INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12616
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Congo, Republic of          Project ID:  P146933
Project Name: Urban Development and Poor Neighborhood Upgrading Project (P146933)
Task Team       Mahine Diop
Leader(s):
Estimated       25-Mar-2015                 Estimated    28-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General public administration sector (50%), Urban Transport (50%)
Theme(s):       Other urban development (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     250.00             Total Bank Financing:    80.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
O
Borrower                                                                    170.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        80.00
Total                                                                       250.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to: (1) improve access to infrastructure and basic services for
poor people living in selected unplanned settlements in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire, and (2)
strengthen government's capacity for urban upgrading.
3. Project Description
This proposed project is a direct follow-on to the PEEDU, which is being implemented in Brazzaville
Page 1 of 9


﻿and Pointe Noire. The objective of the PEEDU is to increase access to basic infrastructure services,
safe drinking water and electricity for the inhabitants of targeted areas in the cities of Brazzaville and
Pointe-Noire. As well as funding access to a broad package of urban infrastructure and services, with
a substantial part of investments going to the water and electricity sectors, the PEEDU also funds a
O
package of capacity building to the two municipalities and reform of the water and electricity sectors
and the two public utility companies in the water and electricity sectors.
The proposed project will complement the intervention areas of the PEEDU but make a shift from a
predominantly sector-based approach to access to services, as under the PEEDU, to a more
geographically focused and integrated approach to upgrading. It is intended that the government will
be able to continue the upgrading process after the project. The project strategy is both adaptive and
proactive. The approach favors in-situ upgrading to minimize resettlement, reduce cost, and keep the
approach as simple as possible to allow the government to scale up the approach after the project and
continue to make improvements in other neighborhoods on its own funds. At the same time, the
project contains elements that will contribute to reducing emergence of unplanned settlements in the
future (although a complete stop of emergence is not realistic given the time frame and budget of the
proposed project).
A poverty study carried out in 2009 as preparation for the PEEDU has served as input to selecting
project neighborhoods based on monetary poverty and living conditions (see details in annex 2).
Selection of neighborhoods was made by city mayors and was agreed with the government and
elected officials of each city during project. The total population of the targeted neighborhoods is
375,000 and the area about 750 hectares. During implementation other neighborhoods will be
selected and will benefit from support under sub-components 2.1 and 2.2, described below, to
develop neighborhood upgrading plans.
Project Components
Component 1: Integration and Neighborhood Upgrading (US$187 million, of which IBRD: US$59.8
million, government: US$127.2 million).
The component objective is to provide access to infrastructure and basic services in targeted
neighborhoods and improve connectivity and network integration with the rest of the city. Creation
a        of temporary work during construction through use of labor-intensive construction techniques will be
an integral part of bidding documents.
1.1: Connectivity and Network Investment Program (US$67 million).
The project will fund investments in infrastructure to connect beneficiary neighborhoods to network
infrastructure. Actual selection will be based on need to create access to beneficiary neighborhoods,
density and poverty, synergy with other investments, concentration of resources, and economic
viability of investments. The following investments are foreseen: (1) Upgrading of about 25
kilometers of road works out of a long list of 70 kilometers of investments for which engineering
designs are available. The priority program will be narrowed down during appraisal, based on the
above criteria and additional economic studies using the Road Economic Decision (RED) model. (2)
About 20,000 square meters of anti-erosion works in Brazzaville. (3) Expansion of primary and/or
secondary infrastructure to connect beneficiary neighborhoods to water, electricity, and sanitation
networks.
1.2: Upgrading Investments (US$120 million).
Page 2 of 9


﻿This sub-component will finance investments to rehabilitate or construct a wide array of socio-
economic infrastructure in the targeted neighborhoods, as determined with the beneficiary
populations during the processes outlined under sub-components 2.1 and 2.2. . Without being
limitative, the project is targeting the following list of infrastructures: (1) neighborhood roads and
O
Q)       lighting, (2) drainage and sanitation works, and environmental and anti-erosion work, (3) water and
electricity networks and access, (4) commercial facilities, health centers, primary schools, and other
municipal infrastructure. The total area of the beneficiary neighborhoods to be upgraded is 750
hectares, and the cost is estimated at about US$150,000 per hectare (estimate based on recent
comparable upgrading investments in Dakar and Ndjamena). The investments resulting from the
second round of upgrading planning in sub-components 2.1 and 2.2 will not be funded by the
UDPNUP but will present a bank of projects that the stakeholders (government, cities and future
beneficiary neighborhoods) will have at their disposal to be financed on rolling budgetary basis.
Component 2: Development of Institutions and Capacity (US$58 million, of which IBRD: US$18.6
million, government: US$39.4 million).
The component objective is to institute an integrated approach to upgrading unplanned settlements
and to preventing emergence of new unplanned settlements.
2.1: Community Facilitation (US$8 million).
The sub-component will fund: (1) hiring of community facilitators to assist the residents of targeted
neighborhoods (and subsequently other neighborhoods, to be identified) to fully participate and
engage in all aspects of upgrading design, from data collection and needs identification over
investment planning and implementation to operation and maintenance. (2) Training for
neighborhood representatives and city focal points. (3) Minor operating expenses for the Local
Development Committees (Comit6s Locaux de Developpement - COLODE) to be established in
each neighborhood (such as flip charts, transport for community representatives to meetings, etc). (4)
Community facilitation activities, e.g. workshops, focus group discussions, and communication
campaigns on socio-environmental issues. (5) Support to resettlement for project affected persons.
o
2.2: Neighborhood Upgrading Plans (US$15 million).
This sub-component will fund consultant services for: (1) establishment of site conditions, (2)
elaboration of feasibility studies and restructuring plans, and (3) Elaboration of engineering designs.
o        Consultants hired to assist the project cities will carry out feasibility studies and engineering designs
in an iterative process with beneficiary communities, to assure that investments reasonably respond
to criteria of cost-effectiveness, equity of costs and benefits to the stakeholders, sustainability,
operation and maintenance, potential employment impact, and considerations of vulnerable groups.
2.3: Urban Sector Organization and Regulation (US$19 million).
The sub-component funds activities to improve the overall sector regulation and complement this
with urban planning tools, in continuation of the activities already supported by the PEEDU.
Activities to be funded are: (1) Institutional diagnostic of the urban sector to reorganize and
determine the role and responsibilities of each actor in the sector. (2) Study on decrees to apply and
operationalize the updated urban and housing legislation to simplify regulation and focus on aspects
that the government and municipalities will realistically be able to implement. (3) Development of
policies, frameworks and guidelines for neighborhood upgrading necessary for continued
implementation of upgrading programs after the UDPNUP. (4) Institutional support and capacity
building to the Ministry of Construction, Urban Development and Housing (MCUDH), including
organizational and functional reorganization, training and equipment, and a communication strategy
Page 3 of 9


﻿on urban planning tools. (5) Elaboration of a land strategy and land use plans and district plans for
Brazzaville and Pointe Noire to lay out an urban grid for extension-areas for the next 10 years for the
two cities, with demarcation of rights of way. (6) Urban master plans for Dolisie, Nkayi, Mossengo,
and Ouesso. (These plans will serve as basis for preparation of investments, with engineering studies
O
U         funded by the proposed UDPNUP.) (7) An urban neighborhood database to assure that future
upgrading activities continue to target the poorest and most needy areas of the two cities. (8)
Improvement of environmental and social safeguards in national legislation, including grievance
mechanism. (9) Procurement training for private companies and in labor-intensive construction
techniques (the latter also for youth of the targeted neighborhoods). (10) Study on social housing that
is more suitable for the poorer part of the population.
2.4: City-level Institution Building (US$16 million).
The sub-component funds activities designed to strengthen the institutional role and the capacity of
city administrations and elected officials to enable them to play a bigger role in financing, planning,
implementing and maintaining infrastructure and managing the upgrading process. The following
activities are included in the sub-component: (1) Technical assistance to functional reorganization of
the two municipal administrations. (2) Implementation and training on the use of a system for
management (operation and maintenance) of the municipalities' key assets and investments financed
by the proposed project. Rollout of the system to the four other fully established municipalities in the
country (Dolisie, Nkayi, Mossengo, and Ouesso). (3) Technical assistance to project management.
(4) Support to the two municipalities to improve management of and increase revenues from
commercial infrastructure. Subsequent rollout to the four other fully established municipalities. (5)
Updating the municipal tax database and revenue collection, with focus on the newly instituted local
occupancy tax. Replication of activities to other fully established municipalities. (6) Street
addressing. The proposed UDPNUP will complement the PEEDU street addressing activities to
cover the entre cities of Brazzaville and Pointe Noire and provide additional training and equipment
to the city administrations to help further improve land management and tax collection. (7) The city
administrations will be supported to set in place procurement units to allow them to take over some
procurement responsibility for investments funded by the proposed UDPNUP. (8) Implementation of
the Simba software already used in municipal financial departments to other municipal departments.
(9) Developing the capacity for the municipalities to continue to work with communities to
implement upgrading programs after the UDPNUP. (10) Training for municipal staff and elected
officials in such areas such as community involvement in neighborhood upgrading, urban planning,
o        investment programming. (11) Demand-driven capacity building activities and technical assistance to
municipalities, not covered by other support. (12) Technical assistance and training of officials and
staff of administrations of other cities. (13) South-South exchanges or study trips to allow officials,
key staff and neighborhood representatives to learn form successful upgrading activities elsewhere.
Component 3: Project Management, Coordination and Evaluation (US$5 million, of which IBRD:
US$1.6 million, government: US$3.4 million).
This component will fund operating costs for the PCU, monitoring and evaluation of project
activities, and supervision costs for environmental and social safeguards activities. The government
will second an engineer, an urban planner, and a social development specialist from the MCUDH to
the PCU in the MFPW to assure transfer of competences. Specific activities funded by the
component include: (1) a communication plan and (2) baseline and impact assessments.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Page 4 of 9


﻿The project will be implemented in the two main cities of the Republic of Congo: Brazzaville and
Pointe Noire. The two cities make up about 60 percent of the population of the country, which is
estimated at 4.1 million. Brazzaville has a population of about 1.5 million inhabitants, while Pointe
Noire is inhabited by an estimated 1 million people. The majority of the inhabitants, however, live in
neighborhoods with poor access to public infrastructure services, such as water, electricity, roads,
health services and municipal facilities. Urban land tenure is an issue. The two cities are affected by
rapid, unmanaged urban expansion that commenced at the end of the period of conflict exacerbated
by unplanned public and private land allocation. Land administration is characterized by three
*         particular traits: (1) absence of land reserves for the development of economic activities and habitat,
(2) disconnect between modem system for land regulation and customary law guiding land titling
and land transfers, (3) uncontrolled urban development and the proliferation of spontaneous
neighborhoods. Brazzaville is located on the shores of the Congo River, while Pointe Noire is on the
shores of the Atlantic. The two water bodies serve as sewer "tanks" of the two cities. Project
activities will include (but are not limited to): rehabilitation and building socio-economic
infrastructures such as roads, bridges, drainage, sanitation and anti-erosion works, integrated health
centers, primary schools, and other municipal infrastructures.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
Martin Henry Lenihan (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Project infrastructure rehabilitation and construction is
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                expected to generate adverse environmental impacts. The
project activities include rehabilitation and/or construction
of socio-economic infrastructures such as roads, bridges,
integrated health centers, primary schools, and other
municipal infrastructure, as well as drainage, sanitation
works, and anti-erosion works. Furthermore, the
rehabilitation and construction works usually involve
quarries. Adverse environmental impacts from these
activities will be site-specific, temporary then manageable
at an acceptable level. However, the exact locations of the
activities are yet to be identified. Consequently, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed
prior to appraisal in country on December 18, 2014 and at
the World Bank's Infoshop on January 22, 2015.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The project does not involve or affect natural habitats.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project does not involve or affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project does not involve pest management
Physical Cultural       Yes          The works will take place in inhabited areas and will
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 involve excavations and demolitions. The possibility of
chance finds of physical cultural resources is not
Page 5 of 9


﻿negligible. The ESMF includes a chapter on physical
cultural resources to address any issue related to this
subject.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The project is being implemented in urban areas and thus
BP 4.10                              the policy criteria do not apply in this case.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Given that project activities will be taking place in
OP/BP 4.12                           unplanned neighborhoods, it is likely that residential and
a                                              commercial structures will be encroaching on the right of
way. It is therefore also likely that project activities could
result in the displacement of vendors and possible the
resettlement of households. Given that sub-project
activities will not be designed until implementation it is
not possible to identify specific resettlement impacts, and
therefore a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
been prepared in lieu of Resettlement Action Plans.
However, based on previous experience it was possible to
estimate that 700 households will be affected (350 in
Point Noire and Brazzaville respectively). Estimated
impacts include 100 households affected by the relocation
of a residential structure, 100 affected by the permanent
displacement of an economic activity, and 85 households
requiring compensation for the loss of agricultural crops
or fruit trees. However, the majority of households (415)
will be affected in the form of the temporary displacement
of economic activities during construction. There will be
no large scale collective resettlement of households. The
RPF was prepared and disclosed in country on December
18, 2014 and at the World Bank's Infoshop on February
9,2015.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not involve dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No significant, long term or irreversible adverse impacts are to be expected from the
implementation of activities that envisaged to be financed under this project. Most of the adverse
environmental and social impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-
specific. Consequently, they will be manageable in acceptable manner. Based on these aspects,
the project is classified as being EA category B and triggers three safeguards policies. There are
OP/PB 4.01; OP 4.11 and OP/PB 4.12. To be in compliance with these policies the ESMF and
Page 6 of 9


﻿RPF have been prepared reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed in Republic of Congo on
December 18,2014 and at the infoshop on January 22, 2015, and February 9, 2015 respectively.
Based on the triggering of OP/PB4.1 1, a specific chapter has been developed in the ESMF, in
order to provide guidance for any physical cultural resources discovery.
During the whole phase of the project, the ESMF and the RPF will be implemented as guidance/
guidelines for any activity that will have to be financed under the project.
Given the population density in most of the targeted neighborhoods, the proposed infrastructure
investments may entail displacement of households and economic activities. It is estimated that at
most 700 households will be affected by project activities, the majority of whom will experience
temporary displacement of economic activities during construction, while at most 100 households
will be affected by the relocation of a residential structure. These are cumulative estimates for all
possible project activities in a range of geographical locations, and because there major
infrastructure works there will be no large-scale collective resettlement of households
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The assessment of potential environmental and social adverse impacts does not foresee long-term
impacts associated to this project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Given that the exact location of future investments are not yet known and activities are diversified,
the borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF). That
safeguard instrument contains standards, methods, and procedures specifying how future activities
whose location, number, and scale are unknown will systematically address environmental and
social issues. It includes: (i) a systematic environmental and social impact assessment for all
activities before selection and implementation; (ii) procedures for conducting activity-specific
limited Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) or Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP); (iii) capacity strengthening and awareness-raising campaigns targeted
at relevant stakeholder groups for better implementation and monitoring of project safeguard
measures; and (iv) establishment and implementation of a consultation framework for the
environmental control and monitoring.
The ESMF provides detailed mitigation measures to ensure sustainability and compliance with
Congo's regulations and legislations, as well as with the World Bank environmental and social
policies.
Because project activities will not be selected until implementation, it is not possible to identify
the resettlement impact prior to appraisal. Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was
prepared and disclosed in country on December 18, 2014 and at the World Bank's Infoshop on
February 9, 2015. Due to its experience in the implementation of the current project, the existing
PEEDU PCU has the capacity and experience to screen, monitor, and manage of potential
resettlement and other adverse social impacts of the project. The RPF describes the procedures for
Page 7 of 9


﻿identifying and compensating any project-affected persons. Overall, the process of screening for
each investment will determine the likely impacts and, where necessary, Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs) will be prepared and approved by the World Bank prior to launch of works.
Compensation and resettlement assistance will be determined during the process of RAP
preparation, and delivered prior to the launch of works. Loan funds will not be used to cover the
cost of compensation and resettlement assistance, which is estimated at FCFA 1,752,000,000
(about US$2.8 million), as these will be financed by the gGovernment of the Republic of Congo.
A project-level grievance redress mechanism will be set in place.
The ongoing operation will be implemented by the PEEDU PCU which already has an
environmental specialist. To allow a proper implementation and close monitoring of safeguard
aspects within this new operation, another environmental and social specialist will be hired. He
will oversee the implementation of the project safeguards instruments and coordinate efforts at the
national level. The Bank's supervision missions will also include environmental and social
specialists who will provide technical assistance and guidance to the environmental and social
expert as well as capacity building.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The consultation process for the project includes a range of formal and informal on-site interviews
and meetings with participation of the COLODE, municipalities and local residents, as well as
other stakeholders such as local Non Governmental Organizations. During the safeguard
instruments preparation, these various stakeholder groups have been consulted. After the
elaboration of both safeguards instruments, new series of consultations were held where all of
these stakeholders have been consulted and their recommendations, comments and suggestions
taken into account in the safeguards documents finalization. The latest consultation in the process
of safeguard instruments was the workshop held in Brazzaville in December 05, 2014.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                18-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             22-Jan-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
*          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Republic of                                         18-Dec-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                18-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             09-Feb-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Republic of                                         18-Dec-2014
Comments: Public Consultations took place at project site in Brazzaville and Pointe Noire
between 19 and 26 September, 2014.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Page 8 of 9


﻿Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
O
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[   NA
O
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mahine Diop
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)         Date: 06-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo    Date: 06-Apr-2015
Manager:                     (PMGR)
Page 9 of 9


