INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA15534
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Nov-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Pakistan                   Project ID:  P155226
Parent       P110099
Project ID:
Project Name: Water Sector Capacity Building and Advisory Services (P 155226)
Parent Project Water Sector Capacity Building & Advisory Services Project (WCAP)
Name:           (P110099)
Task Team       Javaid Afzal
Leader(s):
Estimated       03-Nov-2015                Estimated    21-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO6                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (70%), Climate change (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     34.95             Total Bank Financing:   34.95
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                34.95
Total                                                                      34.95
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 7


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project objective is to improve the management and investment planning of water resources
in the Indus River Basin.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The proposed AF project builds on the original projects' gains and consolidates impacts. The
component structure will remain the same, with small changes to the sub-components of the original
project. The following sections summarize the planned activities under the proposed AF.
Component A: Capacity Building of and Support to Federal/Provincial Institutions in Water
Resources Planning and Management (USD 10.57 Million)
Component Al: Capacity building in planning, development and testing of water resources
infrastructure. The planned activities will in particular address the enhancement of policy and
planning capacity through the strengthening of provincial research labs whose research results inform
federal policy and planning in the energy and agriculture sectors. This will comprise upgrading
(staffing, training, software, hardware) and modernization of existing facilities including the
following three activities:
i.     Up-grading of the Nandipur Irrigation Research Station to build a world class center of
excellence in hydraulic research and related areas that responds to changing global scenarios and
provides technological solutions for optimal and safe design of water resources infrastructure,
including for hydropower development.
ii.    Up-grading and strengthening capacity of Soil Mechanics Hydraulic Research Laboratories
(Hyderabad and Karachi) of the Directorate for Research and Hydrology. This Directorate is the
research wing of the Irrigation Department of the Government of Sindh and caters to other national
and federal departments providing hydraulic modeling results and testing the strength and quality of
materials referred to the research departments.
iii.   Establishment of modem and computerized labs for survey, drawing and soil testing at
Irrigation Unit/Division in Balochistan to support irrigation efficiency in the command areas linked
to the Indus Basin Irrigation System (IBIS).
Component A2: Capacity building in system planning, management and operation. The planned
activities will scale-up efforts to increase transparency in the interprovincial water allocation system
initiated under the original project and contribute to water conveyance efficiency in the IBIS. This
sub-component will include the following two activities:
i.     Flow measurements at key locations of IBIS;
ii.    Analysis of seasonal and monthly water balance between several reaches in the Indus main
stem and Jhelum-Chenab zones.
Component A3: No activities proposed under this sub component.
Component A4: Capacity Building for the Planning Commission (Water Section). This component
will support the establishment of an International Center at/through the Planning and Development
Division for water issues and national and international coordination/cooperation.
Component B: Improvement in Water Resources Management and Development (USD 17.15
Million)
Component Bl: Upgrading (staffing, training, software, hardware, etc.) of tools, water resources
databases, management systems and models. This component will finance enhancements for
hydropower generation and development planning and flood resilience. Support will include the
following three activities:
Page 2 of 7


﻿i.     Development of methodology, techniques and procedures adopted for carrying out the study
for developing seasonal as well as 10- Daily forecasts for River Chenab at Marala and River Kabul at
Nowshera.
ii.    Establishment of an integrated office management system at WAPDA to enhance its water
and energy development and management capacity.
Component B2: No activities proposedunder this sub component.
Component B3: Hydropower planning, asset management plans, dam safety inspections and studies.
This component will finance the upgrading (staffing, training, software, hardware, etc.) of the
Concrete, Cement, Steel and Soil Dynamics Lab of the Central Material Testing Laboratory (CMTL)
at WAPDA.
Component B4: Feasibility studies for hydropower projects. This component will finance the
feasibility studies for hydropower projects.
Component C: Project Management and Additional Studies (USD 7.23 Million)
Component Cl: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation. As with the ongoing project, this
component will finance project management and general administration costs, including experts
working with Project Management and Policy Implementation Unit, monitoring and evaluation,
general operation and maintenance costs for equipment and vehicles, and necessary replacements.
Component C2: Strategic studies approved by the Steering Committee. During implementation of the
ongoing project the following strategic studies have been identified for financing through the AF: (i)
Upgrading capacity of the Federal Flood Commission in managing floods by undertaking studies and
implementing pilots identified in the National Flood Protection Plan IV updated under the original
WCAP; and (ii) upgrading of the Master Plan of Flood Management of Hill Torrents of Pakistan and
feasibility studies for check/recharge dams in the Suleiman Range and the Marri Bugti Hill Torrent.
Additional studies may be identified during implementation of the AF and are likely to include the
Comprehensive Integrated Master Plan for the development and utilization of energy resources on
tributaries in the Upper Indus basin, and ranking/privatization of raw sites.
Component C3: Technical Assistance, Capacity Building and Training. The ongoing project has
financed significant capacity building activities. Over forty government officials have been trained in
monitoring and evaluation techniques, dam safety, procurement, and project management. This
component will finance the continuation of the capacity building and training programs for
government officials under the AF.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The TA project mainly features capacity development of the borrower in water resources
development and management --spread across the entire Indus Basin Irrigation System. Both MoWP
and WAPDA will be capacitated in undertaking various technical studies for water resources
development and management. Two of the three counterpart agencies MoWP & the Planning
Commission are located in Islamabad while WAPDA is housed in Lahore. The Indus basin irrigation
system itself is characterized with gently rolling mountains in the upper Punjab to flat plains of
Punjab and Sindh province. Most of the Basin system is well developed and presents wheat-rice,
wheat-cotton or Wheat-Sugarcane cropping pattern, though area under orchard, vegetables and other
high value crops is increasing. The area is well-populated with bulk of the population spread along
the rivers and the associated canal irrigation system. The physical interventions under AF will be
carried out in Punjab, Sindh, and Balochistan provinces. The intervention in Punjab will be carried
out in a rural setting while the ones in Sindh and Balochistan will be carried out in urban settings.
All of these interventions will be carried out inside the premises/areas owned and occupied by the
project proponents (government departments).
Page 3 of 7


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mohammad Omar Khalid (GENDR)
Salma Omar (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project has prepared and got cleared from the SAR
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Safeguards Advisor an ESMP required to mitigate
potential negative environmental and social impacts likely
to arise due to some rehabilitation/renovation and or
upgradation works at the hydraulic laboratories. These
works are to be funded out of proposed AF. The ESMP
provides adequate implementation arrangements for the
proposed mitigation measures in the ESMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The OP 4.37 may be triggered as appropriate for the
4.37                                 projects for which feasibility studies would be carried out
under AF.
Projects on International  Yes       The RVP has confirmed that this falls under the exception
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 to notification provided under the Bank's policy OP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project includes capacity building for key federal water resources management institutions,
and water resources management and development studies. The additional financing includes
some minor construction activities comprising rehabilitation, addition of rooms or renovation of
existing laboratory buildings located at Hyderabad, Nandipur, Karachi, Quetta and or Dera Murad
Jamali. These construction activities are likely to cause low to moderate intensity of localized,
temporary, and mostly reversible environmental and social impacts. There is no land acquisition
involved in construction activities or research studies. Majority of construction work is
Page 4 of 7


﻿renovation-based. During construction, staff will continue to work from other office space/rooms
on the premises.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The original project funded TA activities to enhance borrower's capacity for the management and
investment planning of water resources and also to manage environmental and social impacts
under investment programs in the Indus River Basin, covering policies and implementation
practice in involuntary resettlement and environment management, such as basin level strategic
environmental assessment and studies on resettlement. Under the AF, the borrower's capacity will
be further enhanced for improved planning and management of water resources in the Indus basin,
particularly focusing the planning and research institution at the federal and provincial levels.
These activities are likely to have positive long term impact. The minor construction activities to
be undertaken under AF are not likely to have any long term and or indirect negative impacts. The
feasibility studies under the AF are not likely to result in any direct environmental or social
impacts but adverse environmental and social impacts cannot be ruled out due to subsequent
implementation of these feasible projects. Separate environmental and social assessment will be
carried out for these feasible projects. The feasibility studies to be undertaken as part of TA project
would consider project alternatives in addition to the potential environmental and social issues.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The only alternative is the 'no-project' alternative which will deny the country the opportunity to
improve the planning and management of water resources in the Indus Basin. Therefore that is not
a preferred alternative.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The feasibility studies for hydropower projects that were developed under the original Project
(under Component B4) included specific environmental and social assessments as well as action
plans in accordance with relevant World Bank Policies and Guidelines. The feasibility studies
under the AF will also have similar arrangements built into them and separate environmental and
social assessment will be carried out for the feasible projects. For the minor construction activities
under the AF, an environmental and social management plan (ESMP) has been prepared. The
ESMP has been disclosed nationally as well as at WB InfoShop. The borrower has limited
capacity to implement the ESMP; appropriate capacity building measures have been included in
the ESMP to address this. In addition, close supervision and guidance from the Bank will also be
provided in this regard.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The original Project supported several vital studies necessary for understanding and establishing
enabling environmental assessment framework for the Indus basin. This included sectoral,
strategic environmental assessment of the Indus Basin with a broader scope compared to the
Sectoral Environmental Assessment of 1991/92 and several feasibility and environmental studies
for the hydropower projects. All these studies were built upon large stakeholder consultation and
validation processes to ensure that their opinions and understanding of the project were fully taken
into account. The feasibility studies under the AF will also include similar nature and scale of
stakeholder consultations. In addition, stakeholder consultations have also been carried out while
preparing the ESMP. The ESMP ESMP was disclosed in-country on October 8th, 2015 and has
also been disclosed at the WB InfoShop.
Page 5 of 7


﻿B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                07-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             14-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Pakistan                                                   08-Oct-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [  ]  No [ X ]  NA [    ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [X] No [     ]  NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [X] No [     ]  NA [    ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Page 6 of 7


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]   No [   ]  NA [
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Javaid Afzal
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                   Date: 03-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Parameswaran Iyer (PMGR)              Date: 03-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


