INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15862
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mexico                     Project ID:  P153338
Project Name: MX: Expanding Rural Finance (P153338)
Task Team       Steen Byskov,Rekha Reddy
Leader(s):
Estimated       17-Aug-2015                Estimated    20-Nov-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFMO4                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), SME Finance (40%),
Other non-bank financial intermediaries (40%)
Theme(s):       Other Financial Sector Development (80%), Other rural development (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    405.00             Total Bank Financing:  400.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    5.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     400.00
Total                                                                     405.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project's development objective is to expand the availability of finance to the rural economy.
3. Project Description
The Government prioritized addressing the lack of productive credit in the Mexican financial system
through its system of development finance institutions (DFIs) in Mexico as part of the 2014 financial
Page 1 of 7


﻿reform. DFIs in Mexico address access to finance gaps through financing, partial credit guarantees
(PCGs), and technical assistance. In 2014, a key pillar of the new Government's economic reforms
was a financial reform law with greater incentives for financial intermediaries to lend for productive
purposes, including efforts to refocus state development bank operations to address finance gaps and
O
U         other restrictions related to credit. Mexico has an extensive system of development finance that
includes six development banks, six government trusts and four development finance agencies to
support key sectors, such as the rural economy. One of these development finance agencies is
Financiera Nacional de Desarrollo Agropecuario, Rural, Forestal y Pesquero (FND), the proposed
borrower for this operation.
The project will have two components supporting the development of finance for productive
purposes:
* Component 1: Expanding Credit for Rural MSMEs: a line of credit of US$375 million to
support MSMEs. US$365 million are to be disbursed through PFIs (Component 1A). US$10
million can be applied to pilot new MSME financial solutions with the potential to impact rural
financial services either through PFIs or through direct lending by FND (Component 1 B).
*      Component 2: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Sustainable Rural Finance: US$30
million, including US$5 million counterpart financing. This component will support the
strengthening of institutional capacity to provide sustainable finance for both FND (Component 2A)
and the PFIs it funds (Component 2B).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The exact project location of sub-project activities will not be known prior to appraisal. However,
the final borrowers of the credit line will be agricultural producers and other members of the rural
economy of Mexico.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Dora Patricia Andrade (GEN04)
Martin Henry Lenihan (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project is classified as Environmental Category FI
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               (Financial Intermediary Assessment) and because the
nature of the activities involved it is unlikely to result in
significant negative environmental impacts.
Since the exact projects will not be known prior to
appraisal, although they will be relatively small credits for
medium, small and micro enterprises, an Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) was prepared by FND.
The Project and the EMF exclude financing of any
Category A subprojects and works. Cumulative impacts
are not foreseen given the wide range of sub-project
locations, their relatively small size, and the very low
probability of a large number of small project in a limited
geographic area and the nature of the relatively small
investments (mostly working capital) in medium, small
and micro enterprises to enhance productivity). The EMF
Page 2 of 7


﻿will include a procedure for sub-project screening by
FND or the participating financial intermediary (PFI) (i.e.,
via line of credit from FND to the PFI). The EMF will
also include: (a) requirements for sub-projects and for
PFIs, which would receive credit lines; (b) potential
applicable legal environmental, social and cultural
resources protection requirements that may apply to the
subprojects; (c) training and capacity building activities;
and (d) supervision and reporting requirements.
The draft will be disclosed and consulted with key
stakeholders.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          While the exact project types are not known, the policy
4.04                                 will be triggered on a precautionary basis and the
appropriate measures included in the EMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes          While the exact project types are not known, the policy
will be triggered on a precautionary basis and the
appropriate measures included in the EMF.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          The Project will not finance the acquisition of significant
quantities of pesticides in a subproject. However
subprojects may involve the purchase and use of
pesticides and the EMF will include applicable measures.
Physical Cultural       No           It is not anticipated that subprojects will involve
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 significant impact on physical cultural resources. In the
unlikely event of an incidental finding, the EMF will
consider developing a handbook of good practice for the
treatment thereof.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          Given that the project area covers the entirety of Mexico,
o         BP 4.10                              and that indigenous people constitute close to 15% of the
country's population, the World Bank's Operational
Policy for Indigenous People applies. The current strategy
of FND for engaging with indigenous communities is to
build the capacity of the regional indigenous funds, which
had been established by the National Commission for the
Development of Indigenous People as institutional
mechanisms for bringing indigenous producer groups
together, and for the delivery of federal subsidies for the
productive activities of these groups. Overall, 300 such
entities were established in different regions of the
country where indigenous people were concentrated, and
FND works with a growing subset in order to build their
capacity to function as PFIs. Given that this project is
working through financial intermediaries, and indigenous
peoples planning framework has been prepared, based on
FNDs strategy of working with regional indigenous funds.
Involuntary Resettlement No          All of the sub-projects to be financed under this operation
OP/BP 4.12                           will be carried out on private land owned or leased by the
Page 3 of 7


﻿ultimate beneficiaries. In order to avoid potential impacts
on third parties, the environmental management system
includes a question on involuntary resettlement that will
allow the intermediary financial institutions to exclude
activities that may result in resettlement impacts.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project would not support the construction or
4.37                                 rehabilitation of dams, nor would support other
investments, which rely on the services of existing dams.
Projects on International  No        The project excludes any project that affect international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterways as defined under this policy and this exclusion
is noted in the EMF.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project would not affect disputed areas as defined
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     under this policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
In terms of environmental issues, significant negative impacts are not expected. The EMF focuses
on prevention and contains a detailed mechanism for screening and instruments, while
recommended good practices serve to create awareness among producers.
While indigenous people are present in the project area of influence, the nature of project activities
will not result in adverse, large scale, significant or irreversible impacts on the land livelihoods or
culture of indigenous communities. Instead the project will focus on ensuring that the activities
supported are culturally appropriate through building the capacity of the regional indigenous funds
(consortiums of indigenous producer organizations) to function as PFIs. Also, because of the small
O
)           scale of the activities to be supported by the credit line, and the fact that they will take place on
privately owned land, the project will not result in any resettlement or land acquisition impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project will not result in any indirect or long term environmental impacts in communities (or
in indigenous communities), or in terms of resettlement and land acquisition. This is due to the
small scale nature of the activities to be financed under the line of credit, which if used for
investment purposes will only finance activities on private land.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Because this is a financial intermediary project that will support multiple sub-project activities that
will be screened for their environmental and social impact, it is not necessary to consider project
alternatives.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
FND has worked with the World Bank to develop an EMF categorizing potential risks related to
lending and an Indigenous People's Framework (IPPF) to support their inclusion into the project.
Page 4 of 7


﻿FND as development agency and public institution seeks to address social and environmental
responsibility and achieve its mission of achieving sustainable development. The institution
recognizes the importance of environmental protection and the need to improve the quality of life
of the rural Mexican population. It also recognizes the potential of an indirect actor (PFI) to
O
generate adverse social and environmental impacts via lending and sees the importance of having a
management system to prevent and mitigate these impacts.
The FND plans to strengthen its capacity to manage the safeguards requirements of this projects.
Technical specialists with a skill level acceptable to the Bank will be incorporated as needed to
support environmental management for this project. FND will also receive assistance and training
from the World Bank, so that it can be better equipped to replicate the information imparted to the
EIF. The EMF has Implementation Guidelines for the PFIs, and envisions training workshops for
FND staff, and technical assistance for PFIs on how to use and apply the EMF.
The IPPF is based on FND's strategy of working with regional indigenous funds (consortiums of
indigenous producer groups) to support their transition into PFIs. This involves accompanying the
delegates of these organizations in putting in place the necessary institutional arrangements,
technical expertise, as well as business and operational plans in order to receive a credit line from
FND that can then be disbursed to member organizations and producer groups for productive
activities. So far FND has successfully built the capacity of 17 such funds to serve as PFIs, and has
plans to grow this number during the life of the project. The business and operational plans
necessary for receiving a line of credit is subject to the approval of the general assembly of each
fund, and participation in FND's program is based on demand from those general assemblies. As
such, the implementation of the FND program adheres to the World Bank policy requirement for
free, prior and informed consultations. It is also important to note that regional funds supporting
indigenous populations have priority access to technical assistance activities planned under
component 2B (support on risk management, corporate governance, and IT systems practices for
financial institutions).
Because the project will support PFIs to provide relatively modest loans to rural enterprises,
implemented on private land, the operational policy on involuntary resettlement does not apply.
For loans requested for the purpose of construction or crop planting, the borrower needs to
demonstrate that they have legal rights to use the land on which the activity will take place.
o           Furthermore, the exclusion list included as part of the updated Environmental and Social
Management System, will include any activities that would require the involuntary displacement
of other users of the land where the activity would take place.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders with responsibility for implementing environmental and social safeguards
include the participating financial institutions (PFI) of the project. Consultations related to the
EMF and IPPF are underway in July 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                30-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             10-Aug-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 5 of 7


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Mexico                                                   21-Jul-2015
Comments:
O
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Aug-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Mexico                                                   21-Jul-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                              00000000
Date of submission to InfoShop                           00000000
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
It is included in the EMF.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ]No [ X]  NA[]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a    Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Page 6 of 7


﻿Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Ifthe whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
a          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ x ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
O
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Steen Byskov,Rekha Reddy
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Alfonso Garcia Mora (PMGR)           Date: 02-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


