The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Dec-2016| Report No: ISDSR21026




                        Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                               Country Director:    Rachid Benmessaoud
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Jose Luis Irigoyen
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge
                             Task Team Leader:      Marc Marie Francois Navelet Noualhier,
                                                    Peter Ngwa Taniform
        The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)



I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                 Project Name
P079736                                                    CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation
Task Team Leader(s)                                        Country
Marc Marie Francois Navelet Noualhier, Peter Ngwa
                                                           Central Africa
Taniform
Approval Date                                              Environmental Category
26-Jun-2007
Managing Unit                                              Is this a Repeater project?
GTI08


PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                         Total Bank Financing
276000000.00                                               276000000.00
Financing Gap
0

Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                 75000000.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                                     201000000.00
Total                                                                                         276,000,000.00
        The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)



2. PROJECT INFORMATION

 Current Project Development Objective
 The project's development objectives are to enhance regional trade and integration and sub-regional cooperation
 between CEMAC and ECCAS member states, and specifically provide the landlocked countries Central African Republic
 (CAR) and Chad with a better access to the Port of Douala through: (i) assistance to the strengthening of the CEMAC
 Customs Union; and (ii) improvement of the logistics chain, including road and rail infrastructure to the Port of Douala's
 hinterland. At a higher level, the project will contribute to the shared growth objectives of the CEMAC countries' PRSPs,
 by ensuring that the Customs Union is effectively implemented and by improving trade facilitation in the region. It will
 also support the broader goal of increasing the regional integration of CEMAC member states by improving its core rail
 and road infrastructure. Furthermore, NEPAD has selected CEMAC as one of the target institutions for Central Africa,
 and these corridors as the main transport infrastructure to be supported in this sub region.



 Proposed New PDO
 The objective of the Project is to facilitate regional trade among the Member States and improve the Central African
 Republic’s, the Republic of Cameroon’s, and the Republic of Chad’s access to world markets.

3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

 The proposed restructuring involves completion of road rehabilitation works in an active military and conflict zone in
 the Far North region of Cameroon through the introduction of innovative and unprecedented implementation
 arrangements, in particular the execution of works by the Cameroon Army Corps of Engineers (ACE) using an Output
 Based Designated Force Account (OBDFA) approach.

4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The remaining 205 kilometer road section, Mora –Dabanga – Kousseri, to be financed by this project is
located in the Mayo Sava and Logone et Chari departments in the Far North region of Cameroon. Many
sections of the road are within several kilometers of the Nigerian border and the population has historically
enjoyed a very close cross and trans-border relationship. This road section is a key part of National Road #1
(RN1) and is an important land transportation corridor between the port of Douala and northern Cameroon
and Chad. Since 2013, the 19 villages along the road have been the target of many Boko Haram attacks and
live in constant fear of kidnappings, reprisal attacks and pillaging. As a result, the level of food insecurity has
been increasing exponentially, many people leave their villages at night when most attacks occur, economic
and social activities are at a standstill and the area has become heavily militarized. An updated social
assessment of the population along the road was completed in September 2016. A survey of 290 households
and meetings with traditional authorities were held in order to assess key safeguard related issues such as
land tenure (level of movement and presence of IDPs is very high, many land owners have moved or are
temporarily living in larger villages), economic development (very limited, living conditions severely
degraded, fields have been abandoned), citizen engagement (traditional authorities are most trusted
authority at community level) and concerns about the road rehabilitation work (safety, attract Boko Haram
        The World Bank                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)



attacks, more military in the area). Given these circumstances as well as the general high level of trauma
being experienced by the population, it was agreed that the entire population along the road would be
treated as a vulnerable population and adjustments would be made to the technical specifications in order to
avoid negative impacts. As a result, the ROW has been reduced from 30 m to 10 m (7 m for existing road
platform, 1.5 m as a shoulder) which avoids most homes and social infrastructure (wells, shade trees) and
the road rehabilitation will be completed within in the current platform. The bridge upgrade and the Kousseri
bypass have been removed from the project to reduce the amount of time required to finish the road
rehabilitation and to avoid further security risk to ACE and the Permanent Security Unit (Detachment de
Securite des Travaux - DST).



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


 Name                                                      Unit
 Arbi Ben Achour                                           GSU05
 Robert A. Robelus                                         GEN05
 Cheikh A. T. Sagna                                        GSU01
 Kristyna Bishop                                           GSU01
 Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna                             GEN07
 Mamadou Diedhiou                                          GSU01


6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

Safeguard Policies                      Triggered          Explanation

                                                           The original Project was categorized as Category B
                                                           however the overall risk profile of the Project has
                                                           increased due to the overall high risk security
                                                           conditions prevailing in the Project area and the
                                                           different implementation arrangements involving
                                                           execution of works by the Army Corps of Engineers.
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP
                                        Yes                Consequently the safeguards category is now upgraded
4.01)
                                                           to A. While adjustments to the project design have
                                                           been made to minimize the environmental and social
                                                           impact, the ESIA and the ESMP have been updated to
                                                           reflect the current operational reality. A robust risk
                                                           mitigation framework has also been designed to deal
                                                           with the high security and social risks.
        The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)



                                                           The road rehabilitation will take place within the
                                                           existing platform and a greatly reduced right of way
                                                           (ROW) in order to avoid any major environmental
                                                           impacts. However the road will border or cross two
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           Yes              national park in the area, respectively the Waza
                                                           National Park and the Kalamaloue National Park. While
                                                           no direct impact is expected, campaigns to build
                                                           awareness against poaching will be carried out during
                                                           project implementation.
                                                           The road rehabilitation will take place within the
                                                           existing platform and a greatly reduced ROW in order
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No
                                                           to avoid any major environmental impacts. No major
                                                           forested sites are in proximity of the project area.

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No               Not applicable.

                                                           The road rehabilitation will take place within the
                                                           existing platform and a greatly reduced ROW in order
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP                       to avoid any major environmental impacts. However,
                                          Yes
4.11)                                                      as a precaution, measures for how to screen for and
                                                           document any chance finds have been included in the
                                                           updated ESMP.

                                                           There are no indigenous peoples meeting the four
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No
                                                           criteria set forth in policy 4.12 in the project area.

                                                           For this restructuring, the ROW has been reduced from
                                                           30 m to 10 m (7 m for existing road platform, 1.5 m as
                                                           a shoulder) which avoids most homes and social
                                                           infrastructure (wells, many shade trees) and the road
                                                           rehabilitation will be completed within in the current
                                                           platform. The Tilde bridge upgrade, Maltam crossroads
                                                           and the Kousseri bypass have been removed from the
                                                           Project, which significantly reduces the social impact
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes              and involuntary land acquisition. A social assessment
                                                           was undertaken in September 2016 and the results
                                                           have been used to update the RPF, GRM and
                                                           communications strategy. The RPF clearly indicates
                                                           that destruction of any homes and mosques will be
                                                           avoided in order to avoid further traumatizing the
                                                           population and that alternatives will be sought before
                                                           destruction of any small works social infrastructure
                                                           such as water points (wells), shade trees along the road
        The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)



                                                                  and crops.




Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)              No                     Not applicable.


Projects on International Waterways
                                           No                     Not applicable.
(OP) (BP 7.50)


Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60) No                      Not applicable.




 II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES

 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The 205 km road section to be rehabilitated is almost entirely located in an active military zone – Operational Alpha -
   in the Far North of Cameroon. Villages along the road and transport convoys travelling the road are regularly targeted
   by Boko Haram and the region is now heavily militarized by four branches of the Cameroon military. Given the security
   situation, the scale of the road rehabilitation has been greatly reduced both in terms of the technical specifications
   and the size of the ROW as well as the size and location of the construction sites. This reduced scale for the project
   area is intended to ensure that the road works proceed very quickly and long term impact on local villages and towns
   is reduced. The main large scale and significant potential impacts are more related to social and security risks than
   safeguards.

 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
   It is highly likely that the upgraded road will be used by both Boko Haram and the Cameroon military and it may
   intensify the conflict. It is also highly likely that Boko Haram will target the food, fuel and construction supplies that
   will be brought by the Army Corps of Engineers (ACE) and this will further jeopardize the safety and security of the 19
   villages and towns along the road.

 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
   The original ROW of 30 m has been reduced to 10 m (7 m current platform, 1.5 m each side for shoulder) and the
   technical specifications of the road rehabilitation have been changed to achieve the more conservative goal of
   “passability? for the road given the current security situation and available budget. Discussions with Ministry of Public
   Works (MPW) and ACE have reinforced the goal of avoiding all destruction of homes and mosques and looking for
   alternatives if possible to avoid any destruction of crops and social infrastructure such as water points.
          The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)




  4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
    capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    A social assessment was undertaken in September 2016 in order to provide key information about the current status
    of the population along the road. Many of the villages have been targeted repeatedly by Boko Haram and in and out
    migration has been significant. There are large populations of IDPs from areas closer to the Nigerian border and the
    original population along the road has changed; some villages have no adults under the age of 50 and some villages
    are comprised almost entirely of the elderly and orphans. As it was agreed that all destruction would be avoided
    because of the security situation as well as to avoid further psychological trauma, a RPF was prepared to guide the ACE
    during Project implementation in case any cases arose that were not captured during the social assessment. Damage
    related to construction – excess of dust, cracks in walls or stairs – will be managed by provisions included in the ESMP.
    In addition to the Social and Environmental Unit in Ministry of Public Works (MPW), safeguard compliance will also be
    monitored by the supervision engineering consultants (CIMA and STUDI) and the Third Party Monitor (TPM) hired by
    the Bank.

  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
    an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The key stakeholders are the 19 villages along the 205 kilometer road section Mora – Dabanga – Kousseri. Population
    statistics are difficult to determine with any accuracy as there is significant in and out migration and a large population
    of IDPs living in and around the existing villages. During the social assessment, interviews were held with 290
    households in the original 30 m ROW and eight focus groups were held in the larger villages. Participants were asked
    about their perception of the military and concerns and expectations regarding road rehabilitation. These results have
    been used by MPW and ACE to prepare an integrated GRM and communications strategy that will be used during
    project implementation to ensure a two-way engagement with the villages and to identify any abuse or adverse
    impacts on them due to project activities.


 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS


Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission to Infoshop
16-Dec-2016                                                      17-Jan-2017
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


“In country? Disclosure
Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
Cameroon                                                         13-Jan-2017
Comments
           The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission to Infoshop
20-Jan-2017                                                       23-Jan-2017
“In country? Disclosure
 Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
 Cameroon                                                          20-Jan-2017
 Comments




C. COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL


OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                   Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and
                                                                                                    Yes
approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                  Yes


OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                                                                                    No
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical)
                                                                                                    NA
natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?


OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources

Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                 Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts
                                                                                                    Yes
on cultural property?


OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         CEMAC - Transport-Transit Facilitation (P079736)



Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as
                                                                                                     Yes
appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review
                                                                                                     Yes
the plan?




The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                   Yes
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local                 Yes
NGOs?


All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
                                                                                                     Yes
for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                   Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
                                                                                                     Yes
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and
                                                                                                     Yes
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?


 III. APPROVALS


                                            Marc Marie Francois Navelet Noualhier
  Task Team Leader(s)
                                            Peter Ngwa Taniform


  Approved By

  Safeguards Advisor                        Maman-Sani Issa                          27-Jan-2017

  Practice Manager/Manager                  Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge                 30-Jan-2017
