                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1011

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Moldova                         Project ID:      P150357
                            Project Name:      Local Roads Improvement Project (P150357)
                            Task Team          Maria Claudia Pachon,Simon David Ellis
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          26-May-2015                     Estimated        10-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Decentralization (10%), Micro, Small
                                               and Medium Enterprise support (10%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     60.00                     Total Bank Financing:        55.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           5.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       30.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 25.00
                              Total                                                                       60.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           19. The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve accessibility to education, health and
                           market facilities by provision of a safe and sustainable local roads network in selected areas of
                           Moldova.
                           C. Project Description
                         This local roads program will put more emphasis on building the management capacity of local roads
                         both at the central and local levels. The proposed project would consist of two components totaling
                         US$ 25 million.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: Local roads financing (US$25 million): This component will finance a mixed
                         program of physical works comprising basic access improvements, periodic maintenance and local
                         road improvements. These will be carried out across the regional road network and in the local road
                         network in the selected raïon(s) using a new and improved system of selection and prioritization of
                         road works. This system will be developed as part of the project and, initially, will focus
                         improvements on sections of local roads through settlements and on school bus routes. The
                         component will include training targeted to the selected raïons on (micro-enterprise) contract
                         management. This component will finance the detailed design and supervision activities for all road
                         rehabilitation and maintenance works as well as independent technical audits of the civil works. An
                         important part of the component will be road safety works in the proximity of schools and on road
                         sections within communities. A key objective will be to provide safe access to schools for children
                         who have been affected by the school consolidation program. This includes transportation to/from
                         schools, and safe access to schools and bus stops.

                         Component B: Institutional strengthening (US$5 million): This component will finance a program of
                         institutional strengthening to build capacity within the sector for efficiently and effectively
                         maintaining and improving the regional and local road networks. The support to government
                         institutions will be focused on building capacity for road network management in SRA and raïons
                         (LPA 2) although there could be some minor support to communal level (LPA 1). As part of this
                         component, the previous condition survey carried out by the SRA on the core local road network will
                         be consolidated and integrated into a database as part of the process of establishing an asset
                         management system. This component will also promote the development of capacity in the local
                         private sector to implement the maintenance and improvement of regional and local roads. This will
                         mainly be by improving the enabling environment within which local consultants and contractors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operate. In addition, the component will finance baseline survey and impact studies on project
                         beneficiaries. Through the collection of quantitative and qualitative data (practical surveys
                         instruments before and after project completion), the proposed assessments will document potential
                         income and social impacts.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project location is still under consideration and will be defined during the project preparation phase.
                         The project will finance approximately 150 kms (to be confirmed during preparation) of local roads
                         in Moldova.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The proposed Project will be implemented mainly by State Road Administration (SRA), which has
                         been implementing several donor funded projects, including the WB “Moldova road sector program
                         support project”, implemented in 2007-2011. Based on previous WB team assessment the SRA has
                         good capacities for implementing environmental safeguards. During the project design the WB will
                         review the current status of SRA EA institutional capacities and, if needed the EMF will specify
                         necessary capacity building activities.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
                           Jennifer Shkabatur (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment     Yes        The project will not finance construction of new
                           OP/BP 4.01                              roads or their major upgrading - the proposed
                                                                   activities are essentially road rehabilitation and
                                                                   maintenance within the “Right of Way” areas. Thus
                                                                   expected environmental impacts related to air and
                                                                   water pollution, solid and hazardous wastes, labor
                                                                   security etc., are expected to be low, site specific and
                                                                   mostly temporarily. The impact on natural vegetation
                                                                   associated with operating the quarry and borrow
                                                                   areas, and constructing detour and access road to the
                                                                   borrow material pits and quarry sites, will not be
                                                                   applicable here – as there will be used the existing
                                                                   borrow/quarry sites. The potential impacts of the
                                                                   project activities upon cultural, religious and
                                                                   historical sites will be assessed during the design
                                                                   stage and it is expected no such sites will be directly
                                                                   impacted by road rehabilitation and/or maintenance
                                                                   works. With regard to social issues, since all works
                                                                   will be conducted on the existing roads, there will be
                                                                   no temporary or permanent loss of agricultural or
                                                                   grazing lands. In addition, the project activities will
                                                                   not trigger involuntary resettlement or land-taking.

                                                                   As during this stage of project design the road
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   segments to be rehabilitated are not known, to
                                                                   address potential environmental impacts the
                                                                   borrower will prepare an Environmental
                                                                   Management Framework (EMF) that would guide
                                                                   the EA process. The EMF would include an
                                                                   assessment of policy, legal and administrative
                                                                   framework; and, if needed - an EA institutional
                                                                   strengthening plan. The EMF would also describe the
                                                                   screening process for identifying subprojects having
                                                                   potentially significant issues that would need to be
                                                                   addressed in a site specific sub-project EIA. The
                                                                   document will contain also Environmental
                                                                   Guidelines that would provide a general assessment
                                                                   of potential impacts associated with the road
                                                                   rehabilitation activities along with the proposed
                                                                   generic mitigation measures to be undertaken for
                                                                   identified sub-projects while designing site specific
                                                                   Environmental Management Plans. It will include
                                                                   also a generic monitoring plan and institutional
                                                              responsibilities with regard to EMPs implementation.
                                                              Environmental Impact Assessments (EIAs) and/or
                                                              Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              prepared for all individual road sub-projects before
                                                              works start. The EMF will be based on the Sector
                                                              Environmental Assessment (SEA) which represents
                                                              the EA framework document that was prepared for
                                                              the previous WB road rehabilitation project in
                                                              Moldova. The SEA will be updated accordingly,
                                                              taking into account the peculiarities of the current
                                                              project and last developments of the country’s EA
                                                              policy, legal and institutional framework.

                                                              The draft EMF will be publicly disclosed and
                                                              consulted in the country. It will be disclosed in the
                                                              World Bank's Infoshop prior to appraisal.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes   OP 4.04 is being triggered on a precautionary basis,
                                                              given that the specific location of roads to be
                                                              rehabilitated are not yet defined. At this stage of
                                                              project design it is not known if there will be
                                                              important wildlife and wildlife habitats in the sub-
                                                              project areas, although it is not excluded that
                                                              proposed activities may possibly trigger this OP. For
                                                              this reason, the EMF will also cover the safeguard
                                                              procedures to be applied for road works in Natural
                                                              Habitats, should they occur.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No

                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   OP 4.11 is being triggered on a precautionary basis,
                         OP/BP 4.11                           given that the specific location of roads to be
                                                              rehabilitated are not yet defined At this stage of
                                                              project design it is not known if there will be
                                                              important PhCR in the sub-project areas, although it
                                                              is not excluded that proposed activities may possibly
                                                              trigger this OP. For this reason, the EMF will also
                                                              cover the safeguard procedures to be applied for road
                                                              works in the case of PhCR, should they occur.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   TBD   OP 4.12 is TBD as all works will be conducted on
                         BP 4.12                              the existing roads, and no need for land taking is
                                                              expected. The works are not expected to trigger any
                                                              involuntary issues, including no temporary or
                                                              permanent loss of agricultural or grazing lands. A
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
                                                                                                                        prepared, consulted and disclosed prior to appraisal.
                                                                                                                        The framework will set the procedures in case future
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        works trigger OP/B.P. 4.12.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-May-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The draft EMP has been disclosed at the State Road Administration website and a public
                                      consultation organized. After finalizing it, the document will be disclosed on SRA website and in
                                      the WB Infoshop prior to Appraisal. The RPF will also be prepared, consulted and disclosed
                                      before appraisal. The site specific EIA's. EMP's and RAP's (as required) for individual road
                                      sections will be prepared as part of the feasibility and design studies during the project
                                      implementation, and as well will be disclosed and consulted on the SRA website and in the
                                      participating communities.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maria Claudia Pachon,Simon David Ellis
                                 Approved By:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                                                                                      Date: 14-Apr-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                                                                                                    Date: 18-Apr-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
