                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC18618

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jan-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Palau                           Project ID:       P160504
                            Project Name:        Palau: ICT Sector Technical Assistance
                            Team Leader(s):      James L. Neumann
                            Estimated Date       15-Mar-2017
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GTI09                           Lending           IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.7                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                                       0.7
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           5. The activity's development objective is to reduce the cost and increase the availability of ICT
                           services in Palau.
                           C. Project Description
                           7. The project is intended to support the analysis of options to: (i) reposition the ownership,
                           governance, management and operational arrangements of PNCC and BSCC; and (ii) attract new
                           private sector led investment and promote effective competition. The focus is to maximize private
                           sector involvement, while ensuring that the benefit(s) of competition and public investment in the
                           ICT sector flows through to end-users (disaggregated to include analysis of potential gender
                           impacts).

                           8. The following specific activities will be prioritized:
                           (a) Strengthening PNCC: Options for positioning PNCC to operate effectively in a competitive
                           market, including: (i) commercial capacity to compete effectively with new entrants; (ii) technical
                           capacity to operate in a competitive market, such as providing interconnection with its fixed and
                           mobile networks; and (iii) financial sustainability, including capital adequacy and capacity to service
                           its debts and maintain positive cashflow.
                         (b) Repositioning PNCC and BSCC: An economic, financial (including market due diligence) and
                         legal analysis of the assets and liabilities of PNCC and BSCC is needed to determine optimal
                         ownership arrangements, including any asset transfer(s), which minimize financial and operational
Public Disclosure Copy




                         risks to Government, promote future private sector investment and maximize long-term benefits for
                         users of ICT services. This includes consideration of obligations owed to third parties, e.g., creditors
                         (RUS), major suppliers (O3b), other unsecured creditors and staff.

                         (c) Analyzing additional infrastructure needs and financing: In anticipation of the new international
                         fiber optic cable, a review of existing domestic infrastructure is needed along with a gaps analysis to
                         determine the minimum bundle of assets required to utilize the international submarine cable
                         effectively and promote sector growth and development. In particular, the potential for a new or
                         upgraded terrestrial fiber ring will be analyzed, including financing, ownership and management
                         options.

                         (d) Operationalizing BSCC: Support for the operationalization of BSCC to ensure financial
                         sustainability and the robust supply of international and domestic wholesale connectivity services. A
                         definitive asset plan, business plan, financing, staffing arrangements, etc., is needed and will be
                         prepared. A critical focus will be on developing implementation arrangements which minimize
                         cashflow risks for servicing third party financing commitments and promote utilization at the lowest
                         cost. Options such as anchor IRU contracts over international and domestic fiber infrastructure will
                         be analyzed.

                         (e) Marketing the ICT sector to potential investors and international operators: As part of the
                         evaluation of sector assets and liabilities, support is needed to promote Palau as a destination for new
                         private sector investment. Assistance will be provided to support marketing activities and attract new
                         market entry by private sector operators, pursuant to arrangements aimed at minimizing the
                         monopoly problem and the need for extensive ex post regulation. The desirability of bundling the
                         market opportunity in Palau with other connected regional markets, such as FSM, will also be
                         prioritized.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (f) Implementing asset restructuring: Support is needed to help the Government execute its
                         decisions for repositioning PNCC and BSCC, including consequential divestitures and/or any asset
                         transfers. Support to prepare legal instruments, work with stakeholders to review and finalize all
                         instruments (legislative, regulatory, governance, contractual, etc.) and to assist Government during
                         any Congressional legislative reform processes will also be provided.

                         9.       Government is focused on reorganizing the sector to minimize its exposure to competitive
                         parts of the market that can be better served by the private sector, while ensuring that assets which
                         have essential facility characteristics are held pursuant to arrangements which minimize monopoly
                         risk and the costs of regulation. The Project will provide assistance to help identify and implement
                         mechanisms to move the costs and risks associated with the Government's investments in core
                         infrastructure, including e.g., the new cable system, to the private sector. Options to minimize the
                         risk of free riding by new entrant private sector operators will also be assessed.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         None.

                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           N/A

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ross James Butler (GSU02)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/                 No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: James L. Neumann
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                           Date: 04-Oct-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Jane Lesley Treadwell (PMGR)                                 Date: 10-Oct-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
