                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA17593
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Oct-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Peru                               Project ID:    P147342
                            Project Name:      Peru: Investments for Environmentally Sustainable Development (P147342)
                            Task Team          Ismael Fernando Loayza Careaga,Ernesto Sanchez-Triana
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          11-Oct-2016              Estimated     20-Dec-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEN04                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        70.41           Total Bank Financing:     40.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                     30.41
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        40.00
                              Total                                                                                        70.41
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of this project is to generate and share information for environmental quality control at
                           the national level by supporting the Government of Peru to improve its environmental monitoring
                           and analytical capacity, increase public access to environmental quality information, and promote
                           informed public participation in environmental quality management.
                            3. Project Description
                           To achieve its project development objective the project will (i) improve the regulatory framework
                           for controlling environmental quality, (ii) increase environmental monitoring and analytical capacity


                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         and practice, (iii) modernize information disclosure and interactive services with the public, and (iv)
                         provide free access to reliable environmental quality data. This is an important first step to enhance
                         environmental governance. Successful implementation of this project will lay a solid foundation for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the country to move into the next stage with follow-up actions to reduce costs of environmental
                         degradation through an empowered civil society, improved decision making in environmental policy
                         and management, and better enforcement of environmental regulations.

                         The proposed project has three components: (a) Environmental Monitoring and Analysis; (b)
                         Information Disclosure and Public Participation; and (c) Project Management. The details of each
                         component is summarized below.

                         Component 1: Environmental Monitoring and Analysis. This component will support MINAM and
                         OEFA to carry out their responsibilities in air, water and soil monitoring and analysis based on an
                         enhanced regulatory framework, the development of capacities and infrastructure for effective
                         environmental monitoring, and the strengthening of analytical and quality control/quality assurance
                         capacities. The component has three subcomponents: (1.1) Environmental Quality Standards and
                         Guidelines; (1.2) Monitoring and Analytical Capacity Building; and (1.3) Monitoring and Analysis.

                         More specifically, Subcomponent 1.1: 'Environmental Quality Standards and Guidelines' will support
                         DGCA of MINAM to strengthen the regulatory framework. It will also support the preparation of
                         technical standards, protocols and guidance for ambient monitoring and analytical activities and, for
                         preparing and implementing actions plans, as needed; Subcomponent 1.2: Monitoring and Analytical
                         Capacity Building will support OEFA to better monitor air and water quality in priority air-sheds and
                         watersheds of the country; and Subcomponent 1.3 Monitoring and Analysis will support OEFA to
                         construct, equip and operate a state-of-art national environmental analysis laboratory to be accredited
                         with ISO/IEC 17025:2006 (General requirements for the competence of testing and calibration
                         laboratories). This laboratory will have two separated sections. The section that will cover the
                         analytical demand of OEFA and another section, the validation and settlement laboratory, that will
                         cover the need for quality control of public and private laboratories. This section will perform the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         functions of a reference laboratory. OEFA will also promote the adoption of Laboratory Good
                         Practices and oversee compliance with these practices. It periodically will publish the list of the
                         laboratories with good practices and the associated risks of using data generated in laboratories that
                         do not have good practices to induce a gradual upgrade of the validity and reliability of
                         environmental data in Peru

                         Component 2: Information Disclosure and Public Participation. This component will support (2.1)
                         interconnection of existing environmental quality databases; (2.2) improvement of SINIA➢❨ s
                         capacity to manage environmental quality data; (2.3) development and deployment of user-friendly
                         IT platforms accessible to the public but tailored to the information needs of different stakeholders/
                         audiences; (2.4) development and deployment of effective communication tools for public inputs on
                         environmental quality management issues; and (2.5) improvement of stakeholders➢❨ capacity to use
                         the new environmental information tools. As a result, this component will enable MINAM to
                         improve SINIA➢❨ s capacity to properly collect, store and share environmental quality information
                         generated by various agencies at the national and local levels and to develop and deploy public
                         participation platforms to facilitate the dissemination of environmental quality information and
                         public participation in environmental quality management.

                         Component 3: Project Management. This component will support MINAM and OEFA to properly


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         implement the agreed project activities, through provision of goods, consultants' services and
                         operating costs. Special attention will be given to the close coordination of project activities under
                         Components 1 and 2 to generate synergies to effectively achieve the PDO.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will support a series of investments to strengthen environmental quality monitoring and
                         the national system of environmental information of Peru. By supporting increased quality,
                         availability and reliability of environmental data and strengthening with user friendly and easily
                         accessible information the demand for improved environmental governance, the project would
                         enhance accountability associated with governmental policies to reduce environmental degradation,
                         promote improved policy making, and give a voice to groups potentially affected by environmental
                         degradation, thus contributing to minimize social conflict. As a result, the project is anticipated to
                         have positive environmental effects.

                         The main physical work supported by this project will the construction of a laboratory for OEFA.
                         The project will also support the enhancement of the air monitoring network in Lima-Callao and the
                         expansion of air quality monitoring networks in Trujillo, Chiclayo, Huancayo, Cusco, Piura and
                         Iquitos and a water quality monitoring network in the River Rimac basin. The precise location of
                         these works is unknown, and it will be determined based on further design studies considering the
                         specific requirements of the areas to be monitored.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alonso Zarzar Casis (GSU04)
                         Juan Carlos Enriquez Uria (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The proposed Project consists essentially of investments
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      to strengthen Peru➢❨ s environmental management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     framework. The Project is expected to have a positive
                                                                     impact on the environment as it seeks to: (i) increase the
                                                                     quality, availability and reliability of environmental data;
                                                                     (ii) improve mechanisms to identify and address
                                                                     environmental priorities at the regional and national
                                                                     levels; and (iii) improve mechanisms for opening up
                                                                     decision making on environmental aspects to public
                                                                     scrutiny. Notwithstanding these positive impacts, the
                                                                     proposed Project will include the construction of a
                                                                     laboratory for OEFA. The project would also support the
                                                                     expansion of the water quality and air monitoring
                                                                     networks. Thus, it triggers the environmental assessment
                                                                     policy with a Category B that includes the preparation of
                                                                     an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                     (ESMF), including social and environmental assessments,
                                                                     to provide guidance on potential issues that could arise
                                                                     during Project implementation. Following, Physical
                                                                     Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11, the ESMF includes
                                                                     specific screening provisions for evaluating potential



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                                                        impacts on cultural resources and guidance on chance
                                                        finds procedures. The ESMF also assessed and provides
                                                        guidance on handling and disposal of chemical reagents
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        and samples. Potentially adverse social and environmental
                                                        impacts are expected to be minor, as they will be avoided
                                                        or minimized through appropriate preventive and
                                                        mitigation measures, as well as through adequate project
                                                        design. The ESMF was submitted for the Bank➢❨ s
                                                        approval.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    This policy is not triggered as the project is not
                         4.04                           anticipated to result in the loss or degradation of any
                                                        Critical Natural Habitats. However, the ESMF includes
                                                        screening criteria to ensure that no investments which
                                                        support the significant conversion of critical natural
                                                        habitats will be supported.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    This policy is not triggered as the project will not finance
                                                        any investment of: (a) projects that have or may have
                                                        impacts on the health and quality of forests; (b) projects
                                                        that affect the rights and welfare of people and their level
                                                        of dependence upon or interaction with forests; and (c)
                                                        projects that aim to bring about changes in the
                                                        management, protection, or utilization of natural forests or
                                                        plantations, whether they are publicly, privately, or
                                                        communally owned. However, the ESMF includes
                                                        screening criteria to ensure that investments which could
                                                        have significant potential impacts on forests will not be
                                                        supported by the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     This policy is not triggered as the project will not finance
                                                        the procurement or significant use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   This policy is triggered because of potential chance finds
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           of physical cultural resources - especially those of
                                                        archaeological significance - that could be found during
                                                        installation of air quality monitoring networks, laboratory
                                                        construction and minor remodeling works. The ESMF
                                                        includes specific screening provisions for evaluating
                                                        potential impacts on cultural resources and guidance on
                                                        chance finds procedures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    The Project has no impacts and implementation will not
                         BP 4.10                        affect indigenous peoples, so the policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement No    This policy is not triggered. One of the project➢❨ s
                         OP/BP 4.12                     investment activities ➢❨ construction of the national
                                                        environmental laboratory ➢❨ will require acquisition of a
                                                        vacant commercial lot of 6,000 m2 from a private owner.
                                                        The team social specialist visited the possible site to be
                                                        acquired by OEFA during project preparation and found
                                                        no resettlement issues. However, at this stage there is no


                                                         Page 4 of 9
                                                          guarantee that the identified area for the construction of
                                                          the laboratory will be the final one. This is due to the fact
                                                          that the borrower has to have the project approved first in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          order to purchase this land, and there is no guarantee that
                                                          by then this area will still be available. For this reason the
                                                          borrower has agreed with the Bank that no land will be
                                                          purchased if there are third parties interests involved, such
                                                          as disputed property rights, or presence of illegal
                                                          occupants, and most importantly, land that could trigger
                                                          OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement Policy will not be
                                                          considered.

                                                          OEFA carried out a market study to identify the best
                                                          technical and economic alternative of the land plot
                                                          required for the laboratory. The study included
                                                          publication through newspapers of a request for
                                                          proposals. OEFA received fifty-two proposals and
                                                          evaluated their compliance with municipal regulations for
                                                          the construction of laboratories, availability of public
                                                          utilities, safety, and absence of physical and legal
                                                          liabilities. As a result of the evaluation, OEFA selected
                                                          two proposals from which the least cost option is located
                                                          in the province of Callao. OEFA cannot progress further
                                                          in the acquisition of the land until the project approval.

                                                          This is a ➢❨ willing buyer/willing seller➢❨ situation,
                                                          where proposals for supplying the land were invited and
                                                          submitted. Also, the selected site is not the only one that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          can be used as alternatives are available and will be
                                                          sought if for any reason the land is not available when
                                                          needed. There is no prospect of the land being
                                                          expropriated for project purposes if the owner chose not
                                                          to sell. As the client committed to follow the same
                                                          principles should a different plot be selected in the future,
                                                          OP 4.12 was not triggered.

                                                          The installation of air quality and hydro-meteorology
                                                          stations in Lima, Trujillo, Chiclayo, Piura, Iquitos,
                                                          Huancayo and Cusco will require small areas likely in
                                                          fiscal lands. As such, the project does not trigger the
                                                          Bank➢❨ s OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement Policy.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No   This policy is not triggered since the project will not
                         4.37                             finance any dams nor will it rely on the operations of
                                                          existing dams.
                         Projects on International   No   This policy is not triggered since the project will not
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50             affect any international waterways as defined under the
                                                          policy.


                                                           Page 5 of 9
                            Projects in Disputed       No             This policy is not triggered as the project will not work in
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          any disputed areas as defined under the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              As noted above, the project will support a series of investments to strengthen the generation and
                              dissemination of environmental quality data and information in Peru. This will lay a solid
                              foundation to the country's good environmental governance by promoting transparent and
                              inclusive environmental quality management and, therefore, it is expected to bring positive
                              environmental impacts. The investment activities, i.e. construction and operation of the OEFA
                              environmental laboratory may generate negative environmental impacts that would be local to the
                              surrounding environment. As such, the project triggered the Bank's OP/BP 4.01 Environmental
                              Assessment policy. The project also triggers OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources because of
                              potential chance finds of physical cultural resources, especially those of archaeological
                              significance that could be found during installation of air quality monitoring networks,
                              construction of the national environmental laboratory and minor remodeling works.

                              The project has been identified as environmental safeguards category B. The potentially adverse
                              social and environmental impacts are expected to be small, as they will be avoided or minimized
                              through appropriate preventive and mitigation measures, as well as through adequate project
                              design. No other Bank policies are triggered for this project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project is not expected to have potential indirect and/or long term due to existing or
Public Disclosure Copy




                              anticipated future activities.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The ESMF identifies the following preventive actions for the construction phase, to ensure
                              minimized adverse impacts:
                              -       Locate the laboratory in an industrial area
                              -       Comply with the ECAs and LMPs
                              -       Laboratory design to meet the national building standards
                              -       Follow the LEED standards
                              -       Obtain archaeological certification (CIRA in Spanish) to prevent negative impacts on
                              physical cultural resources
                              -       Build green areas within the site

                             In addition, it sets the following actions as important measures to reduce adverse impacts:
                             -        Prohibit the use of lead paint
                             -        Promote efficient use of natural light
                             -        Promote efficient use of wind
                             -        Promote efficient use of water and recycled water
                             -        Appropriate treatment of wastewater
                             -        Promote use of natural gas for operation including shower and baths


                                                                        Page 6 of 9
                           -       Promote use of clean energy including solar power and other energy efficient technologies

                           During operation the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will include protocols and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           guidelines to properly manage wastewater and solid waste during the operation stage. The ESMF
                           identifies the following important actions during operation:
                           -        Promote responsible handling of chemicals
                           -        Promote use of organic products
                           -        Promote recycling of materials and equipment and reducing overconsumption
                           -        Avoid purchase of obsolescent products
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to guide how
                           potential environmental and social issues will be managed during the project implementation. The
                           ESMF was submitted by the client for the Bank's review and approval.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The agencies in charge of preparing and implementing the operation happens to be the highest
                           environmental authorities in Peru - the Ministry of Environment (MINAM) and the Environmental
                           Evaluation and Enforcement Agency (OEFA). MINAM coordinates core areas of environmental
                           management, including environmental licensing, the review process of EIAs for large projects, and
                           its overarching coordinating role with key sectors and regions on environmental issues. OEFA is a
                           technical specialized public agency, which is in charge of the oversight, supervision, control and
                           penalties on environmental matters. OEFA's functions include the supervision of the application of
                           the common regime of environmental oversight and control, and the incentive regime provided for
                           in the Law No. 28611, General Law of the Environment, as well as to directly supervise and
                           control the observance of the activities included within the scope of its jurisdiction. It also
                           oversees the performance of authorities with environmental responsibilities. Therefore, MINAM
                           and OEFA have the institutional capacity required for safeguards policies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           OEFA and MINAM disclosed in their websites the ESMF and invite also through their web portals
                           the public to join a public hearing on the project and the ESMF. The ESMF was published through
                           the Infoshop by the Bank. On October 7, OEFA and MINAM held a public hearing. The results of
                           the discussions, comments and recommendations of the public hearing will be documented
                           through minutes, which will include the names of the participants in the meeting. Based on these
                           minutes the ESMF would be adjusted, if required. If OEFA and MINAM cannot accommodate
                           recommendations received during the public hearing, the reasons for this rejection will be stated in
                           the minutes of the meeting.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         24-Aug-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-Sep-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Peru                                                               26-Sep-2016
                              Comments: The ESMF was disclosed through the OEFA and MINAM websites, including the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                            invitation for the public consultation scheduled on October 7, 2016.
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ismael Fernando Loayza Careaga,Ernesto Sanchez-Triana

                                                                       Page 8 of 9
                         Approved By
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Raul Ivan Alfaro Pelico (PMGR)   Date: 08-Oct-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 9 of 9
