INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15444
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kazakhstan                  Project ID:  P153497
Project Name: Center West Regional Development Corridor (P153497)
Task Team       Jacques Bure
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Nov-2015                 Estimated    28-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT103                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (25%), Rural services and
infrastructure (25%), Export development and competitiveness (25%), Regional
integration (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    1195.00             Total Bank Financing:  1051.69
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                    143.31
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      1051.69
Total                                                                      1195.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective are (a) to improve the transport connectivity within the regions
along the Kazakhstan Center West Corridor and (b) to strengthen the capacity of selected agencies
for the effective implementation of the corridor development and road asset preservation policies.
Page 1 of 12


﻿3. Project Description
The proposed Centre-West road project is part of transit corridor Baku-Astrakhan-Atyrau-Aktobe-
Aktau-Turkmenistan border?, which connects Kazakhstan with Azerbaijan and Europe in the west,
with Russia in the north, through Iran with countries of the Persian Gulf, and Uzbekistan and
Turkmenistan in the south. Estimated 2,000 km Center-West project will start in Astana and pass
through Akmola, Kostanai, Aktobe, Atyrau, and Mangistau oblasts, thus linking two of four
identified ?urban agglomerations?, and two of the identified ?second-tier? towns. The project is
o expected to contribute to the local development of the regions through which it passes and promote
pro-poor growth by overcoming the spatial mismatch between the location of jobs and settlements
for low-income residents.
The Centre-West corridor will be part of an overall network upgrade program that will also enhance
existing links between Astana and Almaty (Centre South from Astana - Pavlodar - Semei - Kalbatau
- Ust-Kamenogorsk) and between Astana and Ust-Kamenogorsk (Centre East from Astana - Pavlodar
-Semei - Kalbatau - Ust-Kamenogorsk). The Government is aiming for completion of all the
corridors by 2020.
The construction will be mainly a two lane standard (which indicates a well-grounded consideration
of standards and costs), and expand to four lanes on the first 98km from Astana to Zhanteke because
of the expected traffic and the potential for tourism development of the Zhanteke region and the
Ramsar wetland around the lake Tengiz of Korghalzhyn. Tolling may also be considered along the
four-lane section close to Astana and consistent with a broader tolling plan currently envisaged by
the GOK.
Out of seven options identified at the pre-feasibility stage, the Government has chosen to study
feasibility of the following three routes. The three routes follow only limited sections of existing
main highways, with most of its route currently consisting of either local roads or, in the western end,
tracks in the desert.
0
Route 1 traverses Astana, Zhanteke, Egyndykol, Arkalyk, Turgay, Akshiganak, Yrgyz, Shalkar,
Kandyagash, Dossor, Beyneu to Aktau (total of 1,997km).
Route 2 traverses Astana, Zhanteke, Egindykol, Arkalyk, Turgay, Akshiganak, Yrgyz, Aktobe,
Dossor, Beyneu to Aktau (total of 2,097 km).
Route 3 traverses Astana, Zhanteke, Egindykol, Arkalyk, Turgay, Karabutak, Aktobe, Dossor,
Beyneu to Aktau (total of 1,936 km).
The preferred option for the GoK is Route 1. The section proposed for the Bank to finance starts
from Astana and traverses Zhanteke, Egindykol, Arkalyk, Turgay to Yrgyz (20 km to the west of
Yrgyz up to the junction with the existing Western Europe- Western China Corridor) or further West
to Shalkar, another 100 km-to be confirmed at negotiations). All the roads of this proposed section,
except for Astana-Zhanteke part, are currently local, or secondary, gravel roads in poor condition
ineffectively managed by Akimats. After reconstruction the road will be converted into the
republican roads network.
Section 1 (170 km) starts from about 10 km west from the city center of Astana in suburban Astana,
runs in a north-westerly direction toward Zhanteke and further West. This section consists primarily
of reconstruction of an existing two lane paved, although very poorly maintained, road. The
construction will be mainly a Class 11 (2 lane) highway, except for one portion of this section (98
Page 2 of 12


﻿kin) that is close to Astana, which will be a 4-lane construction, since it is expected to carry a traffic
of about 7,000 vehicles per day. This particular section may be tolled to introduce concession for
operation and maintenance of 4-lane road infrastructure.
O
Section 2 (220km) continues West after Zhanteke to Arkalyk. This section will be a green field
project as there is no existing roads at present. The new road would go through a semi desert with
scattered wetlands and mostly flat terrain with some agriculture land on the last 10 km towards
Arkalyk.
Section 3 (290 km) uses the existing road that connects Arkalyk to Turgay. The road also connects
settlements in between, all of them being modest in size. The road often runs in parallel to an
hydrographic complex made of medium size rivers and their associated tributaries and wetlands.
Section 4 (190 km) continues west after Turgay to Yrgyz (20 km to the west past Yrgyz up to the
junction with the existing Western Europe- Western China Corridor). This section consists of
reconstruction of an existing gravel road in a very poor condition, not accessible during the spring or
autumn.
Project Components
Component 1 (US$1,208 million): Infrastructure development and Supervision. The component will
finance civil works on about 900 km of road sect ions between Astana and Yrgyz (or further west to
Shalkar, another 100 km-to be confirmed at negotiations) and consulting services for supervision of
civil works. Land acquisition and road design costs will be covered from the GOK co-financing part,
and not be financed from the Loan proceeds.
Component 2 (US$6 million) Corridor Development. The component will support: (i) preparation of
a Corridor Development Action Plan (Plan) and (ii) implementation of some key priority activities
from the Plan. The objective of the component is to customize the corridor to local advantage and to
ensure that economically disadvantaged sparsely populated and remote areas within the corridor in
Akmola, Kostanay, and Aktobe oblasts are provided with reasonable access to basic services and
new markets. Local development plans and existing strengths, resources, as well as services in
demand along the alignment were assessed in consultation with local communities. The assessment
identified agriculture, tourism, services, and education as strategic focus of the corridor. The Plan
a        will support activities aimed at unlocking the potential of industries identified and capacity building
for local communities, such as: the development of service areas for retail and sales of local food and
crafts, tourist information, transport services, pharmacies, milk collection points from local farmers,
support to livestock bazaars, etc.
Component 3 (US$20 million) Operation and Maintenance: This component will allow the MolD to
implement a strategy designed with the assistance of the Bank during the preparation of the road
sector reform in 2012-2013. As the road will become a new republican road, it is necessary to create
facilities and equipment for operation and maintenance.
Component 4: (US$3 million) Road Safety. The component will be implemented by the Committee
of Administrative Police of the Ministry of Interior (CAP) Kazakhstan's lead road safety agency with
assistance from local consultants hired under the Project. The objective of this component is to help
the Kazakh authorities design National Road Safety Strategy 2016-2020 (NRSS), strengthen
institutional capacity in relation to the NRSS implementation, and increase road safety education and
awareness of road users in Kazakhstan.
Page 3 of 12


﻿Component 5: (US$ 2million) Project Management. The component will be covered from the GoK
budget. CR identified KazAutozhol (KAZ) as a Project Management Unit (PMU) for the CWP and
other roads projects to be financed by other IFIs. While the MolD through CR will retain the overall
O
)         responsibility for the project implementation, KAZ is expected to assist the CR on day-to-day
operations managing project activities, such as supervision of social, environmental, and fiduciary
safeguards, provision of logistical support, M&E, inter-agency coordination, etc.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The section proposed for the Bank to finance starts from Astana and traverses Zhanteke, Egindykol,
Arkalyk to Turgay-Yrgyz in Akmola, Kostanay, and Aktobe oblasts. All the roads of this proposed
section, except for Astana-Zhanteke part, are currently local, or secondary, gravelroads in poor
condition ineffectively managed by Akimats. The project has all physical characteristics of a large
linear infrastructure project, with significant spatial extension, visible impact on landscape, biosphere
and land use patterns, strong dependence of its impacts on topography, climate, natural conditions
and anthropogenic activity.
Important natural habitats sites are no closer than 25-30 km from the road alignment and will not be
affected by the Project and its associated activities. At the same time, there are saiga migration routes
in the project area.
Turgay geoglyphs - a unique and previously unstudied large-scale earthworks in the Turgay region of
northern Kazakhstan - were discovered in 2007 using satellite imagery (Googleearth) and include Eki
Din, Sahna, and Kogai cross forming a pattern of equilateral crosses, swastikas, circles and lines
produced on the ground and formed by rocks, live trees, gravel, and earth. There are at least 263
mounds in Kostanay oblast in the form of trenches and ramparts, arrayed in five basic shapes. The
"youngest" Turgay geoglyph was constructed between the first century BC and the first century AD.
Meanwhile, ancient Turgay geoglyphs, which can be viewed only from space, can be aged between
7000 years of age and older. Geoglyphs are unique historic structures of ancient civilizations and due
to their physical characteristics (round-like 0.15 - 0.8 m high elevations of clay, rock, gravel 10--12
m in diameter each) they cannot be easily identified at the ground level and can be damaged by
earthworks on road alignment and associated infrastructure (e.g. borrow pits, construction camps,
access roads, etc.).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          A safeguards category of A is proposed. This is justified
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                by greenfield construction of approximately 450 km of
road sections (e.g. Zhanteke - Arkalyk, Turgay - Yrgyz)
planned under the project. The alignment will run through
a variety of areas with different safeguards implications:
(i) in zones of intense agricultural use where existing
irrigation systems will have to be preserved, and (ii)
where the road would cross rangeland under use for
Page 4 of 12


﻿animal husbandry animal underpasses will have to be
planned to guarantee the safety of drivers and animals.
The main envisaged negative impacts during construction
is the operation of borrow areas, generation of waste
(construction materials, spent consumables, household
waste and wastewater from camps), excessive land use,
topsoil destruction and erosion. There is also a potential
risks of pollution of surface water from runoff and
accidental spills involving fuels and lubricants. During
operation of the road storm drainage management, noise,
dust, air pollution will be the main issues. Some sections
of the alignment involve greenfield construction. Site-
specific Mitigation Plans will address/minimize the risks
of potential negative impacts on steppe areas, rivers, and
other sensitive elements of greenfield sections.
Component 2 will finance preparation of a Corridor
Development Action Plan and implementation of some
key priority activities from the Plan (with focus on
agriculture, tourism, services, etc.). The Plan will take
into account potential negative environmental impacts of
economic activity (agriculture, small businesses, tourism)
and will provide guidance on mitigation measures to
avoid or minimize these impacts.
Component 3 will finance the road's operation and
maintenance activities. Environmental aspects of road
maintenance, such as location and design of maintenance
depots, transport/storage/application of de-icers,
maintenance of road maintenance machinery will be
addressed in design documentation and schedules of
depots.
Component 4 will finance various road safety measures
which will generally have positive social impact in the
project area.
The Borrower has prepared the ESIA and EMF which was
reviewed by the Bank team, disclosed and consulted upon.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The Project is not expected to impact established
4.04                                 protected areas. According to the data available at the
Association for Conservation of Biodiversity the project
location passes through the summer habitat range and
potentially some of the migration routes of Saiga tatarica,
a critically endangered species of antelope. Saiga migrates
in spring from the South of Kazakhstan to Akmolinskaya,
Kostanaiskaya and Aktyubinskaya oblasts, the basins of
the rivers Irgiz, Turgai, Ulyshilanshik and Tersakkan and
Lake Tengiz. Vehicle traffic and noise of moving
vehicles may eventually create conditions that prevent
Page 5 of 12


﻿saiga from crossing. Associated facilities (e.g.
construction camps or borrow pits) may potentially divert
animals to other routes. Additional potential impacts
include cases when animals are hit by the moving vehicles
or hunted by construction workers or local inhabitants.
Therefore, the OP 4.04 Natural Habitats is triggered for
the project. Specific areas with high concentrations of
saiga and potential critical habitats and their migration
routes will be surveyed. The Client and their contractors
will establish collaboration with environmental
organizations that perform Saiga monitoring which will
become an important part of preparation and
implementation of site-specific EMPs. According to the
report "Saiga crossing options" (by Kirk A. Olson from
Smithsonian Conservation Biology Institute for the
Frankfurt Zoological Society, Association for the
Conservation of Biodiversity of Kazakhstan, Fauna &
Flora International and Convention on Migratory Species)
properly designed underpasses/crossing points are
considered to be sufficiently effective and acceptable
measure for saiga migration and the road would not lead
to significant degradation of the habitat (i.e. not
significantly interfere with migration). Specific locations
for such crossings (if needed) will be determined during
preparation of site-specific EMPs.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No            Policy OP 0.36 Forests in not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The use of pesticides or herbicides is not foreseen under
the project. The policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural        Yes           While the inventory of known physical cultural resources
Resources OP/BP 4.11                   conducted in the project area has not revealed PCR
objects that may be potentially affected by the project, the
policy on Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 is
triggered due to presence in the project area of so-called
Turgay geoglyphs - unique and previously unstudied
large-scale earthworks in the Turgai region of northern
Kazakhstan. Turgay geoglyphs have not been designated
a status of historical or cultural monuments to be
protected according to legislation of Kazakhstan. OP/BP
4.11 Physical Cultural Resources is triggered in order to
take into account the sites with geoglyphs in project
design and ensure sound protection of this cultural
heritage for present and future generations. The team is
currently identifying the location of geoglyphs in relation
to the proposed alignment. In case there is a threat of
damage to geoglyphs, re-routing of the alignment will be
done at design stage. If re-routing is not possible, Site
Page 6 of 12


﻿Management Plan will be done as part of site-specific
EMPs. The project will also support further research and
promotion of geoglyphs as historic and cultural heritage
and a tourism attraction in the project area.
Chance finds procedure is described in the ESIA. The
requirements regarding chance finds will be included in
the construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           No indigenous peoples live in the project area or will
BP 4.10                               directly or indirectly be affected by the project.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          The project is expected to have land acquisition and
OP/BP 4.12                            resettlement impacts due to construction works associated
with expansion to four lanes from the existing two
including construction of the new road section. The RPF
is prepared by the client. In case the detailed designs
become available at the project preparation, the client will
also prepare RAP(s).
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No
4.37
Projects on International  No         None of the potentially affected water bodies are
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  international. Hence, there are no grounds to trigger
OP7.50.
Projects in Disputed     No           The project is not located in or near disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The design of the road has taken into account measures for the minimization of environmental
impacts. The routing as much as feasible avoids sensitive areas and habitats and protected areas,
follows existing infrastructure corridors and thus limiting the conversion of land to non-critical
land types and land use types. The design will include measures to protect the adjacent population
from noise (routing, barriers), increase traffic safety by speed controls, pedestrian crossings and
underpasses. The design will also take into account requirements articulated from farmers along
the alignment for safe crossings for animals and farm traffic through sufficiently dimensioned
underpasses. Similar underpasses will facilitate wildlife crossings. The design will also include
results from hydrographic and hydrological studies, installing sufficient culverts to avoid damming
of permanent of seasonal watercourses and the creation of swamps or waterlogged areas, and the
dimensioning of bridges will take the seasonality of discharges, as well as the proneness to flash
floods into account.
Most environmental impacts during the construction period will be mitigated by good
housekeeping measures. There will be standard procedures for the control and mitigation of
emissions, such as dust, noise, exhaust fumes and liquid discharges from camps and the road
platform. Surface watercourses will be protected by settling ponds and filters (e.g. straw bales).
Wastewater from construction camps will be treated on site in settlement and aeration basins,
Page 7 of 12


﻿where biological waste will be processed, before discharge into surface streams or rivers. Septic
sludge from toilets will either be composted on site or trucked to existing water treatment plants
along the alignment. Groundwater is not expected to be impacted by the project, as no deep
excavations or major cuts are expected. Water for the construction activities as well as the camps
O
will be extracted in relatively small quantities from existing wells or the public supply system.
Generally water availability is unconstrained in the project area.
Noise and exhaust emissions will be minimized by the requirement for Contractors to use modem
equipment and machinery complying with modem emission standards, and to maintain the
equipment in good working order throughout the project. This will be prescribed in the equipment
specifications in the tender documents. Nuisance to the public will moreover be minimized by
limiting work hours and not allowing nighttime works. Where works are carried out in close
vicinity to residential areas additional measures, such as noise barriers or the installation of
insulating windows will be implemented in accordance with good practice and in consultation with
the community.
Borrow pits will be operated by the Contractors only at locations that have been pre-identified
previous to project implementation and for which both operational and environmental permits
have been obtained. No borrow pit will be operated without a site specific EMP that will contain a
plan for its closure, remediation and re-cultivation that will be approved by the local
environmental authorities (as required under Kazakh regulations) as well as the supervising
engineer (who will ensure that international good practice is followed).
All environmental management measures to be carried out by the Contractors during the
construction period will be integrated in the tender documents and become part of the works
contracts. This will also include a manual on chance find procedures to be followed in case of
unanticipated discovery of potential PCR. The Contractors will be required to have permanent
staff on site with the specific responsibility of environmental and social management (including a
grievance specialist), reporting to the supervision engineers and local authorities.
o
The project will not result in any significant negative social impacts. There is a social assessment
ongoing, which will confirm this and will also help to design the project to achieve maximum
social benefits.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
While we expect that in future the improved access will have broader economic/social
development implications particularly of new roads or significantly improved roads, these future
developments are not considered to be associated with this project in the sense of needing to apply
our SG policies to them. This is because there are no specific developments that we can expect to
occur as a result of the project (as would be the case, e.g., for a road providing direct access to an
area which will be developed for a ski resort).
Component 2 will finance preparation of a Corridor Development Action Plan and implementation
of some key priority activities from the Plan (with focus on agriculture, tourism, services, etc.).
The Plan will take into account potential negative impacts of economic activity (agriculture, small
businesses, tourism) on environment and will provide guidance on mitigation measures to avoid or
minimize these impacts.
Component 3 will finance the road's operation and maintenance activities. Environmental aspects
of road maintenance, such as location and design of maintenance depots, transport/storage/
Page 8 of 12


﻿application of de-icers, maintenance of road maintenance machinery will be addressed in design
documentation and schedules of depots.
Component 4 will finance various road safety measures which will generally have positive social
impact in the project area.
O
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
O
Out of seven alternatives initially, three alignment alternatives were prioritized based on pre-
feasibility assessment and further consultations with local administrations, citizens, and
businesses. Alternative route options do not differ significantly in terms of potential environmental
impacts. All three routes pass via Korgalzhyn, Arkalyk, and Turgay. Project Alternative 1, total of
1267 km, continues to the West via Yrgyz, Shalkar and Emba up to Kandagash and Aktobe. This
alternative envisions the construction of 452 km of new road sections and rehabilitation of 692 km
of roads. The Alternatives 2 and 3 are connected to the exising M-32 (Samara-Shymkent) road at
Yrgyz and Karabutak respectively. They require rehabilitation of 297 km of roads, and 452 km
and 583 km of new construction respectively. In all three alternatives, the highest traffic is
expected at the road sections spanning from Astana to Arkalyk connecting the two economic
centers. The rehabilitation and new construction of these sections will spur generation of local and
regional trips due to improvement of travel conditions and enhanced connectivity. Economic
analysis also takes into account generated trips between settlements along the routes and major
economic centers, as well as divertion of long-distance and international traffic from an existing
alternative road Astana-Atbasar-Kostanay-Karabutak-Aktobe.
Based on economic analysis of alternatives Route 1 was chosen as preferred alignment. The
preferred option contributes to development of the central regions (e.g., around Arkalyk, Turgay,
Akshiganak, Yrgyz, Shalkar).
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The EIA process in Kazakhstan is described in the Environmental code (2007) and a set of
detailed implementation instructions. It foresees 4 stages, which correlate with the respective
design activities and range from (i) a desk study for pre-feasibility level, (ii) a preliminary EIA and
(iii) a detailed ("full") EIA for the detailed design stage and (iv) an EMP as separate section of the
design documentation. In this respect the EIA process is both logical and deemed compatible with
international good practice.
The borrower prepared ESIA report. The ESIA was reviewed by the Bank team, a gap analysis
carried out and issues to be rectified and improved identified. The team, the PMC (project
management consultant) from the ongoing SWRP (South West Roads Project) and a qualified
Consultant assisted the Borrower to address the identified gaps and upgrade the ESIAs to a quality
acceptable to the Bank before project appraisal.
Unoccupied land plots shall be chosen for borrow pits. Location of these land plots as well as
design documentation including re-cultivation plans will be agreed with nature protection
agencies (water, forest, wildlife etc.) to ensure that adverse impacts on environment are eliminated
or minimized. Construction contractor(s) bears full responsibility for the borrow pit operation and
land re-cultivation after its closure. Land re-cultivation will include restitution of slopes and
returning the topsoil which was removed and stored at a separate location. To make a former
borrow pit a "green-field", re-cultivation measures will include setting seeds of various plants or
allowing the endemic plants to naturally take over. During the road construction and land
Page 9 of 12


﻿remediation works the borrow pit sites will be regularly inspected by the representatives of the
project owner and the state agencies responsible for environment.
The environmental compliance of the on-going projects (East-West, and South-West Roads) is
O
generally satisfactory, as has been determined by several performance assessment missions carried
out by the World Bank team. Local experts will be engaged by KAZ for the purposes of
supervision of environmental and social safeguards. Contractors and supervision engineers
regularly monitor the operation and remaining volumes of material in the borrow pits. Every
borrow pit has closure/re-cultivation plan, which is prepared upfront as part of the design
documentation for borrow pits. The documentation for borrow pits is in good order on file with
contractors and supervision engineers.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the road are (a) the Committee for Roads, an agency of the Government of
Kazakhstan, as the project proponent; (b) commercial and private road users, who will be the
primary beneficiaries from improved road quality; and (c) PAPs such as the residents of
communities along the road, farmers, herders and proprietors of roadside services. For this last
group there will be benefits as well as some disadvantages and negative impacts caused by the
project.
To ensure that all views and concerns of all stakeholders are appropriately reflected in project
design and implementation, and environmental and social safeguards instruments fully capture the
baseline situation, the expected impacts and the views and concerns of the PAPs, two sets of
consultations were undertaken during the preparation of the Bank financed project. The first public
hearings were carried out on June 9-12, 2015 in 5 regions of Akmola oblast, Tselinorgrad,
Kurgaldzhin, Egindikol, Atbasars and Zharkaiyn regions, in Kostanay region, in Arkalyk town,
Amangeldy and Dzhangeldy regions, and also in Irgiz region of Aktobe oblast. On June 29, 2015
public hearings were held in Akmol, Zhanteke, Egindikol, Sochinskii villages. Public hearings
gave the opportunity to local residents and other project stakeholders to get acquainted with the
general details of the project and to discuss the effective points concerning ecology and social
aspects, to express the wishes and recommendations which have to be included in the ESIA TOR
and RAP. The draft ESIA was disclosed on September 29, 2015, before start of project appraisal
and public hearings were organized on November 9-11 in the project region (Zhanteke, Egindykol,
Sochinskoye, Arkalyk, Amangeldy, Djangeldy, Akshyganak, Yrgiz).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           29-Sep-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  16-Nov-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kazakhstan                                               29-Sep-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Sep-2015
Page 10 of 12


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                            28-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Kazakhstan                                                21-Oct-2015
O
C. Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [X] No [   ]   NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
C.         property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
O
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [ X]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [  ]  TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 11 of 12


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jacques Bure
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                   Date: 16-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                  Date: 16-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


