INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA14987
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Bangladesh                Project ID:  P154127
Parent       P095965
Project ID:
Project Name: Siddhirganj Power Project Additional Financing (P154127)
Parent Project Siddhirganj Power Project (P095965)
Name:
Task Team       Md. Iqbal
Leader(s):
Estimated       01-Sep-2015               Estimated    30-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEO6                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (30%), Oil and gas (30%), Thermal Power
Generation (30%), Information technology (10%)
Theme(s):       Corporate governance (10%), Infrastructure services for private sector
development (70%), Climate change (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    205.21            Total Bank Financing:   176.71
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        28.50
International Development Association (IDA)                              176.71
Total                                                                    205.21
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       Yes
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 9


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The primary development objective is to support investments in peaking power supply capability
in Bangladesh such that unmet demand for energy is reduced by 1-billion kWh per year. Unmet
demand has an economic cost of at as much as 2% of GDP.
A secondary development objective is to build capacity among the implementing agencies:
Elctricity Generation Company of Bangladesh, Power Grid Company of Bangladesh, and Gas
Transmission Company Limited (GTCL).
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
Increase supply of electricity to Bangladesh grid network.
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The original Project (Siddhirganj Peaking Power Project) was an integrated natural gas-to-power
project and the initial design had a 300 MW peaking power plant (gas-fired) to meet electricity
shortages during peak periods. However, in view of increasing electricity demand and continued gas
and power supply shortages in Bangladesh, the Government proposed to upgrade the power plant to
an energy-efficient, combined cycle design. EGCB then contracted a 335 MW combined cycle power
plant (CCPP). The CCPP will increase power supply in both peak and off-peak periods, instead of
only peak times as per the original PDO. It will address the severe power shortages and meet the
goals of Government's massive power generation expansion plan.
The additional financing is required because the CCPP has a higher capital cost vis a vis that of the
peaking power plant. In addition, because the depreciation of the SDR against the US dollar has
significantly reduced the value of the original credit in USD terms, there is a need for more funds to
pay for contracts already under execution. Higher IDA commitments are required for the selected
contracts and financing of price and physical contingencies. No further changes are proposed. EGCB
is the only recipient of the AF and the proceeds of the AF will not benefit the other two
implementing agencies, PGCB and GTCL.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The CCPP is being constructed in the Siddhirganj power complex located within Siddhirganj Thana
under Narayanganj district which is known as an Industrial area. The site for the power plant is
within 88 acre property owned by the BPDB, currently managed by EGCB Ltd. The land
requirement for the CCPP is 9.24 acre, while the requirement of the open cycle peaking plant was
about 6 acres.
It is approximately 20 km North-East of Dhaka and is easily accessible from Dhaka-Chittagong
Highway. There are 4 gas fired power plants (under operation and construction) within the
Siddhirganj Power Generation Complex. These are: (i) BPDB's 210 MW steam plant in operation
(now under maintenance), (ii) ADB funded two 120 MW capacity peaking power plants in operation,
(iii) one 100 MW rental power plant in operation (HSD based) and (iv) the 335 MW CCPP (under
construction with World Bank finance). In addition, within 2-3 km radius, there are 5 other gas-fired
power plants. These are: (i) AES Haripur 360 MW private power plant, located about 1km
Page 2 of 9


﻿downstream of the Siddhirganj site; (ii) 412 MW CCPP on the other side of the river, owned by
EGCB; (iii) BPDB owned 99 MW Gas Turbine power plant; (iv) the lx1 10 MW NEPC barge
mounted private power plant; and (v) 100 MW Dutch Bangla rental power plant (furnace oil based).
The site of the recently closed-down Adamjee Jute Mill is located immediately along the southern
boundary of the Siddhirganj plant complex, which is now being converted into an Export Processing
Zone (Special Economic Zone). On the northern side, there is a steel re-rolling mill, and also a
couple of brick kilns. There are many other small and medium industries within and around the
Siddhirganj area.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Iqbal Ahmed (GENDR)
Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)
Shakil Ahmed Ferdausi (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The original project triggered the Environmental
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) safeguard policy, and was
classified as Category 'A.'. The Combined Cycle (CC)
power plant is now being constructed in the same location
identified for the peaking (open cycle) power plant. A
rapid EIA was carried out in 2010 to assess the additional
environmental issues, since the peaking plant technology
changed to a combined cycle (CC) unit with a 335 MW
electricity generation capacity. Further, a detailed EIA
was carried out in July 2012, cleared by the bank and
disclosed in the country and at Info Shop.
The additional financing will fill only the financing gap to
the power generation component, which will not trigger
any new environmental safeguard policies. The CCPP
does not trigger any new environmental safeguards
policies. The major environmental impacts are expected
from cooling water requirements and discharges; noise
and air emissions; and ground level pollution. However,
most of the adverse impacts are expected to be limited to
the local environment. The majority of these
environmental impacts will be minimized, avoided or
compensated with a careful design and implementation of
the environmental management plan.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           There are not any natural habitat are at or surrounding the
4.04                                 project location. It is highly unlikely that any natural
habitat formed largely by native plant and animal species
will be affected or modified during the construction phase
of water transmission and distribution lines.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project is expected have no impacts on the health and
quality of forests, no affect the rights and welfare of
people and their level of dependence upon or interaction
Page 3 of 9


﻿with forests and bring no changes in the management,
protection, or utilization of natural forests or plantations.
As such, the policy has not been triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            The project is not expected to finance any synthetic
chemical pesticides activities and the policy has not been
triggered.
Physical Cultural        No           Since the activity is limited to the open premises of
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  EGCB, no impact on landscape with archaeological,
paleontological, historical, architectural, religious,
aesthetic, or other cultural significance is expected.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           There is no tribal/indigenous people in the project
BP 4.10                              influence area.
Involuntary Resettlement No           The original project triggered this policy since there were
OP/BP 4.12                           power and gas transmission components. There is no
requirement for land acquisition, displacement of people
or adverse livelihood impacts anticipated due to this AF
as all project activities are restricted within the power
plant complex and on land belonging to the power station.
No adverse social impacts are expected.
There is a school within the complex comprising primary
and secondary sections. Since the primary section is
severely overcrowded and housed in an old, damp and
dark section of the building the project has agreed to shift
the primary section of the school to an allocated spot
within the complex (in close proximity to the existing
building) where a four-six story building will be built.
Presently there is a very old and dilapidated building on
the spot which is vacant and should be pulled down for
safety reasons. The project will also provide additional
toilet facilities in the existing school building and equip a
library and computer lab there. This is undertaken as a
safeguards plus activity for the project and is completely
voluntary in nature. The new building and other facilities
in the old building will be designed in close consultation
with the schools authorities, students, respective parents
and EGCB. An SMP will be prepared to document the
consultative process for the design of the new facilities,
especially taking into account the gender aspects of the
design.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not finance any new dams.
4.37
Projects on International  Yes        The new combined cycle configuration will draw about
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  12.5 cubic meters per second of water from the nearby
Sitalakhya river. The Sitalkhya drains into the Meghna
and Padma rivers and ultimately the Bay of Bengal. This
policy was triggered during the Level-I restructuring
Page 4 of 9


﻿project due to change of power plant technology. The
notification was made and also no objection has been
received.
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The original project was classified as category 'A'. It also falls under the 'Red' category as per the
country legislation. A full scale of Environment Assessment (EA) was carried out for the peaking
power plant during the project preparation. EGCB again carried out the EA since the technology,
capacity and area requirement have been changed for CCPP. The CCPP has high efficiency
(comparing to open cycle peaking power plant) resulting in lower fuel consumption with resultant
minimum environmental pollution per kWh produced, and conservation of primary energy.
The EIA of CCPP did not envisage any significant negative impact on VECs (valued environment
components) in the influence area due to the project activities .The combined cycle power plant
incorporated a closed loop cooling system. It reduces significantly the water requirement (less than
2% loss) and does not generate any thermal effluent which needs to be discharged in the river
system.
Since the project site is located in a developed area that does not appear to be ecologically
sensitive, impacts of project activities on most ecological parameters (e.g., floral and faunal habitat
and diversity) are mostly insignificant. The important physico-chemical parameters that are likely
to be affected by the project activities include air quality and noise level. The noise generated from
construction activities might become a source of annoyance at the school located close to the
project site. Mitigation measures, including shifting of the locations of water treatment plant
(WTP) and effluent treatment plant (ETP) have been agreed in order to reduce noise exposure.
During the operational phase, high level of noise is expected to be generated within the confines of
the turbine and generator installations. Modeling study suggests that the effect of increased NOx
and PM in the ambient air due to emission from the power plants will not be very significant.
The original project triggered OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement as it involved the installation of a
gas pipeline (GTCL component) and a power transmission lines (PGCB component). Social
Impact Assessments and Resettlement Action Plans were prepared, approved and implemented by
both GTCL and PGCB. Monitoring and completion reports were submitted by both agencies. In
case of PGCB the first RAP prepared showed heavy resettlement impacts and negative community
reaction. Based on this PGCB agreed to change the entire route, bringing down the resettlement
impacts to a minimum which were fully mitigated through a new SIA and RAP. GTCL
implemented the gas pipeline which resulted in mostly temporary impacts through requisition of
land; all impacts were identified through a comprehensive SIA and RAP. GTCL hired an NGO
with a respectable history in implementing resettlement programs to implement the RAP.
An SIA was carried out by EGCB for the power plant. It is not anticipated that this AF will trigger
OP 4.12 as the activities proposed are strictly restricted within the power station compound on a
Page 5 of 9


﻿piece of land that belongs to the Power Development Board and specifically allocated for the
purpose of the project. No land acquisition, displacement of people or adverse impacts on
livelihoods are expected. There are no indigenous communities within or around the project
location.
There is a school building within the complex. Children of staff working in the power complex as
well as those coming from the surrounding areas, attend the school. The primary section of the
school is particularly overcrowded, in poor physical condition and is unsafe. As a safeguards plus
measure, the project has agreed to build a new six-storied building across the existing school to
shift out the primary section (with classrooms, adequate toilet facilities, teachers rooms, sick room
and a common area on the ground floor for extracurricular activities). The project will also provide
new toilet facilities in the existing school which are urgently required and will equip a library and
computer for the secondary school. The design of all these facilities has been been done in close
consultation with the school authorities, teachers, students, respective parents, EGCB and other
relevant stakeholders. Initial engagement with them has demonstrated very positive reactions. The
activities are completely voluntary in nature. The new location of the primary school is across the
field from the existing building. The location is well within the power complex on land that
belongs to them and is presently occupied by an old and decrepit building which is vacant and
would be pulled down in any case for safety reasons. It does not entail any social issues.
The overall compliance of safeguard management is satisfactory (also reflected in last project
ISR). In addition of the EIA, the contractor of the CCPP has prepared the Environmental Action
Plan (EAP) in line with their work methodology, schedule of work, equipment standards etc. to
control specific environmental impacts associated with project activities. EGCB, along with the
Owners Engineer, monitors the construction site in regular interval to ensure the implementation
of EMPs during construction. Also the laboratory test for standard parameters of ambient air,
water and n oise were carried out during monitoring.
The findings from the monitoring report explored that the house-keeping is properly maintained at
the plant site. Segregated solid, liquid and hazardous waste are regularly managed at a designated
place by the contractor in a coordinated manner. Personal protective equipment (PPE) are used
properly to reduce worker's health and safety hazards. A health care facility has been provided
with qualified doctor and nurses to provide medical assistance to the workers and officers as well
as the subsequent clinical facilities has been ensured. The lab test result in the monitoring report
also identified that the BOD5 is higher level in the Sitalakkaha River and the noise level also
exceeded the standard value of the Department of Environment (DoE), Bangladesh and it is a
concern for nearby school. However, these parameters are not exceeded due to the impacts from
the activities during construction. The labor camp is outside the project boundary and the labor
camp has been properly managed. The sanitary latrines connected to appropriately designed septic
tank system (consisting of septic tank and soak pit) to avoid any contamination of any sort around
the project boundary. No human waste or solid waste is disposed in the river.
Noise mitigation measures were planned in accordance with EIA for the project and consultations
with local school, communities and the project PIU. The contractor made reasonable efforts to
schedule heavy noise activities for weekends or late afternoons and kept the less noisy activities
for normal teaching hours (between 8 am to 2 pm) to keep a normal environment at surrounding
the school compound. Also, the contractor has installed the noise barrier around the construction
activities, where noise was unavoidable.
Page 6 of 9


﻿To reduce the noise exposure at the school area during operation phase, the water treatment plant
(WTP) and effluent treatment plant (ETP) of proposed power plant have been relocated. In
addition, the planting of trees outside the entire northern boundary of the school (around 7 meters
corridor) will be done after completion of power plant and the school boundary wall will be raised
up. As stated above, the project has agreed to build a new six-story building across the field from
the existing building to shift out the primary section.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Additional power generation capacity may be added in near future in the area. Since these will also
be natural gas-fired, the negative impact on air quality are expected to be marginal. Although the
EIA of CCPP did not envisage any significant negative impact on VECs (valued environment
components) in the influence area due to the project activities, however, the limited cumulative
impact assessment showed that there are large number industries, other power plants, brick kilns
etc. surrounding the proposed project area and all of which contribute to pollution on physical
environment of surrounding sites. In view of this findings, the Power Cell under the Ministry of
Power, Energy and Mineral Resources took an initiative to carry out Cumulative Environmental
Impact Assessment (CEIA) in the power hub area to assess cumulative impacts and prepare
appropriate management plan to implement future planned projects for power generation. Power
Cell faced considerable difficulty in identifying qualified firms to undertake the CEIA and finally
hired an international firm for this in May, 2015. The firm commenced the work and submitted an
interim report of CEIA on July 29, 2015. A comprehensive analysis of cumulative impacts on
VECs will be conducted in the subsequent stage of the study. It will involve estimating of present
and future state of the VECs that may result from the impacts they experience from the present and
future developments. Indicators will be established for expression of VEC condition. The effects
on all the indicators associated with VEC will be aggregated. Management strategies and
procedures would be designed to manage cumulative impacts to plan the future project. The final
report is expected by March 2016.
There are no adverse social impacts anticipated under the AF.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The alternative analysis between combined cycle power plant and open cycle power plant has been
carried out. In terms of resource utilization, the combined cycle power plant is more efficient and
does not discharge high temperature exhaust or steam into the air, and hot water into the river
since it has a close loop cooling system. In addition, an alternative analysis from environmental
perspective was carried out on the two proposed locations within the Siddhirganj power generation
complex and the best option is selected for the project. The project footprint was analyzed several
times from a social impact perspective and has been re-designed to yield the minimum social cost
option (present design).
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
EGCB has updated the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and conducted a Social Impact
Assessment (SIA) considering the new technology option and larger area requirement. EGCB has
been has used certification of ISO 14001-2004 (Environmental Management Standard) and
OHSAS 18001: 1999 (Occupational Health and Safety Management Systems) as the eligibility
criteria for selection of the contractor. EGCB made requirement for the contractor to prepare the
environmental action plan based on their equipment specification, construction schedule and
Page 7 of 9


﻿agreed Environmental Management Plan (EMP) under EIA.
Presently EGCB has formed an Environment Management committee, comprised with
Environment Manager, Field Executive Engineer and Chemist of EGCB along with
Environmental Specialist of Owner Engineers for the environmental monitoring and preparing
quarterly progress reports on safeguards monitoring. EGCB has been familiar with the safeguards
requirement and also working on further institutional capacity building. EGCB is also in the final
stage for establishing their separate environment unit/cell, staffed by one Deputy General Manager
(DGM), one Manager and one Assistant Manager.
Under the original project, EGCB, GTCL and PGCB prepared all necessary safeguards documents
and implemented them. There was significant capacity building done for the agencies through
training and study tours. PGCB and GTCL have developed sufficient in-house capacity to manage
resettlement programs.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the households living within and surrounding the Siddhirganj Power
Hub. There were consultations with the people during the EAs and SA. Their comments and
suggestions have been reflected in EAs and SA. The EA was also presented on September 6, 2012
in a national workshop to the Board of Directors and senior management of EGCB, Department of
Environment (DoE), the World Bank and the relevant stakeholders. The updated EA also
incorporated the comments as raised in the presentation. The EA summary was translated and
disclosed into local language (Bangla). EA is also available in the EGCB's website (www.egcb.
com.bd).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                15-Jul-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                             15-Jul-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Bangladesh                                                 15-Jul-2012
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Page 8 of 9


﻿Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ] No[  ]  NA[
in the credit/loan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Md. Iqbal
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)             Date: 04-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Julia Bucknall (PMGR)                Date: 04-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


