INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13756
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-May-2015, 03-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Afghanistan                Project ID:  P146184
Project Name: Higher Education Development Project (P146184)
Task Team       Harsha Aturupane
Leader(s):
Estimated       27-May-2015                Estimated    29-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Tertiary education (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
0
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                      50.00
Total                                                                      50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to increase access to, and improve the quality and relevance of,
higher education in Afghanistan.
3. Project Description
The HEDP will support the country's NHESP II 2015-2020. The HEDP is organized under two
components: (a) a Higher Education Development Program component; and (b) a Program
Page 1 of 8


﻿Operations and Technical Support component. These components are complementary. Component
one has been strategically designed to assist the implementation of NHESP II. Component two will
support the implementation of component one through program coordination, technical assistance,
capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, and research and communication. These activities will
O
benefit both the MoHE and the individual universities.
Project Components
Component One: Higher Education Development Program (estimated cost US$ 40 million)
This component will support the implementation of the NHESP-II through a Results-Based
Financing (RBF) modality. Disbursements will be associated with specific results called
Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). Financing will be provided against Eligible Expenditures
Programs (EEPs) selected from annual MoHE budgets, rather than against specific inputs. The
following key themes would be supported under the component.
Theme 1.1: Increasing Access to Priority Degree Programs for Economic Development
The objective of this theme is to expand enrollment in degree programs that are of direct relevance
for future economic development. Special attention will be given to increase female participation in
priority degree programs, through initiatives such as: (a) providing scholarships for female students
from disadvantaged backgrounds to enroll in priority degree programs; (b) strengthening orientation,
counseling and support services for women in universities; (c) improving transportation services to
and from universities; and (d) developing on-line higher education courses to expand opportunities,
especially for women who are physically constrained for cultural reasons from attending universities.
The expected increase in student numbers will also require expansion of a variety of physical
facilities and equipment, such as lecture halls, tutorial rooms, ICT facilities and equipment, science
and medical laboratories and equipment, libraries and e-resources, residential facilities and water and
sanitation. The construction activities required to implement the NHESP-II would be funded through
the MoHE budget.
o
Theme 1.2: Modernizing and Enhancing the Quality of Teaching and Learning
The objective of this theme is to assist universities to introduce modem outcome-based education
(OBE) and student-centered learning (SCL) in line with current international trends in higher
a        education. The introduction of OBE and SCL will require new approaches to curriculum design and
delivery; innovative teaching methods and techniques; active and dynamic learning models;
increased use of higher education publications, and ICT and intemet-based resources; and the
modernization of assessment systems, in universities. The Staff Development Centers (SDCs) of
universities will play an important role in the provision of continuous professional development for
university academics, management and technical staff, to introduce and establish OBE and SCL and
to use ICT, web-based content and digital resources, for teaching and learning. The degree programs
which are considered priorities for the country's economic development will be the first set of
programs to which OBE and SCL will be introduced. Over time, OBE and SCL will be expanded to
other degree programs. A key element will be to strengthen the capacity of the Afghanistan Research
and Education Network (AfgREN) to operate a national system that connects campus networks to
each other and to other research and education networks globally.
Theme 1.3: Improving the Qualifications and Skills of University Staff Members
Under t his theme the number of academic staff members who are qualified to at least Master's
Degree level will be substantially increased. Special attention for support will be given to: (a)
Page 2 of 8


﻿academic staff from degree programs identified as priorities for economic development; and (b)
female academics. Scholarships will target faculty staff of public universities and will be restricted to
full-time, regularly employed faculty staff. Cost effectiveness and the quality of Master's degree
programs will be considered when selecting universities for study. Cultural factors in Afghanistan
create a preference among many female academics to pursue their postgraduate studies in-country. In
such cases, blended formulae will be used where possible, to combine overseas and in-country study
in partnership with foreign universities. Scholarship awardees will be bonded by an obligation to
work in Afghan universities after graduation. It is expected that at least 300 scholarships will be
awarded over the project implementation period. The program will be organized in parallel with the
recruitment of new staff so that the absence of faculty staff pursuing full time study will not create an
excessive shortage of teachers. The development of the universities will also require the skills of
technical staff, such as laboratory and ICT technicians and librarians, to be upgraded. Under this
theme the MoHE will support the improvement of the quality of university technical staff through
suitable short-term skills upgrading programs, organized mainly through the SDCs.
Theme 1.4: Strengthening Governance, Quality Assurance and Accreditation
The objective of this theme is to promote substantive and procedural autonomy of universities, and to
develop the quality assurance and accreditation system. Increased substantive autonomy will
empower universities to take greater initiative and responsibility for the development of academic
programs, research activities and community services. Under procedural autonomy universities will
have greater administrative powers and responsibilities. A by-law on financial autonomy has been
approved by the cabinet. This enables universities, in principle, to generate and retain revenues from
postgraduate degrees, research and consulting activities, and extension courses, to be used for
university development. The development of the procedures and systems to implement this by-law,
including training and capacity building of university leadership and management, and fiduciary
staff, is an important part of this theme. The exercise of substantive autonomy would initially be pilot
tested in about two-four universities and rolled out over time.
For universities to exercise autonomy and be accountable, a clear long term vision must be
developed. To that end, universities will prepare and implement strategic institutional development
plans (SPs) aimed at progressively increasing the quality and relevance of their degree programs,
research outputs and community services, and utilizing feedback from external and internal quality
assurance reviews. SPs will have to be consistent with the NHESP-II and present a realistic and
a         sustainable financial framework. In parallel, universities will also develop Annual Progress Reports
(APRs) which will monitor and report progress towards achieving SP targets, including remedial
measures in case of deviations from the SP. Universities' institutional development will be
strengthened through a Mentors Program. Mentors would be drawn from among senior academics
from foreign and Afghan universities who will support institutional development and the
achievement of the goals and targets set in university development plans. Mentors will interact
closely with the senior management of universities through regular visits.
Under this theme, quality assurance and accreditation (QAA) will be expanded and strengthened to
reflect international standards of rigor and utilization. At the national level, the Afghanistan Quality
Assurance and Accreditation Directorate (QAAD) in the MoHE will be developed, including through
membership of an international accreditation network such as the Asia Pacific Quality Assurance
Network (APQN). This will help MoHE to benefit from international good practice. The QAAD
would develop a cadre of QA reviewers trained to incorporate modern QA protocols and guidelines,
and conduct a fresh cycle of external quality assurance for public universities and private HEls. The
capacity of the QAAD would also be enhanced to enable a clear, transparent and objective process
Page 3 of 8


﻿for the licensing, quality assurance and accreditation of private HEls. This is an urgent necessity due
to the rapid growth of private HEls of very variable quality.
A comprehensive Internal Quality Assurance System will also be developed in public universities.
O
U         This would involve: (a) setting up Internal Quality Assurance Units (IQAUs) in universities which
lack such units; (b) developing IQAUs in universities which have embryonic units; (c) assisting
universities to conceptualize, plan and conduct institutional self-assessments; (d) incorporate findings
from QA reviews into the design and implementation of university institutional development plans;
and (e) establish a process of continuous quality improvement of teaching and learning in
universities. The IQAUs will play a key role in assisting the academics to assess and develop the
quality of the novel OBE and SCL, and internet-based, teaching and learning methodologies.
Theme 1.5: Stimulating Development Oriented Research
The objective of this theme is to develop a research culture in universities. The focus will be on
applied, development oriented research projects, mainly from the priority disciplines. However,
research projects from other disciplines, if clearly development oriented, will also be eligible for
resources. Both group research projects and individual research will be supported. The group projects
could include research activities by teams drawn from a single university, or teams drawn from more
than one university. Collaboration on research projects with overseas researchers would also be
encouraged. The Kabul based universities would be expected to undertake research projects focused
on national development. The universities in the provincial towns could also undertake national
research, but would also act as research hubs for the development of their provinces. The research
culture to be developed will be results-focused and based on competition. This is consistent with the
principle that research activities are more productive if they are based on incentives and demand,
rather than supply-driven.
Component Two: Program Operations and Technical Support (Total US$ 10 million)
This component aims to strengthen the capacity of MoHE and universities to implement the reforms
of the NHESP-II. Support under this component will cover coordination, capacity building, pilot
initiatives of innovations, monitoring and evaluation, research and communication. The technical
assistance and capacity building activities of this component will assist the MoHE to implement the
development initiatives of the NHESP-II. Policy studies could include beneficiary satisfaction
a        surveys of staff and students of institutions and programs supported by HEDP, as well as tracer
studies of graduates to analyze their job search and labor market experience. Communication would
enable higher education authorities to disseminate development initiatives to political authorities,
policy makers, academics, students, and the general public. The component would also help MoHE
to support pilots and innovative approaches such as the orientation of the universities in provincial
towns to support the economic development of their provinces. This component will also finance
incremental operating costs for an Operations and Monitoring Support Team (OMST) in the MoHE.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
No negative social safeguard issues and impacts of the Project are expected since there will be no
civil works financed by the Grant. While the GoA may finance civil works under the broader
NHESP-II sectoral program using GoA funds, no land acquisition is anticipated. In the case of new
facilities, construction is expected to take place on land already owned by MoHE and universities.
Before the start of any physical works, MoHE will confirm state ownership of land and provide
documentation that it is free of squatters, encroacher's, or other claims or encumbrances. In
Page 4 of 8


﻿rehabilitating existing facilities or constructing new buildings, MoHE will provide facilities to
address the needs of disabled people per international standards. The MoHE has developed an
Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) comprising guidelines and procedures for
managing and mitigating potential negative environmental and/or social impacts of the Project. This
O
U         ESMF is also applicable to activities supporting NEHSP-II funded under the GoA budget. The
ESMF includes a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that clarifies resettlement principles,
including the definition of "project affected peoples" (i.e. eligibility), compensation matrix,
organizational arrangements, consultations and design criteria to be applied to sub-projects in the
event that sub-projects require land acquisition or result in any resettlement outcomes. The RPF
customizes an existing RPF applied in a number of ministries, the basic principles of which were
approved by an inter-ministerial committee in December 2010.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdul Mohammad Durani (GSURR)
Asta Olesen (GSURR)
Marzia Meena Sultan Ahmad (GSURB)
Mohammad Arif Rasuli (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         MoHE has conducted an environmental assessment and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               has prepared a sectoral environment and social
management framework (ESMF) to address potentially
negative environmental and/or social impacts caused by
construction activities undertaken by the GoA and
financed from its own resources as part of its sectoral
program. The ESMF consists of environmental and social
mitigation measures, environmental and social monitoring
requirements, as well as documentation protocols. It
specifies capacity building needs for effective
implementation of the ESMF. The OMST will assist
MoHE in putting in place the necessary institutional
arrangements.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No          No physical cultural resources will be impacted as in the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                case of new facilities, the expansion of infrastructure is
expected to take place on land already owned by MoHE
and public universities. The ESMF contains Chance Find
Procedures based on applicable Afghan law, to guide any
chance finds during implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          The project is of national scope, with special attention to
inclusion of women. No communities identified as
Page 5 of 8


﻿BP 4.10                             Indigenous People will be impacted
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The ESMF comprises a Resettlement Policy Framework
OP/BP 4.12                         (RPF) that clarifies resettlement principles, including the
definition of "project affected peoples" (i.e. eligibility),
compensation matrix, organizational arrangements,
consultations and design criteria to be applied to
subprojects in the event of sub-projects which require
land acquisition.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will not support any construction activities. However, the overall government program
supported by the project would assist the construction of buildings. Any adverse environmental
and social impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific. The
MoHE has conducted an environmental assessment and has prepared a sectoral environment and
social management framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) to address
potentially negative environmental and/or social impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Given the nature of the activities and their potential adverse impacts that will be manageable at an
acceptable level, no long-term impact due to project activities is foreseen.
a         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The MoHE has developed an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
comprising guidelines and procedures for managing and mitigating potential negative impact. The
MoHE has produced the ESMF as applicable also to activities funded under the government
budget. The ESMF comprises a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that clarifies resettlement
principles, including the definition of "project affected peoples" (i.e. eligibility), compensation
matrix, organizational arrangements, consultations and design criteria to be applied to subprojects
in the event of sub-projects which require land acquisition. The RPF is customizing an existing
RPF applied in a number of ministries, the basic principles of which were approved by an inter-
ministerial committee in December 2010. The MoHE acquired some experience in handling
safeguards issues under the SHEP project and is expected to be able to manage the implementation
Page 6 of 8


﻿of the ESMF. The HEDP under Component 2 can provide any technical assistance in
environmental and social safeguards required to the MoHE.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During preparation consultations have been held with a range of sectoral stakeholders and their
comments taken into account. The MoHE disclosed the ESMF locally in English and local
languages (Dari and Pushto) on May 6 and forwarded it to the Bank for disclosure on InfoShop.
Infoshop dislcosed the ESMF on June 12.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-May-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Afghanistan                                              06-May-2015
Comments: The ESMF was disclosed at the Ministry of Higher Education and the universities.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Afghanistan                                              06-May-2015
Comments: The RAP was disclosed at the Ministry of Higher Education and the universities.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
0
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Page 7 of 8


﻿The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Harsha Aturupane
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Keiko Miwa (PMGR)                    Date: 03-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


