The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Market Instruments for climate change mitigation in Chile (P130378)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                     Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Mar-2017| Report No: ISDSR22060




                         Regional Vice President:    Jorge Familiar Calderon
                                Country Director:    Alberto Rodriguez
                  Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                     Practice Manager/Manager:       Antonio Alexandre Rodrigues Barbalho
                              Task Team Leader:      Janina Andrea Franco Salazar
          The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Market Instruments for climate change mitigation in Chile (P130378)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
                                                               Market Instruments for climate change mitigation in
P130378
                                                               Chile
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Janina Andrea Franco Salazar                                   Chile
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
27-Aug-2014                                                    Not Required (C)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GEE04

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
3,000,000.00                                                   4,980,000.00
Financing Gap
-1,980,000.00
OLD_FIN_DTL
Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Trust Funds                                                                                           4,980,000.00
Total                                                                                                 4,980,000.00



2. PROJECT INFORMATION
           The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Market Instruments for climate change mitigation in Chile (P130378)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The objectives of the Project are to provide technical assistance to the Beneficiary in the design and implementation of a
    Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) framework and registry, and the design and preparation of one or more
    carbon pricing instruments in the energy sector.




.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The Partnership for Market Readiness (PMR) is a grant-based, capacity building multi-donor trust fund that provides
funding and technical assistance for the collective innovation and piloting of market-based instruments for greenhouse
gas emissions reduction. The PMR provides a platform for technical discussions on market instruments, fostering North-
South and South-South exchange, facilitating collective innovation for pilot efforts, and harnessing financial flows for
implementation and scale up. The PMR is country-led. It provides systemic support to enhance countries’ technical and
institutional capacities in order to implement market-based and carbon pricing instruments, such as a domestic
emissions trading system (ETS), a scaled-up crediting mechanism or a carbon tax.

Original PMR activities in Chile are:

          Component 1.- Regulatory, Economic and Institutional Analysis to assess the viability of one or more carbon
           pricing instruments for the energy sector:
               o Regulatory Analysis for one or more carbon pricing instruments in Chile.
               o Economic Analysis for one or more carbon pricing instruments in Chile.
               o Institutional Analysis for one or more carbon pricing instruments in Chile.
          Component 2.- Design and implementation of MRV framework and Registry system:
               o Design and implementation of an MRV framework.
               o Development of a Registry
          Component 3.- Stakeholder engagement and communication strategy, and capacity building:
               o Development of a strategy for stakeholder engagement.
               o Public, private and political stakeholder consultation.
               o Development of a communication strategy, including the preparation of informational tools.
               o Participation in trainings and workshops and country - visits by Chilean official
               o Other PMR-supported technical assistance and capacity building programs
          Component 4.- PMR Implementation Coordination


The proposed Additional Financing (AF) activities complement ongoing PMR Chile Project activities and strengthen
Chile’s position as a leader in the use of carbon pricing instruments to meet its GHG mitigation objectives, including
those outlined in its NDC. The proposed AF would support Chile to take advantage of the momentum and awareness
raised to broaden the scope and increase the impact of the carbon tax, so more of the country’s GHG emissions are
        The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Market Instruments for climate change mitigation in Chile (P130378)



regulated under a carbon pricing instrument. It would sustain the implementation of a MRV Platform (MRV 3.0) for the
energy sector that goes beyond the boilers and turbines currently affected by the carbon tax and would set the basis for
the GHG accounting system in the energy sector as a whole that is in line with the Paris Agreement requirements and
the country’s NDC commitments. The enhancement of the current carbon tax scheme by assessing other
complementary carbon pricing instruments is also part of the proposed AF activities. The activities to be implemented
under the proposed AF would provide additional funds to existing Components 3 and 4, and include two new
Components (Components 5 and 6).

No changes are proposed to the existing Project Development Objectives (PDO). The PDO remains to provide technical
assistance to Chile in the design and implementation of a Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) framework and
registry, and the design and preparation of one or more carbon pricing instruments in the energy sector. The proposed
AF’s objectives are fully aligned with the parent project’s PDO and would not require changes to project objectives and
design, including implementation arrangements.

No changes are proposed to the existing PDO indicators. PDO Indicators continue to be: (i) one or more carbon pricing
instruments and associated infrastructure recommended to the Government and concrete activities to develop specific
elements proposed; (ii) MRV framework and registry established within the energy sector; and (iii) knowledge,
awareness and capacity developed in the public and private sector in relation to the design and implementation of
carbon pricing instruments.

Activities proposed under the AF are as follows:

       Component 3: Stakeholder engagement and communications strategy, and capacity building (totaling
        US$200,000; PMR TF resources). This component would continue the development and execution of the
        stakeholder engagement and communication strategy to support the dissemination of the new proposed
        activities. It would also include activities such as participation in training, workshops, in-country visits, and study
        tours, with the objective of enhancing global and regional cooperation on carbon pricing. The Component would
        also include periodic updates and improvements to the Project website, as well as capacity building services for
        the private and private sectors.
       Component 4: PMR Implementation Coordination (totaling US$265,000; PMR TF resources). The component
        would include support for overall management of the Project, including the Project Implementation Unit which
        would include staff for: (i) strategic coordination and project management activities; and (ii) fiduciary aspects
        within AGCI to support project implementation.
       Component 5: Enhancement and complementation of the existing carbon tax scope and reporting system
        (totaling US$690,000 of which US$610,000 are PMR TF resources and US$80,000 ME). This component would
        aim to deepen the analysis and understand how to improve the impact of the carbon tax given its design
        limitations. In line with the objective of complementing the existing tax scheme, this component would also
        implement a comprehensive MRV Platform (MRV 3.0) for the entire energy sector that would include areas and
        sub-sectors currently not covered under the carbon tax such as mining, iron or steel industries. By expanding the
        scope of the current carbon tax MRV system, this activity would include a mandatory reporting scheme to
        identify bottom-up emissions generated by the energy sector. The component would be led by the MMA with
        strong coordination with the ME, SMA and the Internal Revenue Service (SII).
       Component 6: Assessment of alternative carbon pricing schemes for the energy sector (totaling US$1,125,000 of
        which US$905,000 are PMR TF resources and US$120,000 ME). In February 2017 Chile ratified the Paris
        Agreement, which entered into force for the country on March 12, 2017. In the context of the Paris Agreement,
        there is a need to further understand the role the carbon tax would play in the realization of Chile’s NDC
        commitments and how it could be enhanced with complementary carbon pricing mechanisms. This component
          The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Market Instruments for climate change mitigation in Chile (P130378)



          would support: (i) the design and implementation a climate policy simulation tool for the energy sector in Chile;
          and (ii) the development of an MRV scheme to account emission reductions from energy-related mitigation
          actions. The simulation tool would reproduce different scenarios of carbon tax and its interaction with other
          complimentary carbon pricing alternatives, such as an emissions trading system (ETS). Through this simulation,
          the tool would assess the impacts in emissions of implementing a combination of different carbon pricing
          instruments, such as a carbon tax and/or an ETS, in the context of NDC implementation. The final objective is to
          identify potential emission reductions trajectories in the overall energy sector for achieving Chile´s NDC, and
          corresponding measures for their implementation by 2030. The rationale for assessing complimentary carbon
          pricing instruments, such as an ETS, responds to Article 6 of the Paris Agreement, and the results from studies
          developed by the PMR Chile Project that highlighted the opportunity to expand the reach of carbon pricing
          instruments by exchanging carbon units with the establishment of an ETS. As for the establishment of a robust
          accounting framework for the energy sector mitigation actions aligned with the EP2050, the component would
          identify and account emission reductions from energy-related mitigation actions (such as, distributed
          generation), to help support achievement of the NDCs. Implementation of this component would be led by the
          ME, in coordination with the MMA and SMA.


    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The project does not finance any physical activity on the ground, but rather consists solely of technical
assistance activities, such as training, background analysis and studies, computer simulations and modeling,
etc. Consultants will work mostly in Santiago, in their own offices and those of the Ministry of Energy (MoE)
and Agencia de Cooperacion Internacional de Chile (AGCI). Delivery of the training and capacity building
activities and preparation of consultant studies may take place in various locations in Chile.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM



SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


    Safeguard Policies                         Triggered             Explanation

                                                                     There are no anticipated environmental
                                                                     negative impacts since the project does not
                                                                     finance any physical activity on the ground, but
    Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) No
                                                                     rather consists solely of technical assistance
                                                                     activities, such as training, background analyses
                                                                     and studies, computer simulations and modeling,
       The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Market Instruments for climate change mitigation in Chile (P130378)



                                                                  etc.
                                                                  The proposed Project Classification is
                                                                  Category C.

                                                                  The project would not involve any works and thus
                                                                  no significant negative impacts on natural
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)             No                    habitats. The studies may result in positive
                                                                  impacts on natural habitats due to GHG
                                                                  management.
                                                                  The project would not involve any works and thus
                                                                  no significant negative impacts on forest. The
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                      No
                                                                  studies may result in positive impacts on forests
                                                                  due to GHG management.
                                                                  The project would not involve the purchase or use
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                   No                    of any quantities of pesticides. There are works
                                                                  and thus no negative impacts.

                                                                  The project would not involve works and thus no
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) No
                                                                  significant impacts on physical cultural resources.

                                                                  There are no anticipated actives related to
                                                                  indigenous peoples since the project consists
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           No                    solely of technical assistance activities, such as
                                                                  training, background analyses and studies,
                                                                  computer simulations and modeling, etc.
                                                                  There are no anticipated actives related to land
                                                                  taking of any type since the project consists solely
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     No                    of technical assistance activities, such as training,
                                                                  background analyses and studies, computer
                                                                  simulations and modeling, etc
                                                                  The Project would not support the construction or
                                                                  rehabilitation of dams nor will support other
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No
                                                                  investments which rely on the services of existing
                                                                  dams.

Projects on International Waterways (OP)                          Project activities would not affect international
                                            No
(BP 7.50)                                                         waterways.


                                                                  The Project would not be implemented in areas
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
                                                                  known to involve disputed areas.

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES
         The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Market Instruments for climate change mitigation in Chile (P130378)



  1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
     potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
     N/A



  2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.

     N/A


  3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.

     N/A


  4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
     capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     N/A


  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
     with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
     N/A



COMPLIANCE_TABLE
B.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                      NA
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                        NA
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                      NA
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                      NA
cost?
          The World Bank                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Market Instruments for climate change mitigation in Chile (P130378)



Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                              NA
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal                          NA
documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                            Janina Andrea Franco Salazar
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                            Patricia Marcos Huidobro

    Approved By
                                            Antonio Alexandre Rodrigues
    Practice Manager/Manager                                                    19-Aug-2017
                                            Barbalho
.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
