INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR13227
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Burkina Faso               Project ID:  P108791
Project Name: International Institute for Water and Environmental Engineering (2ie) (P108791)
Task Team       Adama Ouedraogo
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Feb-2008                Estimated    05-Jun-2008
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Tertiary education (70%), Vocational training (30%)
Theme:          Education for the knowledge economy (67%), Environmental policies and
institutions (33%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      43.00            Total Bank Financing:    5.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               5.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      5.00
Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                               33.00
Total                                                           43.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The objective of the 2iE project is to increase the number of highly skilled professionals in the areas
Page 1 of4


﻿of water, energy, environment and infrastructure enginee                 ring by
supporting the development of 2iE as a regional center of excellence.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The objective of the 2iE project is to increase the number of highly skilled professionals in the areas
of water, energy, environment and infrastructure enginee                 ring by
supporting the development of 2iE as a regional center of excellence.
3. Project Description
The additional financing will support the first component of the original project, called "further
increasing the capacity of 2iE The activities to be financed                are the
following: (i) construction of several boarding facilities with a combin
ed capacity of 720 beds, including landscaping utilities (water, electricity, IT
connectivity) (U$8.6 million); (ii) furniture for student rooms (US$500,000);
(                          iii) supervision of construction work, and audits (US$400,000); and
(iv) conting                        encies (US$ 500,000).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
All construction activities will take place at 2iE's second campus in Kamboinse, about 20 km outside
Ouagadougou. The site is owned by 2iE.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSURR)
Amadou Konare ()
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
*         Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
Page 2 of 4


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
)           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as Environmental Category B as the potential environmental and social
impacts will not be adverse; as they are likely to be small-scale, site-specific and thus easily
manageable. Since no new policies are triggered in this additional financing, the same
environmental safeguards instrument of the parent project still applies. The general environmental
management clauses for civil works will be inserted into the bidding documents and contracts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no potential indirect and or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Additional Financing, like the original project, is classified as B indicating that
environmental and social impacts will not be adverse; as they are likely to be small-scale, site-
specific and thus manageable at an acceptable level. The Environmental Assessment policy (OP/
BP 4.01) was triggered for the original project and accordingly an appropriate environmental
safeguards instrument: Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was prepared and
updated for the Additional Financing. With this Additional Financing, no new safeguards policies
are triggered, as the civil works proposed are similar and in most cases extension of activities of
the original project. The types of investments (construction of classrooms, dormitories, research
offices, conference halls etc.) included in the project are covered by the Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the original project prepared, reviewed, approved and disclosed in-
country and at the Infoshop respectively in February 2008 and updated and re-disclosed in August
2012 in-country and at the Infoshop. The ESIA had a well detailed and costed Environmental and
O
Social Management Plan (ESMP) that is being implemented under the original project. The
Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP/BP 4.12) was not triggered in the original project as there
was no land taking, or restriction of access to assets or sources of livelihood. This fact was
confirmed by a participative social analysis carried out during the identification stage of the
original project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
As recommended by the social analysis carried out in the preparation of the original project, a
permanent consultation group between 2iE, local administrative authorities, and village traditional
authorities was set up and has been developing and implementing joint projects benefiting the
local community.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank         1P-Feb-200 8
Date of submission to InfoShop                             15-Feb-2008
Page 3 of 4


﻿For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  //
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
O
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[   NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [ ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Adama Ouedraogo
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Meskerem Mulatu (PMGR)             Date: 01-May-2015
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


