INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 180
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Armenia                     Project ID:  P152039
Project Name: Geothermal Exploratory Drilling Project (P152039)
Task Team       Artur Kochnakyan,Almudena Mateos Merino
Leader(s):
Estimated        17-Apr-2015                Estimated    29-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (90%), Climate change
(10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      10.68             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      2.13
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                  8.55
Total                                                                        10.68
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed project development objective is to confirm whether the geothermal resource at Karkar
site is suitable for power generation and, if confirmed, to involve the private sector in development of
a geothermal power plant.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 9


﻿Geothermal Exploratory Drilling Project consists of two components: (A) Phase I exploratory
drilling program; and (B) Phase II exploratory drilling program and transaction advisory.
Component A - Phase I exploratory drilling program (US$4,300,000 SREP grant)
Sub-component A. 1: Construction of access road and first phase of exploratory drilling.
Constructing access road and other associated infrastructure will include provision of a gravel road
with sufficient length and width to allow for safe transportation of equipment and other materials to
*         the site. It will also include rehabilitation of an existing groundwater well and arrangement of water
supply pipe, preparation of small rig pads, installation of equipment and some minor works, as
required.
Drilling of one or two slim wells. The decision on whether to drill the second slim well will be made
after drilling the first one and will depend on whether the information obtained from the first well is
or not conclusive regarding the nature of the geothermal resource. The coordinates of the two slim
wells were determined through field investigations works. The project will proceed to Phase II
depending on the results obtained from drilling the slim well(s).
Sub-component A.2: Technical assistance for assessment of the geothermal resource potential and
technical supervision.
Well logging and mud logging will include analyzes of the cuttings from the borehole, well
temperature and pressure measurements and gathering of essential data (such as drilling progress,
changes in temperature, etc.), both as the drilling progresses and at the end of each drilling stage for
the slim well(s).
Technical supervision and support consultant. This will include support to the Renewable Resources
and Energy Efficiency (R2E2) Fund in technical supervision of the drilling of slim exploratory wells;
review of the results and findings of well logging, mud logging, flow testing, and chemical analysis
of cuttings; and other technical advice and support.
o
Project audit and operating costs will include financing: (a) incremental operating costs of the R2E2
Fund related to implementation of the first phase of the project; and (b) project audits.
Any project funds that are not used during the Phase I of the project will be made available for
implementation of the Phase II if the results from drilling of exploratory wells during Phase I justify
the need for Phase II.
Component B - Phase II exploratory drilling program and transaction advisory (US$4,250,000 SREP
grant)
Sub-component B. 1: Construction of water infrastructure and rig pads and second phase of
exploratory drilling.
Constructing of water infrastructure and rig pads will include (a) provision of infrastructure to supply
water from a nearby spring to ensure the continuous water supply required for the drilling operation
if drilling of production-size exploratory wells is warranted; and (b) installation of rig pads where the
rig and the associated equipment will be placed if drilling of production-size wells is warranted.
Production-size exploratory drilling will include drilling of one (or two, if the remaining budget after
Page 2 of 9


﻿completion of Phase I allows for it) production-size exploratory well if the results from Phase I
warrant such drilling. The production-size well(s) will be drilled at the same location as the slim
wells. Exact coordinates will be determined after the drilling of the slim wells is completed and if
results justify the drilling of production-size wells.
o
Sub-component B.2: Technical assistance for assessment of the geothermal resource potential and
technical supervision.
Well logging and mud logging will include analyzes of the cuttings from the bore hole, well
temperature and pressure measurements and gathering of essential data (such as drilling progress,
changes in flow line temperatures, etc.), both as the drilling progresses and at the end of each drilling
stage for the slim well(s).
Feasibility study for a geothermal power plant will include: (a) assessment of the possible power
output of the wells, the ratio between brine and steam; (b) assessment of enthalpy; (c) sampling of
the brine to decide the type of power conversion techniques to be used and the type of the plant to be
constructed, and estimate the power generation potential for a potential geothermal power plant; (d)
assessment of the economic and financial viability of the potential plant; (e) legal gap analyzes of the
institutional and regulatory framework for construction and operation of a geothermal power plant;
and (f) preparation of conceptual/preliminary design of transmission lines and a substation, and other
infrastructure required for connection of the potential power plant to the grid.
Technical supervision and support consultant will assist R2E2 Fund in technical supervision of the
drilling operation for the production size exploratory wells; review of the results and findings of well
logging, mud logging, flow testing, and chemical analyzes; and other technical advice and support.
Transaction advisory will include provision of transaction advisory services to the Government in
order to structure and complete a PPP transaction involving the private sector in construction and
operation of the geothermal power plant if adequate resources are confirmed. If needed, the
Government will seek additional funding from SREP, Public Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility
(PPIAF), Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP), and other sources to
complement the SREP financing for transaction advisory services.
Project audit and operating costs will finance: (a) incremental operating costs of the R2E2 Fund
a         related to implementation of the Phase II of the project; and (b) project audits.
The project is designed as a 4-year long operation in order to ensure that all the necessary activities
can be completed given the limitations on site accessibility caused by weather conditions and also
given the time needed to complete the PPP transaction for the power plant. The "window of
opportunity" for accessing the site is generally from mid-May to mid/late-September, so at least two
seasons would be needed to complete the drilling project. However, the project may be completed in
one year if the drilling of the slim well(s) suggests that the resource is a low-temperature.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Karkar site is situated in the Syunik province (marz) at an elevation of around 3,500 m above sea
level. The site is not in an immediate proximity to human settlements and does not overlap with
especially protected areas, natural habitats, or privately owned land plots, however community lands
owned by the villages and used as pastures may fall under the direct or indirect impact of the project.
Page 3 of 9


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
Jennifer Shkabatur (GSURR)
O
Sarah G. Michael (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Exploratory drilling at the Karkar site will comprise of
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                physical works such as construction of access road,
provision of a water supply system, arrangement of rig
pads, and drilling at depth to reach the geothermal fluids.
Although the project site is in the area with poor
vegetation and modest wildlife, lies away from human
settlements, and does not carry any natural resources
currently used by communities or businesses, the planned
works still carry moderate environmental and social risks.
Therefore, the project triggers OP/BP 4.01 and is
classified as environmental Category B.
Potential adverse environmental impacts have been
examined through an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA). They are related to the extraction of
water from a groundwater well and its delivery to the
project site, generation of excess material from drilling
and other earth works, generation of waste water and
possibly some small amount of hazardous waste (i.e. solid
materials used and discarded while drilling, toxic
materials injected during the drilling and contained in the
extracted samples, and those mixed with waste water
generated while drilling and/or exhausted with emissions).
Likelihood and exact nature of these potential risks were
studied during the ESIA and mitigation measures are
provided in the Environmental Management Plan (EMP).
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No           ESIA revealed no physical cultural resources that fall
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 under project impact zone, and the policy is not triggered.
Chance finds cannot be excluded during earth works.
Therefore blueprint of action in case chance finds are
encountered is included into the ESIA report and EMP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Page 4 of 9


﻿Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project is not expected to affect any privately owned
OP/BP 4.12                           lands, but construction activities may take place on some
of the community lands owned by the villages. These
o                                              lands are used for pasture. Project implementation will not
have significant impact on the pasture use, however minor
temporary restriction to pasture land and/or permanent
loss of small area for grazing cannot be excluded at this
stage. Since the exact footprint of the drilling program
will not be known until the detailed designs are finalized,
OP 4.12 is triggered as a precaution. R2E2 prepared a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No        Project implementation will not affect and will not depend
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 on any international waterway. No surface water source
within the drilling area will be capable of providing the
flow rates required for drilling the slim wells and the
production size wells. About 8 km south of the drilling
location, there is a groundwater well with a water intake
facility which had been used back in Soviet times and was
restored recently. It will be used for the purposes of
drilling both - slim wells and production-size wells under
the project.
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental
Because the project finances exploratory drilling only and excludes support to commercial
operations, it will have modest environmental impacts confined to the project site which could be
mitigated through application of measures provided in the Environmental Management Plan
(EMP). The drilling site has extremely poor vegetative cover: no trees or shrubs. There are no
designated protected areas in its vicinity. The project site is not critical for supporting livelihood of
any plant or animal populations. Part of the area nearby the project site periodically gets logged
with seasonal springs and snow-melt water. These snow-melt-related surface water areas do not
have ecological significance for animals or birds. They emerge after main spring bird migration,
and dry out before fall migration and hence do not support migrating birds. Moreover, the project
related activities are not expected to impact those snow-melt surface water areas because the
project related drilling activities will be located at least a few hundred meters away.
The exploration works will require improving the access road to accommodate movement of
heavy equipment and hauling trucks. Some sections may need widening (from approximately
Page 5 of 9


﻿1.75m to 4m) and/or paving with gravel. Culverts or other drainage control infrastructure will need
to be installed at several seasonally dry stream crossings. Establishment of a temporary work camp
with a housing facility for workers may be required, depending on the choice of a contractor. With
adequate organization and proper maintenance, the camp is not expected to have negative
O
environmental impacts.
One or two drill pads will be established at the test-drilling site, initially 20m x 20m and then 50m
x 75m size, assuming the program will proceed to the larger wells. Drilling of slim wells is not a
water-intensive activity. Water will be collected from a groundwater well with a recently
refurbished intake facility dating form Soviet times. The well is located about 8 km way from the
drilling site. Water will be delivered from the well to the project site by specialized vehicles and
be stored in containers at the work site. The well is within the administrative area of the Tskhouk
village community, but is not used by the latter in any way. Its flow makes 200-250 1/s. Water for
drilling of production-size wells will come via pipe from the same groundwater well. This will
require installation of pump(s) and a pipeline that will run alongside the road, as well as
construction of one or more lined temporary reservoirs in the existing natural depressions near the
drilling site.
Drilling fluids and cuttings will be stored and ultimately disposed into sumps created in the
process of drilling near the wells.
An ancient tomb dated 12 century B.C. is located in the Karkar area, however, neither exploration
not possible commercial use of geothermal resources will affect this historical asset.
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report and EMP included in it carry
provisions for handling chance finds in case they are encountered during earth works.
Social
The long-term social impact of this project may be positive. The project will enable to assess
whether Karkar holds adequate geothermal resources for power generation and, if so, provide
consumers with additional electricity generation resources, and thereby protect them from price
fluctuation that is associated with possible natural gas and uranium price increases. This could
help minimize the effect of such price fluctuations on domestic electricity tariffs and, thereby, help
keep electricity service affordable for consumers.
The land plots affected by the project are owned by the three villages, which apportion pasture use
among their communities. Geothermal exploration activities will not have significant impact on
pasture use. Minor temporary restriction of access and/or permanent loss of small area for grazing
cannot be excluded at this stage. Exact information on this matter will come with the detailed
design. However local communities demonstrate strongly positive attitude to the project and are
anxious for the access road improvements to occur, as the improved road will enable easier transit
by shepherds and cattle. In addition, there is a hot spring in the highlands that citizens sometimes
visit for pleasure and for its attributed medicinal benefits. The improved road will enable easier
access and more frequent visitation to this resource.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The ESIA, carried out for exploratory drilling project, covers primarily direct impacts of works to
be undertaken under this project and overviews nature and magnitude of likely impacts from the
Page 6 of 9


﻿proposed future commercial operation as well. However if feasibility studies confirm viability of
geothermal resource for the operation of a thermal power plant and the decision is made to proceed
with its development, then a separate ESIA will be carried out to evaluate risks of the commercial
investment and recommend their mitigation measures.
o
Based on the information available at present, the ESIA of exploratory drilling project estimated
that no significant environmental or social damage should be expected from a full-scale
development and operation of a small geothermal power plant given that it is properly designed,
planned, and implemented. No protected areas, natural or critical habitats, and areas of high
conservation value will be affected. Water that will be required for any additional drilling in case a
geothermal plant is constructed will come from the same groundwater well as the one identified
for use during exploration drilling. Debit of the well is fully sufficient for that purpose.
Local communities are supportive of the installation of a commercial power plant as they have
expectations of employment and local revenue generation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
At the detailed design stage, options for aligning access road and the water infrastructure will
considered to minimize possible impacts on the areas used as pastures.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The R2E2 Fund carried out ESIA of the proposed Geothermal Exploratory Drilling Project, and
developed environmental management and monitoring plans. EMP will be included in the bidding
documents and will be annexed to contract(s) for the provision of works. Although the likelihood
of the project affecting use of pasture land around the work site is little, it cannot be excluded at
this stage. The R2E2 Fund prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) as a precautionary
measure. In an unlikely case of required resettlement, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
prepared through in-depth consultations with the communities of affected villages and
implemented prior to commencement of works. If any land acquisition is required, Government
funds will be used for this purpose.
The R2E2 Fund is the implementing agency for the geothermal exploratory drilling project. At
present, the R2E2 Fund is implementing a Bank-supported Energy Efficiency Project financed
from the GEF. Past experience of theR2E2 Fund includes implementation of other Bank-financed
operations too (Urban Heating Project and Renewable Energy Project). These operations had a
good track record in safeguards compliance. The R2E2 Fund employs a safeguards consultant who
is well familiar with the Bank's safeguards policies. Institutional capacity of R2E2 Fund for
handling environmental and social issues under the exploratory drilling project is fully sufficient.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources of the Republic of Armenia, the R2E2 Fund,
administration and population of Syunik marz, and potential investors into the development of a
geothermal power plant have strong interest in the outcome of exploratory drilling. Local
stakeholders are the residents of the villages located closest to the project site (Tsghuk, Sarnakunk,
and Spandaryan, all situated along Highway M2). The combined population of these villages is up
to 1500 people.
Page 7 of 9


﻿The R2E2 Fund disclosed the draft ESIA report in Armenian and English languages through its
web page, carried out consultation with stakeholders on this draft report, and finalized the report
having the minutes of public consultation meeting attached. Draft RPF was disclosed and
subjected to stakeholder consultation process in a similar way. In addition to posting of draft
environmental and social safeguard documents of the exploratory drilling project on the the R2E2
Fund's web page, hard copies in Armenian language were made available to the village
communities for easy access. Consultation process was held in a gender-sensitive manner. The
finalized ESIA report and RPF were re-disclosed and published through the Bank's InfoShop.
Affected communities will be informed on the commencement of exploratory drilling prior to
mobilization of works contractor and a viable Grievance Redress Mechanism will be provided for
accepting and entertaining their feedback in the course of the project implementation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Armenia                                                  17-Mar-2015
Comments: Consultation meeting with local communities on the ESIA report was held in village
Tshguk on 03/26/2015.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
O
Armenia                                                  17-Mar-2015
Comments: Consultation meeting with local communities on the RPF was held in village Tshguk
on 03/26/2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
Page 8 of 9


﻿OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Artur Kochnakyan,Almudena Mateos Merino
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                   Date: 15-Apr-2015
Practice Manager!      Name: Ani Balabanyan (PMGR)                Date: 15-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


