                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA13461
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Iraq                               Project ID:    P155732
                            Project Name:      Emergency Operation for Development (P155732)
                            Task Team          Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          07-Jun-2015                        Estimated   07-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (12%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (21%), Rural and
                                              Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (45%), Sanitation (8%), W ater supply (14%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (20%), Health system performance (12%), Urban services
                                              and housing for the poor (8%), Other urban development ( 10%), City-wide
                                              Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     350.00           Total Bank Financing:                 350.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    350.00
                              Total                                                                                    350.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project aims to support the Government of Iraq in the reconstruction of damaged infrastructure
                           and housing and restoration of public services delivery in targeted municipal areas.



                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will adopt an integrated and pragmatic approach to the reconstruction and rehabilitation
                         of damaged infrastructure and housing in conflict-affected cities in Iraq. For the water, energy and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transport sectors, this will be conducted through the repair and reconstruction of damaged
                         infrastructure in the areas of electricity transmission and distribution networks, municipal waste,
                         water, sanitation, roads and bridges, and health. Each of these sectoral interventions are sub-divided
                         into: (i) Year 1 concentrates on rapid repairs/supply and installation of damaged infrastructure, as
                         well as a damage and need assessment, planning and design and procurement of emergency
                         equipment and goods/materials; (ii) and Year 2 to 5 will concentrate on the implementation of the
                         rehabilitation and reconstruction of works as per the damage assessment. These interventions, in
                         addition to promoting state/citizen trust-building and reconciliation, will be designed to generate
                         local employment opportunities and help develop the local small- and medium-sized contracting
                         industry including demand in a number of other sectors, such as construction materials and related
                         services. For housing, a subsidy scheme will be designed and for health mobile hospitals and primary
                         health care units and ambulances will be delivered.

                         The project will also support technical assistance towards planning and designing urban development
                         and future infrastructure schemes and will also support project management, sensitization and
                         monitoring and evaluation component. The design of the project components provides flexibility to
                         include newly liberated and secure municipal areas.

                         An important precondition to infrastructure and housing repair and reconstruction will be the
                         removal of debris and rubble, as well as structures which have been damaged beyond economic
                         repair in order to clear space for subsequent reconstruction works. Due to the risks of explosive war
                         remnants (EWR) concealed in and under the rubble (both unexploded ordnance - UXO, and
                         deliberately planted explosives) an extensive explosive ordnance disposal (EOD) would have to be
                         an integral part of rubble removal. The Iraqi government with assistance from the European Union,
                         rest of the international community including specialized agencies such as the United Nations Mine
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Action Service (UNMAS) will ensure that improvised explosive devices (IEDs) and UXOs are
                         properly detected and removed prior to works activities begin especially where rubble is
                         accumulated. Any rubble removal contracted by the Bank will only apply to those areas that have
                         been declared safe of EWRs.

                         The individual project components are as follows: (1) Electricity; (2) Municipal Waste, Water and
                         Sanitation; (3) Housing and Transport; (4) Health (5) Technical Assistance; and (6) Project
                         Management, Sensitization and Monitoring and Evaluation.

                         COMPONENT 1: Restoring Electricity Infrastructure and Connectivity

                         Iraq’s electricity sector has suffered from more than a decade of conflict and sanctions that have left
                         its institutions weakened and have resulted in under-investment and chronic deterioration in service
                         delivery and infrastructure. Although Iraq’s electricity sector has made progress in restoring and
                         increasing power generation capacity (20GW nameplate capacity as of 2014), the transmission and
                         distribution sub-sectors continue to face serious issues including significant (over 40%) losses, and
                         hampering the provision of reliable and adequate supply to households and the private sector.
                         Inadequate electricity is seen by Iraqis today as a top concern in comparison with other matters such
                         as national security, health care, unemployment, crime, and high prices. Unreliable and insufficient
                         electricity supply is creating hardship and undermining government credibility. Inadequate and poor


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         electricity services and infrastructure also impede private sector development and negatively affect
                         employment, economic growth and constrain attempts to address widespread poverty. According to
                         the Investment Climate Assessment (ICA) Survey, 73 percent of the firms operating in Iraq identified
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the lack of sufficient electricity supply as a “very severe obstacle” to productivity, and the most
                         significant issue affecting private sector development and job creation. According to the Integrated
                         National Energy Strategy (developed with the Bank in 2013), the lack of reliable electricity supply
                         costs Iraq in excess of $43 billion per year in lost GDP.

                         Today, less than 10 percent of the population has continuous access (i.e. at least 20 hours a day) to
                         electricity. With progress being made in the expansion of generation capacity, it is now in the
                         sector’s transmission and distribution network where the challenges predominantly lie. Iraq’s
                         transmission and distribution networks have suffered chronic deterioration and are now overloaded,
                         unreliable and in need of significant investment. The poor state of network infrastructure is
                         compounded by the absence of effective metering, billing systems, and customer management
                         systems resulting in very high technical and non-technical losses (approximately 42% of electricity
                         generated does not make it to the end consumer). Even whilst electricity supply is constrained by
                         system capacity and inefficiency, demand continues to grow unabated (over 7% per year) given the
                         lack of any real price controls or demand side management. In addition, weak institutions, poor
                         collection rates, and high levels of theft also contribute to increasing fiscal pressure on Iraq’s public
                         resources, and reduce the MoE’s ability to meet electricity demand and customer satisfaction.

                         Prior to the ISIS conflcit, the MoE developed investment plans totaling around USD 21 billion
                         between 2011 and 2020 in response to an urgent need for investment in Iraq’s transmission and
                         distribution sub-sectors, supported by a comprehensive master plan developed by Parsons
                         Brinkerhoff in 2010. The MoE has also requested the Bank’s support in developing a roadmap for
                         reform of the electricity sector and preparing a [USD500] million IBRD financing – the Electricity
                         Distribution Reform and Investment Project (EDRIP - P150933, planned for FY2017). This project
                         aims to finance distribution infrastructure that will reduce losses, and increase levels and reliability
                         of electricity supply in the central and south regions of Iraq. In addition, it will also support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reform of Iraq’s electricity sector institutions and operations to improve the sector’s overall
                         performance. This Project incorporates very basic, scalable design, and could also be scaled up to
                         include more comprehensive infrastructure rehabilitation in the areas under consideration by the
                         emergency project.

                         This Project would assist with the emergency supply of equipment and reconstruction of
                         transmission and distribution infrastructure in the targeted municipal areas. Electricity supply to the
                         seven municipalities pre-ISIS conflict was on par with that to the rest of Iraq and reports would
                         indicate that, although poorly maintained, was in service during the ISIS occupation. Technical
                         Assistance will be provided for the supervision of electricity sub-projects implementation.

                         COMPONENT 2: Restoring Solid Waste, Water and Sanitation Services

                         Iraq is estimated to produce 31,000 tons of solid waste every day with per capita waste generation
                         exceeding 1.4 kg per person per day. Rapid increase in waste generation production is putting
                         tremendous strain on Iraqi waste handling infrastructure which have significantly deteriorated after
                         decades of conflict and mismanagement. In the absence of modern and efficient waste handling and
                         disposal infrastructure, most waste is disposed in unregulated landfills across Iraq, with little or no
                         concern for both human health and environment. Iraqi landfills are characterized by spontaneous
                         fires, groundwater contamination, surface water pollution and large-scale greenhouse gas emissions.

                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         Additionally, the management of rubble and debris resulting from armed conflict and acts of war
                         needs attention as part of the reconstruction efforts. Special attention also needs to be given to
                         contamination by hazardous substances that could result from war-related damages such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         petroleum products and a spectrum of chemicals from small industries and storage facilities which
                         could affect soils, rubble/debris, as well as water and groundwater in conflict-affected areas.

                         A National Solid Waste Management Plan (NSWMP) for Iraq was developed in 2007 and contains
                         recommendations to build 33 environmentally engineered landfills with the capacity of 600 million
                         cubic meters serving all of the 18 governorates in Iraq by 2027. In addition to constructing landfills
                         the plan also focuses on the collection and transportation, and on developing systems to maximize
                         recycling and reuse. Broad education measures would complement investments in waste
                         management infrastructure supporting the understanding of and participation in waste management
                         in the identified municipal areas of both communities and individuals.

                         In Iraq access to improved water supply and sanitation is relatively high, but the quality of that
                         access is often low. In 2012, 94 percent of the population had access to safe sanitation. In the same
                         year, 87 percent of the population had acces s to piped water supply in their houses. The quality of
                         services provided, however, is perceived to be low. Many households experienced regular and
                         lengthy service interruptions in 2012 and beyond due to the lack of maintenance and interruptions in
                         water supply. Apart from the lack of reliable water supply, the water quality provided through the
                         public network is also poor. Further, while almost all households have universal access to sanitation
                         facilities, collection of wastewater is not equally developed with only 28 percent of the population
                         having access to a sanitation facility connected to a piped sewerage network. Conflict related damage
                         to water and sanitation services has further adversely impacted service delivery.

                         The objective of the municipal waste, water and sewer component is to restore water, wastewater and
                         solid waste services through the repair and rehabilitation of damaged infrastructure in selected
                         municipalities. The repair, rehabilitation, and reconstruction of damaged infrastructure would help to
                         reduce public health risks while generating local employment opportunities. The work will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i) repair, reconstruct and rehabilitate existing water, wastewater, storm water and solid waste
                         infrastructure (such as water intake, transmission lines, treatment plants, pumping stations, storage
                         tanks, distribution networks, house connections, sewers and trunk lines, wastewater treatment plants,
                         storm water drains) through: (i) carrying out of a water and sanitation damage and needs assessment
                         and identification of Water and Sanitation Subprojects; (ii) preparation of detailed plans and designs
                         for Water and Sanitation Subprojects; and (iii) provision of technical assistance for the supervision
                         and implementation of Water and Sanitation Subprojects.

                         COMPONENT 3: Restoring Transport Infrastructure and Developing a Housing Reconstruction
                         Subsidy Scheme

                         Successive years of conflict have limited GoI’s ability to promote an enabling environment for the
                         provision of affordable housing by the private sector and for a greater role for financial services in
                         the construction sector. Iraq suffered from a chronic housing shortage coupled with low quality
                         housing stock even before the latest ISIS conflict. Recent estimates indicate that almost 30%-40% of
                         the population lives in very poor housing conditions and that at least 10% of the nation's total
                         dwellings are overcrowded. Further, the absence of a market-based housing finance system makes it
                         difficult for most Iraqis to afford adequate housing with housing much less affordable for Iraqis than
                         elsewhere in the Middle East. Against such a background, the latest conflict has severely
                         compounded the housing crisis where a large number of housing units have been destroyed or

                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         damaged.

                         This component will support the GoI in designing of a Housing Reconstruction Subsidy Scheme.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Such a subsidy scheme will be based on past Government practices in similar situations and could be
                         adopted by the Government for all the liberated areas in Iraq. The scheme will be enhanced taking
                         into account efficiency and effectiveness in addressing the needs of tenants, informal settlers and
                         mortgaged assets.

                         Transport infrastructure (for all modes, including roads, railways, ports and airports) is key to the
                         economic development of Iraq. However, most transport infrastructure in the affected region suffered
                         destruction and damage as a result of recent military operations, sabotage and vandalism during the
                         current crisis. As a result of the full or partial destruction of structures, road sections and airports, the
                         impact to transport operations has been significant. This has led to the continued closure of a number
                         of road and rail section for normal traffic, except for the purposes of military operations. While
                         international transportation has been limited due to ongoing conflict, economic sanctions and safety
                         issues, domestic air transportation has also been limited to a few routes. Negligence and lack of
                         maintenance has further deteriorated the infrastructure. Continued use of the transport network by the
                         military and for refugee transportation continues to negatively impact on the transport infrastructure.
                         Additionally, much of this infrastructure suffered extensive damage and destruction during the
                         previous conflict. Some were in the process of rehabilitation but the current situation exacerbated the
                         challenge. The lack of a sectoral strategy, chronic underfunding, lack of institutional capacity, and a
                         complex conflict-affected environment compound the problem. At this juncture, the country faces
                         enormous challenges in reconstructing its transportation networks and facilities, as well as re-
                         establishing key transport services.

                         The objective of the transport component is to improve the condition of road assets by repair and
                         rehabilitation of highly damaged segments of the primary road network and currently used detour
                         routes in and around selected municipalities, re-establishing critical bridge crossings and functioning
                         of major culverts. The project will also help restore the functional capacity of these road assets, i.e. to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         restore normal and safe traffic operations. In addition, the proposed civil works on roads and bridges
                         would generate local employment opportunities. The work will be conducted in coordination with
                         rubble removal and will include road structure repairs (mainly pavement, bridge decks, abutments
                         and poles), but also shoulder stabilization, approaches to bridges, road safety signalization and
                         equipment, and drainage repairs. The project will also support the formulation of key
                         transformational area-based projects, including Regional Development Framework and
                         Decentralization Plans.

                         COMPONENT 4: Restoring Health Services

                         Due to the prolonged conflict, Iraq’s health sector is under strain. In the last few decades, Iraq’s
                         health care capacity has been severely undermined by the effects of different wars, international
                         sanctions, sectarian violence and political instability. Furthermore, the growing inflow of Syrian
                         refugees and internally displaced Iraqis in the 2012-2014 period has challenged the ability of the
                         government to respond to the growing health needs of the population. Once considered the best in the
                         region, Iraq’s health indicators have been deteriorating and according to World Bank 2013 data ,
                         maternal mortality in Iraq is among the highest in the region at 67/1,000 live births. Similarly, Iraq is
                         above the regional rates for under five mortality (34/1,000 compared to 26/1000) and infant mortality
                         (28/1,000 compared to 21/1,000). Immunization rates for Measles (63 percent), Polio (70 percent),
                         and DPT (68 percent) are also below the regional averages at 88 percent, 90 percent, and 89 percent

                                                                        Page 5 of 13
                         respectively.

                         The large influx of internally displaced persons (IDPs) led to a significant increase in demand for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         health services and a rise in communicable diseases. According to WHO latest data, acute respiratory
                         infection (ARI), skin disease, and acute diarrhea (AD) remain the leading causes of morbidity
                         reported from all camps. Other assessments indicate that basic laboratory services in health facilities
                         in IDP camps are either nonexistent or insufficiently equipped to handle the growing demand for
                         services . Communicable diseases, particularly water-borne infectious diseases is also affecting the
                         Iraqi population, Cholera is endemic, with major outbreaks in many parts of the country. Hepatitis E
                         is also reportedly endemic, with an approximately 20.3 percent prevalence rate. (WHO, 2013a).

                         The Ministry of Health (MoH) capacity to manage the provision of basic services has been
                         jeopardized. The health system’s physical infrastructure is suffering from severe deterioration due to
                         destruction, neglect over time and consequences from the war, whereby most of the health
                         infrastructure is in poor condition and is critically lacking human resources and essential equipment.
                         Given this situation, there is an urgent need to address the resource shortages and build the resilience
                         of the Iraqi health system to alleviate the currently declining health situation in the country.

                         The objective of the health component is to improve the delivery of essential healthca re services in
                         selected municipalities to serve the urgent health needs of the Iraqi population. As such, this
                         component will adopt a two-pronged approach: (i) responding to the most urgent health needs
                         through the acquisition of mobile hospitals, mobile clinics and ambulances and (ii) technical
                         assistance to assess and plan for mid to long-term reconstruction/rehabilitation of the health care
                         services.

                         COMPONENT 5: Technical Assistance

                         Sectoral development: This activity will constitute a platform for the identification and [partial]
                         preparation of a range of potential sector investment projects which would be based on a continuous
Public Disclosure Copy




                         strategic, medium to longer term needs assessment carried out between the Bank and the Iraqi
                         government over the project implementation period. This needs assessment would go well beyond
                         the project’s lifetime and the scope of emergency reconstruction and restoration, and identify
                         opportunities to build on the momentum, delivery mechanisms and implementation arrangements set
                         up under Emergency Operation for Development Project (EODP). Likely sectors for medium to
                         longer term development approaches could include transport (both urban and inter-urban including
                         railways lead by the Ministry of Construction and Housing (MoCH), housing (MoCH) and water and
                         waste management (Ministry of Municipalities and Public Works - MoMPW). Some of the outputs
                         of the TAs would be in the form of urban development master-plans, integrated solid waste
                         management plans and designs, and railway infrastructure rehabilitation and safety improvement
                         plans and designs. This TA will also support the carrying out of a health sector needs assessment and
                         development of a mid- to long term health care services master plan.

                         Technical assistance: TA will provide analytical and advisory services to sectoral components on a
                         demand driven basis with likely two broad topics. The first would fall under the theme of state/
                         citizen trust-building and promoting reconciliation in the wider project context, with likely topics
                         being: (i) inclusive participation by local communities (ii) transparency of resource allocation, (iii)
                         enacting measures to promote tolerance through community-led projects across different social
                         groups, (iv) using targeted media, social media and communications campaigns to disseminate
                         information about the project, and promote trust and solidarity, and (v) addressing local grievances

                                                                       Page 6 of 13
                         through an effective redress mechanism. The second would relate to a broader assistance strategy for
                         the reconstruction and sustainable management of physical cultural resources. This activity could
                         include a systematic and detailed damage assessment of damaged Physical Cultural Resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (PCR), a prioritized list of required interventions, a reconstruction and restoration strategy including
                         standards, guidelines, knowledge and technical resources, and design codes, and the identification of
                         financing sources and setup of a pooled multi-donor fund.

                         COMPONENT 6: Project Management, Sensitization and Monitoring and Evaluation

                         This component will cover costs associated with the management and coordination of the Project,
                         including the creation and maintenance of a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system. This will also
                         include communication at the national and local (seven cities) levels with beneficiaries and all other
                         stakeholders involved in the Project including line ministries, international agencies/missions, civil
                         society and faith based organizations. It is expected that complementary, specialized, technical inputs
                         and their logistical support will be required to execute individual project activities and provide
                         adequate technical guidance to the project implementing partners. This component will also cover the
                         cost of travel, accommodation and per diem for the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) and Project
                         Management Teams (PMTs) participating in Bank conducted supervision missions outside Iraq
                         structures detailed in Section II below). Sensitization and communication work will aim at raising the
                         transmission of clear and consistent messages to support the effective implementation of the project
                         by informing, guiding, proactively managing expectations of its beneficiaries and communities about
                         project, promoting understanding and buy-into the process, as well as generating and sustaining
                         broad stakeholder interest and buy-in. These activities will be initiated at the start of the project and
                         will continue throughout the project life cycle.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented in urban agglomerations of Tikrit, Dour, Al-Alam and Al
                         Dalooeyya located in the Salah Al-Din Governorate as well as urban agglomerations of Jalula, As-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sadiya and Al-AAzeem located in Diyala Governorate. In addition, suburban areas, villages and
                         infrastructure across open range land may also be included for project-financed activities.

                         The common feature for all project interventions is the strict adherence to pre-existing footprints of
                         buildings, structures and linear infrastructure, which was damaged or destroyed during combat
                         activities when ISIS moved into the areas, and was pushed out again, and vandalism, sabotage, and
                         retribution acts during ISISs occupation.

                         The majority of interventions is expected in urbanized areas, which currently are characterized by
                         very low environmental baseline conditions, mainly due to acts of war and related deterioration and
                         negligence (such as: rubble and UXO presence, unregulated waste disposal, breakdown of
                         environmental services, and presence of contaminations from oil / fuels and ammunitions). Some
                         larger reconstruction sub-projects, such as bridges, will be located at major rivers and within areas
                         with slightly higher environmental sensitivities, but again within existing transport corridors and on
                         existing footprints.

                         As the project is prepared under the provisions of paragraph 12 of OP10.00 for projects in situations
                         of urgent need for assistance or capacity constraints, the preparation of safeguards instruments has
                         been deferred into the implementation period, and an environmental and social action plan (ESAP)
                         has been developed by the Task Team.


                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Chaogang Wang (GSURR)
                         Wolfhart Pohl (GCFDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        The project will involve substantial physical / civil works,
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               dealing with rubble removal, clean-up and reconstruction
                                                             activities. While expected to be implemented in small
                                                             increments and on existing footprints, these works will
                                                             require a solid E&S management framework, specifically
                                                             ESMPs, to avoid, minimize and mitigate potential
                                                             negative impacts routinely associated with construction
                                                             activities of the foreseen scale. The project wide ESMF
                                                             and site specific ESIAs/ESMPs will be produced, cleared
                                                             by the Bank, and disclosed both in country and at the
                                                             Bank InfoShop before the start of physical works.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No         Due to the project being confined to existing footprints of
                         4.04                                structures, roads, bridges etc., and mainly located in
                                                             urbanized areas, no sensitive or protected habitats will be
                                                             affected.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No         Due to the project being confined to existing footprints of
                                                             structures, roads, bridges etc., and mainly located in
                                                             urbanized areas, no sensitive or protected habitats will be
                                                             affected.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No          No activities will be financed that will require the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             purchase, storage, handling, or use of pesticides or
                                                             herbicides.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes        Iraq is a country extremely rich in Physical Cultural
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                Resources (PCR), and the destruction experienced during
                                                             combat activities between ISIL and Coalition forces are
                                                             highly likely to have affected historical buildings,
                                                             religious sites such as mosques and shrines, and
                                                             monuments. Destruction may have been random acts of
                                                             war, but also targeted acts of sectarian violence. Dealing
                                                             with PCR has been included into the ESMF and will be
                                                             part of the planned TA component.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No         No stakeholders qualifying as Indigenous Peoples (IP)
                         BP 4.10                             will be affected by the project activities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes        As a general principle, all activities are planned to take
                         OP/BP 4.12                          place on existing footprints. Nevertheless there is a small
                                                             possibility that reconstruction works may temporarily
                                                             affect access to livelihoods or residences, or require
                                                             temporary use of private land. Hence this policy was
                                                             triggered in a precautionary manner and a RPF as overall



                                                              Page 8 of 13
                                                                      guidelines for resettlement planning and implementation
                                                                      of the whole project and site specific RAP/ARAP as
                                                                      needed will be produced, cleared by the Bank, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      disclosed both in country and at the Bank InfoShop before
                                                                      the start of physical works. The planned TA component
                                                                      will include advisory services on social inclusion and
                                                                      participatory processes, to ensure just and equitable
                                                                      access of all stakeholders to the project’s services.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            No reconstruction activities involving dams will be
                            4.37                                      included into the project, nor infrastructure that is directly
                                                                      dependent on the technical soundness and functioning of
                                                                      an existing dam (such as e.g. irrigation networks).
                            Projects on International   Yes           The policy is triggered because the project will finance
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      water supply and wastewater infrastructure that use or
                                                                      rely on water sources that are considered international
                                                                      waterways for the purpose of OP7.50. However, the
                                                                      project will only finance the rehabilitation of ongoing
                                                                      schemes. The nature of these works may involve
                                                                      additions, alterations or reconstruction of existing
                                                                      facilities, but it will not involve works and activities that
                                                                      would exceed original schemes, change their nature, or
                                                                      alter or expand their scope and extent to make them
                                                                      appear new or different schemes. None of the works are
                                                                      therefore expected to lead to appreciable adverse effects
                                                                      on hydrological flows, or water quality of any
                                                                      international waterway. Thus the team has sought an
                                                                      exception from the policy’s notification requirement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed        No            While the project will target areas recently liberated from
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          ISIS, these are not deemed “disputed” in the sense of this
                                                                      policy, as ISIS has no international recognition and would
                                                                      thus not be a claimant with any legitimacy to their
                                                                      controlled territories.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The sheer financial volume and physical dimensions of the project have the potential to cause
                              adverse environmental and social impacts, though mitigated by the expected partition of the
                              investments in a large number of smaller increments. The disaggregated environmental risk is
                              moderate, as all investments are expected to be implemented on existing physical footprints, being
                              reconstruction and rehabilitation activities. For the same reason the risks associated with
                              involuntary resettlement and livelihood restoration are moderate. These issues will be managed
                              with appropriate safeguards instruments (an ESMF and RPF for overall guidance, and sub-project
                              specific ESMPs, ESIAs and RAPs/ARAPs) which will be produced during the first months of the
                              implementation phase. The key social risk is associated with the activities planned under the


                                                                       Page 9 of 13
                           housing sector and are associated with (i) creating equitable, just access to the project’s benefits;
                           (ii) dealing with unclear titling, informal uses and proxy owners; (iii) avoiding negative
                           unintended consequences, e.g. rapid increases of rents; and (iv) creating the capacities and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           resources to manage the substantial transaction efforts to implement this sectoral component. The
                           mitigation measures for the latter risk will include targeted TA activities, which will be deployed
                           during the first year of project implementation, and aim to build on existing mechanisms in
                           housing provision and repair to strengthen management capacity for data collection, inventory,
                           damage assessment, design, construction supervision, financial management, and verification.
                           This said, there are no large-scale, significant or irreversible impacts expected from the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No indirect / long term impacts are expected due to the project activities. The main broader
                           impacts would be the rekindling of the previous levels of economic activities, and the restoration
                           of public and environmental services, which would be a positive impact compared to the current
                           baseline.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           As this project will finance only the reconstruction and restoration or pre-existing structures, no
                           relevant project alternatives are considered. Within sub-projects there may be various design
                           options, and the ESMPs to be deployed for every sub-project will promote the environmentally
                           and socially best performing and most sustainable approaches and design options.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           As the project is prepared under the provisions of paragraph 12 of OP10 for projects in situations
                           of urgent need for assistance or capacity constraints, the preparation of safeguards instruments has
                           been deferred into the implementation period, and an environmental and social action plan (ESAP)
                           was developed (see PAD, Annex 5). During the implementation period and before the relevant
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project activities are commenced, the Recipient will prepare an ESMF and RPF that will cover the
                           entire scope of potential investment sub-projects (e.g. housing, road repairs, transmission lines,
                           bridges, energy production facilities, etc.), divide them into typologies along environmental and
                           social criteria and impacts, and for each typology define the suggested, specific instruments and
                           processes. This would also be the instrument that would be disclosed and consulted, before any
                           physical activities would start. The ESMF will also include a positive list of likely activities and
                           investments to be financed, and a negative list of activities, equipment, and goods that will not be
                           financed by the project due to their potential, negative environmental impacts

                           The ESMF will provide clear guidance on (i) the scope of project typologies, ranging from simple,
                           routine civil reconstruction works (e.g. road repair) to more complex repairs of e.g. bridges and
                           larger structures; (ii) which types of safeguards instruments would be will be required. The types
                           of safeguards instruments anticipated for the project range from abbreviated, checklist type
                           ESMPs for simple, routine repair works, over more elaborate and comprehensive ESMPs to ESIAs
                           within clearly defined project boundaries. All project activities involving civil works on any scale
                           will require some type of environmental / social management instrument, which will be
                           determined and defined by the ESMF.

                           Most typologies within the expected scope of subprojects are expected to involve routine, simple
                           civil works pertaining only to existing structures and footprints, where conflict-related damage


                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                           was incurred. For these typologies abbreviated ESMPs will be prepared as appropriate safeguards
                           instrument, and freestanding, comprehensive ESIAs will be not be required, as the structures and
                           installations will have existed before, and the project would only finance their repair,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           reconstruction or reinstatement. All subprojects under this typology, e.g. repair / reconstruction of
                           housing, roads, transmission lines, municipal infrastructure, as well as the restoration of public
                           services will require safeguards instruments in form of ESMPs (E&S management plans) that
                           would become part of the works contracts, set the E&S standards and compliance mechanisms, an
                           serve as contractual basis for supervision and enforcement of good E&S practice during the works.
                           For some larger projects, e.g. bridge reconstruction, a limited ESIA may be required, as the works
                           would be more substantial in scale, and rivers may be more sensitive and vulnerable to
                           environmental impacts, which would be integrated into the ESMP. Also the ESMPs would be
                           more specific on measures to protect water quality, riverine / aquatic ecosystems, and retain the
                           hydrological regime around the bridge. Also, additional social considerations, such as continued
                           access to the river for fishing and water abstraction, may become relevant

                           Linked to the ESMF (though under different management and control) is the risk of ERW
                           (explosive remnants of war), including UXO (unexploded ordnance), AXO (abandoned explosive
                           ordnance) and booby traps in the project areas. As the project will be implemented in areas
                           recently liberated from ISIL rule, and as the liberation often took place with considerable combat
                           activities, the presence of ERW is a certainty. Thus, all project areas will have undergone or
                           undergo a screening (technical survey) for ERW and will have to be declared safe prior to any
                           works, be it relating to rubble removal, reconstruction of damaged structures, or any works below
                           ground level.

                           Project Management Teams will be established in relevant line ministries involved in the project
                           implementation. Even though the ministries have experience of implementing Bank financed
                           project and know well about the requirements of the Bank safeguards policies, their capacity of
                           implementing safeguards instruments are relatively weak. The Bank team will provide training and
                           guidance to clients as needed during the project implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are (i) the PMTs (project management teams) from the sector line Ministries,
                           (ii) the Administrations of the affected Governorates, (iii) the Municipalities, and (iv) project
                           beneficiaries and people potentially affected by the project. Consultations with relevant
                           stakeholders will be carried out in preparation of the ESMF, RPF, limited ESIAs and site specific
                           ESMPs and RAPS/ARAPs as needed. The planned environmental and social management
                           approach will also be part of the public hearings and consultations that will precede individual
                           subproject implementation, and will be organized by the municipalities.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          ////
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       ////
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          ////
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         ////
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      ////
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?



                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ibrahim Khalil Dajani
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Bernard Harborne (PMGR)                       Date: 18-Jun-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
