                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC14845

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-May-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bolivia                          Project ID:      P152281
                            Project Name:      Santa Cruz Road Corridor Connector Project (P152281)
                            Task Team          Gylfi Palsson
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          14-Sep-2015                      Estimated        01-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (50%), Trade facilitation and market access (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       230.00                Total Bank Financing:        130.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        130.00
                              Total                                                                        230.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The projects Development Objectives (PDO) are to support the Recipient in reducing transport costs,
                           travel time and road fatalities between San Ignacio de Velasco and San Jose de Chiquitos.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed operation is envisioned as a single road investment aiming at reducing transport costs,
                           travel time and road fatalities in a corridor connector between two main corridors coming out of
                           Brazil. The project will also fund study for future investment on the northern San Matias – San
                         Ignacio de Velasco corridor. No specific institutional strengthening activities are planned under the
                         operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed road upgrading is of about 203 km connecting the towns of San Ignacio de Velasco -
                         San Jose de Chiquitos in the Department of Santa Cruz. The road is on a north-south axis, and
                         connects the two main east-west corridors coming out of and going to Brazil. From a technical
                         standpoint the upgrading of the road is uncomplicated and which for the most part will follow the
                         existing alignment and thus largely be within already established Right-of-Way. There will be two
                         bypasses needed to avoid heavy vehicle traffic in populated areas (in San Miguel and in San Ignacio)
                         and straightening of alignment by San Diablo hill. Construction will be needed for 3 small bridges
                         (35m, 40m and 46m) and a handful of existing bridges will be replaced by large box culverts. Total
                         culverts needed on the length of the route are about 300. The terrain is mostly flat to gently rolling
                         hills.

                         A three year old technical, economic, social and environmental study for the upgrading of the
                         corridor connector exists. On basis of Bank comments, ABC is having the study updated, with new
                         traffic count, rationalization of the design, a new economic assessment, amended environmental
                         management plans and general population and indigenous consultations.

                         From environmental perspective there appear to be no significant adverse impacts. On the social
                         side, some resettlement is expected because of the bypasses especially. The area is populated by two
                         indigenous groups native of the lowlands, mostly Chiquitano population and to far lesser extent by
                         Ayoreo communities; and to small extent by Aymara and Quechua migrant populations from the
                         Altiplano. Triggering of following safeguard policies are expected: (i) OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental
                         Assessment); (ii) OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats); (iii) OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples); OP/BP 4.11
                         (Physical Cultural Resources); and (v) OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

                         The proposed project will likely have two components: (i) Upgrading of San Ignacio de Velasco-San
                         Jose de Chiquitos road; and (ii) Study for upgrading the San Matias – San Ignacio de Velasco road
Public Disclosure Copy




                         corridor.

                         Component 1: Upgrading of San Ignacio de Velasco-San Jose de Chiquitos road (about 203 km) –
                         estimated cost US$228 million. This component will finance a conventional input type of contract
                         for improvement of the corridor connector between the two main corridors coming out of Brazil,
                         about 300 km from the borders of Bolivia and Brazil. The road is important to Bolivia’s effort in
                         upgrading the transit corridor from Brazil to Chile, to give better connectivity to Bolivian
                         beneficiaries in the area and beyond and will reduce cost of transport.

                         Component 2: Study for upgrading the San Matias – San Ignacio de Velasco road corridor –
                         estimated cost US$2 million. This component will finance a technical, economic, environmental and
                         social study and bid documents for upgrading of the northern road corridor from Brazil (San Matias
                         to San Ignacio de Velasco). Discussions are underway to explore ABC interest in introducing
                         through the study a possible Design-Build-Maintain-Operate-Transfer (DBMOT) contracting
                         methodology, which is performance and results-based and has worldwide been found to improve
                         efficiency in road asset management. The road is not expected to have any major environmental or
                         social impacts.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The region is one of the most important in lowland Bolivia for the historical presence of a series of
                         missions dating back to the Jesuits first and Franciscans later, where indigenous tribes were settled
                         into towns and engaged in art and music based on Christianbeliefs; however, as in many cases these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         were mixed and influenced by indigenous culture in the region. This is one of the most important
                         tourist sites for Bolivia, where Baroque musical festivals attract visitors, Chamber orchestras and
                         Choirs from all over the world, including Europe and elsewhere. Another salient and important
                         characteristics is that the Catholic Church promoted, developed and supported workshops for the
                         fabrication of classical instruments made from local wood; and that large choral arrangements were
                         made with children living in the region. More recently, the Spanish government has invested in
                         rehabilitating the 13 missions that conform the “circuit” of missions and towns and are all
                         incorporated into the yearly festival.

                         Overall the project is expected to have positive impacts considering that the most important physical
                         impacts are already pre-existing. Positive impacts identified include reduced costs and travel times
                         and improved travel comfort. The route will improve conditions for connection and international
                         mobility and present important benefits to international transport. However, in this case, special
                         measures should be taken to assure that excessive heavy traffic and trucks that might begin to use
                         this route coming in from Brazil would not cause negative effects to local tourism, local
                         communities, the environment, local religious festivities, or other aspects of indigenous community
                         life. Innovative and creative mitigation measure should be considered during the construction period
                         to assure maximum benefits to the tourism potential. Likewise, if heavy traffic is expected to
                         increase, measures should be taken to assure limited impact of large trucks on small towns and
                         communities and the environment. Perhaps truck stops or rest areas could be considered to limit
                         impact on communities and allow economic activities (restaurants, tire repair, mechanics, truck wash
                         sites, etc).) but concentrated in locations that avoid or, when not possible, minimize social and
                         environmental impacts.

                         Upon inputs provided from the Social Assessment and preparation of an IPP for the Ayoreo group, a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         determination will be made whether to prepare IPPs for other IP groups as identified.

                         The project has an EIA in compliance with national regulations, after the final design is completed it
                         would be necessary to upgrade the EIA. Sensitive issues such as environmental protection and proper
                         use of available water sources along the road and the conservation of fauna in places of ecological
                         interest should be consider as part of the Environmental Management Plan.

                         As a sidelight to compliance with the safeguards of the Bank and the national legislation, it is
                         recommended to evaluate the potential of simple actions to improve environmental management in
                         the municipalities in the area of roads such as campaigns for better management of waste, protection
                         of sites of historical interest, better understanding of native flora and fauna, better management of
                         increased number of visitors and other actions that could highlight the ecological, historical and
                         cultural value of the area.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         ABC has in place reasonable standards and procedures for establishing RoW and compensations for
                         different groups. They carry out a social analysis as part of each road building project. ABC has a
                         national indigenous peoples specialist that will oversee the socialanalysis and development of the
                         needed social safeguards instruments, and who will receive additional support from the social and
                         environmental staff in the Santa Cruz regional office. Key to implementation will be the
                         incorporation of needed environmental and social measures in the contracts of the supervisor and
                           contractor.

                           ABC has an Environmental Manual for Roads (MAC, Manual Ambiental para Carreteras) that
Public Disclosure Copy




                           provides an orientation guide for the adequate compliance with norms and best practices for
                           Environmental Management in road works. It is an ample and specific document for road works in
                           Bolivia. In accordance to the ABC its use is mandatory, since an ABC Board of Directors resolution
                           was issued (ABC-DIR-009-2009). This Environmental Manual is fully in line with OP 4.01 and
                           WBG EHS. Moreover, use of ABC Environmental Manual and compliance is mandatory to
                           contractors.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Carlos Alberto Molina Prieto (GSURR)
                           Juan Carlos Enriquez Uria (GENDR)
                           Raul Tolmos (GENDR)
                           Rodrigo Victor Hernan Munoz Reyes Pantoj (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment        Yes           The project is proposed to be classified as Category
                           OP/BP 4.01                                    B. The Project does not foresee significant
                                                                         environmental impacts that could jeopardize the
                                                                         natural but intervened environment of its influential
                                                                         project area, mainly characterized by livestock and
                                                                         agricultural landscapes. The "Category B" is justified
                                                                         by the fact that the rural road works to be supported
                                                                         under the project would not include any new road
                                                                         construction. Most part of the road will follow the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         existing alignment and thus largely be within already
                                                                         established Right-of-Way. The proposed road
                                                                         upgrading is of about 203 km connecting the towns
                                                                         of San Ignacio de Velasco - San Jose de Chiquitos in
                                                                         the Department of Santa Cruz. There will be two
                                                                         bypasses needed to avoid heavy vehicle traffic in
                                                                         populated areas (in San Miguel and in San Ignacio)
                                                                         and straightening of alignment by San Diablo hill.
                                                                         Construction will be needed for 3 small bridges
                                                                         (35m, 40m and 46m) and a handful of existing
                                                                         bridges will be replaced by large box culverts. Total
                                                                         culverts needed on the length of the route are about
                                                                         300.

                                                                         Most challenging environmental management issues
                                                                         will be focused on protection and sound use of
                                                                         ground and underground water bodies (e.g. ponds
                                                                         and aquifers) along the road used for recreational
                                                                         purposes by local population as well as for
                                                                         agricultural and livestock purposes too. Moreover,
                         these water bodies sustain wild fauna local
                         populations (e.g. birds, small mammals, bats, etc.).
                         During the dry season, these water bodies are critical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         for livestock and wild fauna. So surface water quality
                         and quantity is a critical issue to be addressed
                         particularly during road rehabilitation. On the other
                         hand, given that the EIA report recommends digging
                         wells to obtain water for camp sites and works, it
                         will be necessary to adopt needed measures to avoid
                         aquifer contamination. Specific actions on these
                         aspects will be recommended in the updated version
                         of the EIA report once the road final design is
                         completed. Issues related to pedestrian health,
                         signaling and road safety aimed at mitigating
                         accidents will be updated as part of the final
                         technical design under preparation.

                         An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA),
                         including an Environmental Management Plan
                         (EMP), comprised of several environmental
                         mitigation programs (e.g. PASAs and PPMs
                         according to the EIA terminology in Bolivia - PASA:
                         Programa de Adecuacion y Seguimiento Ambiental;
                         PPM: Programas de Prevención y Mitigación), has
                         been prepared in 2012 for the road to meet the
                         Bolivian environmental regulatory requirements. An
                         EIA was approved by the Ministry of Environment
                         and Water Resources (MMAA) in 2012 as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the corresponding environmental license issued. This
                         EIA and its different EMPs (e.g. PASAs and PPMs)
                         will be updated and disclosed before appraisal and
                         the corresponding environmental license revalidated.
                         Terms of Reference to update the technical, social
                         and environmental studies (e.g. EIA and
                         corresponding EMPs) have been prepared by the
                         client and reviewed by the Bank. Studies under
                         component 2 will be conducted based on the World
                         Bank environmental and social safeguards and the
                         WBG EHS Guidelines. Two public consultations
                         were held in the four municipal jurisdictions
                         involved in the project area with participation of key
                         stakeholders that supported the project during
                         preparation of the original EIA - and EMPs –
                         prepared by Ecoviana. Local population emphasized
                         issues related to hiring of local workforce, location
                         of ancillary facilities and workers’ residences, and
                         behavior codes for contractor’s
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy was triggered given the presence of
                                                             natural habitats along the road that could be affected
                                                             due to change in a very small segment of alignment
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             in the San Diablo hill. Although the natural
                                                             environment on both sides of the road is mainly
                                                             characterized by intensive productive agricultural
                                                             and cattle raising landscapes, however there are wild
                                                             fauna and flora species interacting with those
                                                             productive landscapes. Thus, along the road to be
                                                             rehabilitated, the technical design will have to ensure
                                                             transit of wild fauna from one side to another and
                                                             minimize impacts and risks during rehabilitation
                                                             works and construction of bridges. Natural habitats
                                                             protection aspects will be dealt in the EIA. Current
                                                             environmental mitigation programs (e.g.. PASAs and
                                                             PPMs) in the EIA are oriented in the right direction.
                                                             Also, the fact that 300 culverts will be constructed
                                                             should prevent barrier effect along the road.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    This policy will not be triggered since the project
                                                             does not involve, nor support, conversion of forest
                                                             lands to other economic alternatives. Main primary
                                                             economic activities along the road are agriculture
                                                             and livestock followed by tourism.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    This policy will not be triggered since the project
                                                             does not involve procurement or use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   This policy will be triggered since the project’s area
                         OP/BP 4.11                          is recognized as a global cultural heritage area and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             should be protected and conserved. Road to be
                                                             rehabilitated between San José de Chiquitos and San
                                                             Ignacio de Velasco crosses some of the towns that
                                                             host the Chiquitania churches and their related
                                                             immaterial cultural heritage. Jesuit reductions of San
                                                             Ignacio de Velasco, San Miguel de Velasco and San
                                                             José de Chiquitos and three other more reductions
                                                             constitute a UNESCO world cultural heritage site
                                                             funded by the Jesuits between 1696 and 1760. The
                                                             six population centers of San Francisco Javier,
                                                             Concepción, Santa Ana, San Miguel, San Rafael and
                                                             San José, located in the ancient territory of the
                                                             Chiquitos indigenous people, still form a living
                                                             heritage. On the other hand, San Ignacio de Velasco
                                                             also is the entrance to Noel Kempff Mercado
                                                             national park, located to the North of the Bolivia-
                                                             Brazil border. This national park was declared
                                                             natural world heritage site by UNESCO due to its
                                                             extraordinary biodiversity. Improved access to these
                                                              sites due to improved quality of the access roads, if
                                                              managed properly, could contribute to the
                                                              sustainable development of the region and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              maintenance of traditional indigenous practices. EIA
                                                              to be updated and its corresponding EMPs will
                                                              include screening provisions for evaluating potential
                                                              impacts on cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       Yes   A social assessment (SA) will be developed to
                         4.10                                 identify Indigenous Peoples within the area of
                                                              influence of the project, consisting of native peoples
                                                              of the lowlands (90% Chiquitano, Ayoreo >0.1%)
                                                              and upland migrant populations (approximately <5%
                                                              of Aymara and Quechua), in addition to the existing
                                                              mestizo population. This identification is important
                                                              because beyond the positive effects of the project,
                                                              such as reducing travel times and costs, it is likely
                                                              that the project will not provide further positive
                                                              benefits. The probability of negative risks to this
                                                              vulnerable population is high, since the increase in
                                                              drivers of heavy and international transport, creates
                                                              risks for this population, especially women and
                                                              children. For these reasons, the Indigenous Peoples
                                                              Policy (OP 4.10) is activated and an Indigenous
                                                              Peoples Plan (IPP) will be prepared to consider
                                                              mitigating risks and allow the inclusion and
                                                              participation of these populations in the benefits of
                                                              the project. The project shall consult with the general
                                                              population located within the project area, but
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              especially within the framework of the Indigenous
                                                              Peoples Plan (IPP) with these populations, to
                                                              determine the impacts and ways of active
                                                              participation during the different stages of the
                                                              project. The IPP is expected to be ready in the third
                                                              quarter of 2015, following detailed consultations.
                                                              The consultation process will be with all
                                                              organizations identified in the IPP.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   This policy will be triggered given that the project
                         BP 4.12                              proposes new works such as variants in urban areas
                                                              (San Ignacio and San Miguel) and in San Rafael
                                                              which can have negative impacts on the population,
                                                              besides requiring the acquisition of land and
                                                              buildings. Therefore, the Involuntary Resettlement
                                                              Policy (OP 4.12), is triggered preventively, and may
                                                              require a Resettlement Action Plan for each of the
                                                              two bypasses in order to mitigate the impacts,
                                                              implementing the plan activities for land purchase
                                                              and properties, such as also design programs for the
                                                                                                                        restoration of initial conditions for the affected
                                                                                                                        population. Only once the final designs are ready and
                                                                                                                        measurable impact and effects on population are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        identified, can need for Resettlement Action Plan be
                                                                                                                        determined. In such as, these plans must be executed
                                                                                                                        before the start of the works and consider the
                                                                                                                        socioeconomic conditions of the population,
                                                                                                                        especially in the municipality of San Rafael, the
                                                                                                                        TESA mentioned as the greatest poverty and
                                                                                                                        possibly vulnerable to the adverse impacts of the
                                                                                                                        project population.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         This policy should not be triggered as the project will
                                                                                                                        neither support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                                                                                        dams nor will it support other investments which rely
                                                                                                                        on services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         This policy should not be triggered as the project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   not finance activities involving the use or potential
                                                                                                                        pollution of international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This policy should not be triggered as the project will
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                not finance activities in disputed areas as defined in
                                                                                                                        the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      TORs for social assessment being developed over next 3 weeks; other instruments will be
                                      developed in the basis of this time line being worked out.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gylfi Palsson
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                                                                                                 Date: 11-May-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 11-May-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
