The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
(CAREC - 1b) (P128050)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


         Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2017| Report No: ISDSR21855




                        Regional Vice President:    Cyril E Muller
                               Country Director:    Lilia Burunciuc
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Jose Luis Irigoyen
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Binyam Reja
                             Task Team Leader:      Jacques Bure
        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
        (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                  Project Name
                                                            East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section):
P128050                                                     Western Europe - Western China International Transit
                                                            Corridor (CAREC - 1b)
Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
Jacques Bure                                                Kazakhstan
Approval Date                                                Environmental Category
01-May-2012                                                  Full Assessment (A)
Managing Unit                                                Is this a Repeater project?
GTI10


PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                           Total Bank Financing
1256000000.00                                                1256000000.00
Financing Gap
0

Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                              188000000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                    1068000000.00
Total                                                                                         1,256,000,000.00


2. PROJECT INFORMATION

 Current Project Development Objective
 The project development objectives (PDOs) are to increase transport efficiency along the section of the Western Europe-
 Western China Road Corridor within Almaty Oblast and to modernize highway management on sections of the Western
 Europe-Western China Road Corridor.



 Proposed New PDO
        The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
        (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



 The project development objective (PDO) is to increase transport efficiency and modernize highway management
 along the selected road sections of the Western Europe – Western China Road Corridor and the Center-South Corridor.

3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

 Type here to enter text

4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The proposed restructuring will finance civil works that will rehabilitate and upgrade the existing Balkhash-
Burylbaital road section, for a total length of approximately 297 km (from 1855 km to 2152 km), which is in
poor condition and with high accident rates. This road section was assessed in the ESIA prepared by the
Borrower for the entire Center South Corridor program as part of the respective project, which was
appraised in August 2016 but for which preparation has been recently stopped by the Government. As part
of this restructuring, the Borrower has prepared draft ESMP for the 6 sections of the road in line with
relevant detailed designs completed by the end of 2016. The existing road is a two lane road in a flat and hilly
terrain located in Karaganda (150 km) and Zhambyl oblasts. The road section in Karaganda begins from km
1855 and passes through Aktogai district of Karaganda oblast between Balkhash and Saryshagan villages; the
road section in Zhambyl oblast starts at km 2005 to km 2152 km and passes through several villages, i.e.
Kashkan Teniz village (1 km from the road), Mynaral village (7 km from the road), Ulken village (is relating to
Almaty oblast and passes in 9 km from the road), Shyganak village (1 km from the road), Burylbaital village
(0,5 km from the road) of Moiynkum district. The road alignment goes partially along the shore of Lake
Balkhash. The alignment area is characterized by semi-desert landscape with complex geological structure,
and includes river valleys fed by groundwater sources or originating from mountain areas. As informed by
the ESIA, it was concluded that the section of the road in Karaganda oblast passes through conservation
zones, while a small section of the existing road in Moyynkum District of Zhambyl Oblast runs through a site
with regulated regime of Zhusandalinskaya State Conservation Area of the National Significance (GZZRZ). No
historical and cultural heritage facilities, as defined in the national legislation, have been found in the section
km 1855-2005 but chance finds procedures will be followed if need be. No endangered species or habitants
of animals listed in the Red Book of Kazakhstan have been encountered along the new alignment.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


 Name                                                         Unit
 Ruxandra Maria Floroiu                                       GEN03
 Mohamed Ghani Razaak                                         GSU03
 Aimonchok Tashieva                                           GSU03
 Rustam Arstanov                                              GEN03
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
       (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

Safeguard Policies                      Triggered             Explanation

                                                             The environmental Category A including for the
                                                             additional road sections is justified given that the
                                                             proposed alignment covers a variety of areas with
                                                             different environmental and social safeguards
                                                             implications such as the need to design road crosses
                                                             and underpasses construction to allow safe trespassing
                                                             of drivers and animals; special mitigation measures to
                                                             protect water resources, or conservation areas; land
                                                             acquisition along specific sections including bypass. The
                                                             proposed works envisage partial reconstruction and
                                                             widening the existing Class II road (last reconstructed
                                                             in 2006) to Class Ib asphalt-concrete covered road,
                                                             from 2 to 4 lanes, with multi-level interchanges,
                                                             bypasses around selected settlements (i.e., on the road
                                                             section km 1955 – km 2005, in the area of Saryagash
                                                             village) but within the existing right of way (70 m),
                                                             almost parallel to the existing road and thus, limiting
                                                             the conversion of land to non-critical land types and
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP                            land use types. The main impacts during construction is
                                        Yes
4.01)                                                        the operation of borrow pits, generation of waste
                                                             (construction materials, spent consumables, household
                                                             waste and wastewater from camps), excessive land
                                                             use, topsoil destruction and erosion. There is also a
                                                             potential impact on groundwater and surface water
                                                             from excessive turbidity and siltation, and accidental
                                                             spills involving fuels and lubricants. There will be no
                                                             significant disruption of natural habitats and
                                                             ecosystems by the additional road sections
                                                             construction and operation. During operation,
                                                             environmental risks would be linked to road storm
                                                             drainage management, soils, ground and surface water
                                                             pollution, noise, dust, and air pollution.
                                                             In order to address the vulnerability to climate change,
                                                             the Client has adopted some climate resilient road
                                                             design standards, with specific measures for road
                                                             pavement construction to better withstand extreme
                                                             seasonal temperature differentials. In addition, snow
                                                             and wind barriers and an elevated road formation are
The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
(CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



                                                      approaches being used to ensure the road performs
                                                      better during snow and floods. These features will help
                                                      the road survive during extreme weather conditions
                                                      such as intensive snow, flood, and wind, as well as
                                                      large winter/summer temperature gradient. Moreover,
                                                      modern road-side service facilities will provide
                                                      emergency services and evacuation points for road-
                                                      users caught in extreme events. The project will
                                                      finance Technical Assistance to design, plan and
                                                      implement e-tolling strategies that will lead to green
                                                      and sustainable growth for road transport. E-tolling
                                                      tariffs will be designed so that heavy vehicles, and
                                                      those with high green-house gas (GHG) emissions pay
                                                      more, a policy approach aimed at promoting a switch
                                                      to cleaner vehicles. The Borrower has prepared the
                                                      ESIA for the entire CSRCP corridor, and an ESMP for
                                                      Balkhash-Burylbaital section (1855-2152 km). The
                                                      projected road expansion from 2 to 4 lane will go along
                                                      the existing road alignment other than the proposed
                                                      by-passes, thus number of people who will be affected
                                                      by the project in connection to the existing road
                                                      rehabilitation and reconstruction will be minimal. Only
                                                      23 persons and properties will be affected by the
                                                      project. It has been found that within the road reserve
                                                      no other properties will be affected. Reconstruction of
                                                      the road may also require temporary land use for the
                                                      entire period of construction to accommodate
                                                      concentrated off-the-way borrows soil, construction
                                                      camps, parking areas for road-building equipment and
                                                      road-building materials warehousing sites. However,
                                                      some of these impacts cannot be verified accurately at
                                                      this stage. A RAP has been prepared which identifies
                                                      broader social impacts including potential land
                                                      acquisitions, PAPs, and mitigation measures. It also
                                                      specifies the procedures to be followed by the
                                                      Government of Kazakhstan through the Committee for
                                                      Roads (CfR) and the Ministry of Investment and
                                                      Development (MID), as well as actions that will be
                                                      taken for proper resettlement and compensation
                                                      payment to the Affected Persons.
                                                      The social management measures, in addition RAP
                                                      implementation, require particular attention to
                                                      provision of cattle crossing, ensuring accessibility to
        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
        (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



                                                              settlements and improvements of the road signage.
                                                              The contractors, through their social and
                                                              environmental management specialist will provide
                                                              regular monitoring and work to ensure feasible
                                                              adjustment needed during construction works in
                                                              consultations with local beneficiaries and project
                                                              affected persons. The previous experience shows that
                                                              the social specialist attached to the Supervision
                                                              Consultant team carry out regular visits to each
                                                              construction site and record concerns and suggestions
                                                              of the affected person and road users. These records
                                                              then shared with the contractor and necessary actions
                                                              were taken to address people’s concerns and their
                                                              suggestions. This has been proved to be a ‘good
                                                              practice’ and a similar exercise will be followed under
                                                              this road section as well.
                                                              An ESIA was cleared and disclosed under the Center
                                                              South Project in 2016 (the CWP was in preparation
                                                              then) and the same ESIA was disclosed again under the
                                                              current project on June 1, 2017. A draft ESMP was
                                                              disclosed on May 31 (local) and June 1, 2017 (English
                                                              version).
                                                              The policy has not been triggered for the original
                                                              project. However, it will apply to the additional
                                                              alignment which runs along the current road through
                                                              Karaganda and Zhambyl oblasts as well as along the
                                                              Balkhash Lake, one of the largest lakes in Central Asia.
                                                              According to the ESIA and ESMP field studies’ findings,
                                                              the sections of the road in Karaganda oblast pass
                                                              through conservation areas. Also, a small section of the
                                                              existing road in Moyynkum District of Zhambyl Oblast
                                                              runs through an area with regulated regime of
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)          Yes                  economic activity located at the Northern boundary of
                                                              Zhusandalinskaya State Conservation Area. Based on
                                                              the ESIA, there is no indication of concentration of rare
                                                              or endangered species of this conservation area in the
                                                              proximity of the additional road sections considered
                                                              for this restructuring. Also, no regular or seasonal
                                                              strong movement of animals has been observed in this
                                                              area. The detailed designs incorporate specific
                                                              adequate elements such as bridges over rivers, culverts
                                                              and cattle and agricultural underpasses that will serve
                                                              aspotential routs for random movement of animals in
        The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
        (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



                                                              the area of the alignment. The draft ESMP
                                                              acknowledges potential impacts on natural habitats
                                                              and includes relevant mitigation measures for
                                                              contractors during works.
                                                              The project does not involve forestry operations; no
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No                  significant impacts on forests are expected and the
                                                              policy remains not triggered as for the original project.
                                                              As in the original project, the policy will not be
                                                              triggered for the additional road sections. No
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No
                                                              pesticides or herbicides are foreseen to be purchased
                                                              or used for control of the roadside vegetation.
                                                              The policy was triggered by the original project given
                                                              the location of one PCR site identified on the
                                                              considered alignment. In accordance with Kazakhstan
                                                              legislation, PCRs that might be located within the
                                                              protected zone of 200 meters from the road could be
                                                              directly affected by works and as such the Client needs
                                                              to prepare specific PCR Action Plans (APPCR). For the
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP                          additional sections considered under the restructuring,
                                          Yes
4.11)                                                         no PCR sites have been identified close to the
                                                              additional road sections (1855 km -2005 km) on the
                                                              existing alignment. However, the policy remains
                                                              triggered preventively; and in case of more PCRs
                                                              identified in the project area during actual works, the
                                                              national legislation will be implemented accordingly
                                                              (works stopped and specific actions undertaken
                                                              following the advice of the relevant authorities).

                                                              Not applicable as no indigenous peoples live in the
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No
                                                              project area.

                                                              RPF was cleared and disclosed in April 2016. The policy
                                                              is triggered due to anticipated land acquisition and
                                                              resettlement activities primarily related to construction
                                                              works associated with expansion to four lanes from the
                                                              existing two. Additional impacts are expected to allow
                                                              land allocation for parking of the road-building
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes
                                                              equipment, bypasses, borrows pits, construction
                                                              camps, and road-building materials and warehousing
                                                              sites. A RAP has been prepared for the road section.
                                                              The impacts identified are as follows; Extent of lands
                                                              required for permanent and temporary use for the
                                                              road are 1433ha and 942ha respectively. Total number
The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
(CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



                                                      land lots/PAPs are 23 which include both temporary
                                                      and permanent loss of lands. The lands that to be
                                                      acquired are largely belong to the State (except 6 cases
                                                      where the PAPs use State lands on long term rental
                                                      basis). There are no built structures or properties in
                                                      these lands and they are used only for grazing or
                                                      pasture lands for cattle and other livestock. As per the
                                                      preliminary assessments, main adverse impact would
                                                      be loss of grazing lands and all the affected persons will
                                                      be provided with alternative pasture lands in the same
                                                      locality. Lands that required for construction of camps
                                                      and borrow pits to be acquired from the State and/or
                                                      obtained through rental agreement on a temporary
                                                      basis by the contractor, in case of private land. It has
                                                      been agreed that the contractor pays cash
                                                      compensation for rental and materials at replacement
                                                      value rates for the lands acquired. Where willing
                                                      buyer/willing seller is not feasible, an ARAP will be
                                                      prepared based on the RPF. All the lands acquired
                                                      temporarily and on rental basis will restored to original
                                                      status at end of rental.
                                                      The construction activities require both skilled and
                                                      unskilled labor. As per the experience from pervious
                                                      road sections completed through Bank funds,
                                                      contractors may accompany a sizable number of
                                                      outside labor force (It is difficult make an estimate on
                                                      actual size/number required at this stage).
                                                      Nevertheless, influx of labor will be kept minimal and
                                                      project will employ local labor force as much as
                                                      possible for construction works. In order to minimize
                                                      adverse impacts, efforts will be taken establish labor
                                                      camps in locations outside of major settlements to
                                                      ensure no undue social disturbance to local
                                                      communities. The road sections completed under the
                                                      previous Bank support shows that the labor camps
                                                      established by the contractors are managed well and
                                                      no reported incidence of adverse social impacts or
                                                      disputes with local communities. One important
                                                      observations in this regard is most of the outside labor
                                                      force that brought for previous road works belong to
                                                      same cultural/religious         groups     as the local
                                                      communities and therefore social relations between
                                                      outside labor force and local community was cordial
        The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
        (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



                                                              and mutually beneficial. A specific GRM was
                                                              established at local community and camp level to
                                                              address issues related to labor camp management. The
                                                              grievance management and implementation will follow
                                                              the GRM procedures as defined by the RPF/RAP. There
                                                              is an outstanding compliant/issue of borrow pit #4 at
                                                              km 88 of the project. The issue is mainly due to
                                                              following reasons: Lack of constructive dialogue
                                                              between the contractor and the land owner. The land
                                                              owner is skeptical and less confidence on the
                                                              Contractor’s ability to address his concerns. Secondly,
                                                              lack of supervision and effective use of grievance
                                                              redress system. In the existing grievance redress
                                                              mechanism, the complaints first go to the local
                                                              government first and then to the Client. There is no
                                                              evidence in place that complaints are registered and
                                                              monitored by the Supervisor or Contractor. However,
                                                              an agreement has been reached to find an amicable
                                                              solution and the contractor agreed to resolve the issue
                                                              of 20% slope gradient by either additional soil or using
                                                              the existing space of the borrow pit. Nevertheless, in
                                                              order to avoid such situations in future, it is necessary
                                                              to have a liaison staff to resolve the conflict between
                                                              PAPs and Contractor at the ground level. Also the
                                                              exiting GRM of the project level reviewed and
                                                              strengthened to address the issues effective and timely
                                                              manner.
                                                              No additional dam safety issues were identified during
                                                              the ESIA filed visits. There are only small low dykes
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)            No                   required in line with designs for protection of river
                                                              banks or related crossing infrastructures. No large
                                                              reservoirs are located in the additional road sections.
                                                              As in the original project, no international waterways
                                                              will be affected by the additional works. Theses
                                                              sections are boarding the Lake Balkhash which is a
                                                              basin shared by Kazakhstan (downstream riparian), and
Projects on International Waterways
                                         No                   China, with a small part in Kyrgyzstan. The basin drains
(OP) (BP 7.50)
                                                              into the lake via several rivers, of which the Ili River is
                                                              the major one. There are no grounds for triggering the
                                                              policy since China is upstream of the additional
                                                              sections.
        The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
        (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)




Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60) No                      The project is not located in or near disputed areas.




 II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES

 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The design of the additional road sections considered measures for minimization of possible impacts to protect
   environment and the adjacent population from noise (routing, barriers), increase traffic safety by speed controls
   (traffic management plan), pedestrian crossings and underpasses (occupational health safety). It also took into
   account requirements from villagers along the alignment for safe crossings for animals and farm traffic through
   sufficiently dimensioned underpasses, and to facilitate wildlife crossings. Standard procedures for the control and
   mitigation of emissions (dust, noise, exhaust fumes and liquid discharges from camps and the road platform) will be
   followed in line with site specific ESMPs. Wastewater from construction camps will be treated on site before discharge
   into surface streams or rivers. Septic sludge from toilets will either be composted on site or trucked to existing water
   treatment plants along the alignment. Groundwater is not expected to be impacted by the project, as no deep
   excavations are envisaged. Water for the construction activities as well as the camps will be extracted in small
   quantities from existing wells, the public supply system or Lake Balkhash. Borrow pits will be operated by Contractors
   at locations that have been pre-identified by designers and for which both operational and environmental permits
   have been obtained. No borrow pit will be operated without a site specific ESMP that will contain a plan for its closure,
   remediation and re-cultivation approved by the local environmental authorities (as required under Kazakh regulations)
   and by the supervising engineer (who will ensure that international good practice is followed). All environmental
   management measures carried out by Contractors during the construction period will be integrated in the tender
   documents and become part of the works contracts. Monitoring of air, noise and water quality will be done in line
   with parameters listed in national standards and EHS Guidelines.

 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
   Currently, the area of project influence is underdeveloped and there are no known cumulative impacts in relation to
   the implemented road works under the ongoing project. However, the ESIA for CSRP (June 2016) noted that there is
   no information about future infrastructure projects that are planned to be implemented in the region around the
   alignment. For the additional road sections, construction of bridges, overpasses, pedestrian and animal passes;
   culverts; rest areas; drainage channels and other road infrastructure have been advised where required by the
   detailed design and informed by environmental and social impact assessment as well as the consultation process.
   Road widening will take place mainly within the ROW of the existing road and no potential irreversible indirect and/or
   long-term impacts are expected. The construction of bypass will involve greenfield construction across open space and
   agricultural areas. Land plots that are subject to acquisition have been identified in line with the detailed design and
   relevant RAPs drafted. During operation the functionality of noise and traffic safety measures will be monitored and
   maintained as done for the original project. Any required modifications, upgrades or additions (e.g. issues relating to
   pedestrian safety or to excessive road kills of domestic or wild animals) will be flagged and integrated into the road
   repair and maintenance plans for rectification. As the road corridor already exists no significant impacts are expected
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
       (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



  from induced or secondary development. While traffic volumes are expected to increase the optimized alignment will
  reduce environmental stress in the long term. The road will not contribute to habitat fragmentation in addition to the
  impacts already in place from historic economic activity.

3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Road section alignment alternatives have been considered for bypasses, bridges, interchanges, etc. during the detailed
  designs to address presence or proximity of nature protected areas, physical cultural resources, environmentally
  sensitive elements of environment (e.g. rivers, lakes, wetlands), residential areas, sensitive receptors (i.e. schools,
  hospitals, daycare facilities, elderly housing and convalescent facilities). Based on the detailed designs for the 6
  specific sections for the Balkhash-Burybaital road (1855-2152 km), given that the alignment of these sections primarily
  follow the existing road, only alternatives for the bypasses at village Saryshagan have been analyzed. In this case, the
  final alignment will cross the railway tracks twice, and road overpasses will be constructed accordingly at each
  location. The proposed alignment and routing of bypasses has been chosen as having most socio-economic benefits
  and minimal potential negative environmental and social impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  For the ongoing project, environmental compliance is generally moderately satisfactory as per several assessment
  missions carried out by the Bank. The isolated re-cultivation issue at the borrow pit lot 2 remains to be addressed by
  CR (Bank will carry out an environmental audit of all pits used as informed by detailed designs). Environmental impacts
  of the additional road sections are standard for road widening and new alignment. Physical-geographical location and
  geotechnical conditions are similar to conditions under EWRP. Mitigation measures to minimize potential negative
  environmental impacts are provided in site-specific ESMPs, which implementation will be monitored by the
  Supervision Engineer and the Client. The Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRMs) are in place at all sites. Contactors
  tend to solve grievances in close collaboration with local authorities. In relation with the additional Balkhash-
  Burylbaital road construction, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), including generic ESMP
  Framework was prepared by the CR as part of the Center South Corridor Project. These documents were approved by
  the Bank and disclosed in country and at the Bank on May 6, 2016 (ESIA) and on April, 27, 2016 (RPF). Furthermore, an
  updated set of ESMP and RAP were prepared for the Balkhash-Burylbaital road sections in line with specific detailed
  designs for each 6 road sections; they will be integrated into civil works contracts to create contractual obligations for
  proper environmental supervision (including occupational health and safety aspects). ESMP will be revised by
  contractors to address final costs for mitigation measures and monitoring actions if required. In addition to
  resettlement related impacts, labor influx issues will be assessed and addressed systematically. As per the experience
  gained under the ongoing project, works generate a sizable number of outside labor force (about 500 per
  USD100million). Labor influx will be kept minimal as contractors employ mainly local workers. The road sections
  completed under the previous Bank support shows that camps sites established by contractors are managed well with
  no incidence of adverse social impacts or disputes with local communities. Also outside labor force brought for
  previous road works belong to same cultural/religious groups as the local communities. The risks related to labor
  influx is minimal and managed carefully. Site specific environmental documentation have been kept on file.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders of the road are: the Committee for Roads, an agency of the Government of Kazakhstan, as the
  project proponent; commercial and private road users, who will be the primary beneficiaries from improved road
  quality; and PAPs such as the residents of communities along the road, farmers, herders, and proprietors of roadside
          The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
          (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



    services. For this last group there will be benefits as well as some disadvantages and negative impacts caused by the
    project. To ensure that all stakeholders' views and concerns are duly reflected in project design and implementation,
    and environmental and social safeguards instruments fully capture the baseline situation, the expected impacts and
    the views and concerns of the PAPs, two sets of consultations were undertaken during the preparation of the CSRP
    project, covering also the Balakash-Burylbaital road sections (1855 km-2152 km); such consultations took place
    starting in June 2015 in villages along the alignment in Karagandy and Zhambyl oblast and continued up to June 2016.
    The ESIA was disclosed in May 2016 and followed by additional public consultations held on May 6 2016, with
    participation of residents from the nearby settlements located along the alignment in Karagandy and Zhambyl oblasts.
    The draft ESMP and RAP relevant to the 6 road sections covering the Balakash-Burylbaital road (1855 km-2152 km)
    have been reviewed by the Bank and disclosed in country and on the Bank external website in May 2017, after
    revisions were addressed in line with detailed designs. The grievance management and implementation will follow the
    GRM procedures as defined by the RPF/RAP and will be applied to both safeguards and all other project related
    grievances, including health, safety, and labor influx issues. The social management measures, in addition RAP
    implementation, require particular attention to provision of animal and cattle passes, ensuring accessibility to
    settlements and improvements of the road signage. The contractors, through their social and environmental
    management specialist will provide regular monitoring and work to ensure feasible adjustment needed during
    construction works in consultations with local beneficiaries and project affected persons.


 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS


Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
12-May-2017                                                    26-May-2017
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
06-Jun-2016
“In country? Disclosure
Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
Kazakhstan                                                     26-May-2017
Comments
Updated ESIA for the proposed CSRCP including the Balkhash-Burylbaital road section was disclosed on project's website
on June 6, 2016; the relevant English version and the Executive Summary was disclosed in Washington, DC in former
Infoshop on June 6, 2016. The same ESIA applicable to this restructuring has been re-disclosed on WB external website
on May, 26, 2017. Draft ESMP for the Balkhash-Burylbaital road section prepared recently for the purpose of this
restructuring has been disclosed in country and on the WBG external website in May 2017. The ESM{ for the Balkash -
Byrylbaital will be updated, finalized and disclosed before the presentation to the Board.

Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
           (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



Date of receipt by the Bank                                      Date of submission for disclosure
30-Jan-2012                                                       27-Feb-2012
“In country? Disclosure
 Country                                                           Date of Disclosure
 Kazakhstan                                                        26-May-2016
 Comments
 RPF was disclosed on April 2016. Draft RAP is disclosed locally and on external website of the Bank on 26th May 2017.
 The RAP will be finalized and disclosed again prior to the signing of civil works contracts.



C. COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL


OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                      Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and
                                                                                                       Yes
approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                     Yes


OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                                                                                       No
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical)
                                                                                                       Yes
natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?


OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources

Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                    Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts
                                                                                                       Yes
on cultural property?


OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as
                                                                                                       Yes
appropriate) been prepared?
         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         East-West Roads Project (Almaty-Korgos Section): Western Europe - Western China International Transit Corridor
         (CAREC - 1b) (P128050)



If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review
                                                                                                     Yes
the plan?




The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     Yes
disclosure?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local                 Yes
NGOs?


All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
                                                                                                     Yes
for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                   Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
                                                                                                     Yes
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and
                                                                                                     Yes
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?


 III. APPROVALS


                                            Jacques Bure
  Task Team Leader(s)
                                            Aliya Karakulova


  Approved By

  Safeguards Advisor                        Nina Chee                                06-Jun-2017

  Practice Manager/Manager                  Binyam Reja                              06-Jun-2017
