INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13234
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Turkey                     Project ID:  P151739
Project Name: Turkey Geothermal Development Project (P151739)
Task Team       Shinya Nishimura,Pierre Audinet
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Oct-2015                Estimated    04-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEO3                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other Renewable Energy (80%), General energy sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (20%), Infrastructure services for private sector development
(80%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     352.30            Total Bank Financing:  250.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   62.50
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     250.00
Clean Technology Fund                                                      39.80
Total                                                                     352.30
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to scale up private sector investment in geothermal energy
development in Turkey.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 12


﻿The project proposes to achieve the Objective by providing support to overcome the barriers, as per
following; (i) by reducing the risks taken on by the private sector in the exploratory phases, and (ii)
by providing access to long-term financing for the resourcedevelopment phases.
O
Component 1: Risk Sharing Mechanism for Resource Validation (USD 39.8 million, CTF grant)
This component aims to promote private sector development of renewable geothermal energy
projects in the early stage geothermal exploratory and confirmation drilling stages by sharing the risk
of failing to validate a geothermal resource among two parties: the administrator of a Risk Sharing
Mechanism (RSM), capitalized by a CTF contingent recovery grant, and the geothermal developer (i.
e. the beneficiary). In case a well fails to yield outputs at a level of well productivity pre-agreed
between the RSM and the beneficiary, the RSM will cover a pre-defined percentage of the drilling
expenditures incurred by the beneficiary. This percentage will be 40 percent for projects located
within the administrative boundaries of Aydin, Denizli and Manisa in the Aegean region (or whose
largest share of the project area is located in within those boundaries) and 60 percent in those located
elsewhere in the country, which will encourage exploration in new areas, where the resource risk is
generally higher given that limited or no previous exploration activities have been carried out by
General Directorate of Mineral Research and Exploration (MTA).
The RSM will screen potential beneficiary applications based upon a clear and pre-defined set of
technical, financial and corporate eligibility criteria to ensure that potential beneficiaries have carried
out the appropriate surface exploration studies and have the necessary technical and financial
capacity to complete the resource validation process (i.e. exploration and confirmation drilling) they
plan to undertake. Selected beneficiaries will apply a pre-established well testing methodology,
which will provide the results (i.e. enthalpy and flow) against which success and failure will be
determined.
In case of failure, the RSM will cover the agreed percentage of the beneficiaries' drilling program
expenditures (60 or 40 percent depending upon the location of the concession as explained above). In
Q)       the case of success, the beneficiary will be required to contribute to the RSM a "success fee" of 10
percent of the planned incurred expenditures, as a way to reduce the rate of depletion of the RSM
capital and maximize the number of projects to be supported. This percentage has been established to
balance on the one side the capacity of the RSM to revolve its funds around the largest number of
projects and on the other side, the willingness to pay of beneficiaries. The capacity of the RSM to
revolve its funds is influenced in large part by the expected success rates to be achieved, currently
estimated at 55 percent in the exploration phase in Turkey.
This component also includes a technical assistance component for (i) capacity strengthening of the
geothermal team at the GDRE to supervise implementation of the RSM, and (ii) consultancy support
to GDRE to facilitate implementation of the RSM (GDRE will hire a consultant to establish and
operate the RSM, and to help ensure that MENR is technically capable to take over RSM operations
before the end of the project).
The General Directorate of Renewable Energy (GDRE) and the General Directorate of External
Relations and EU Affairs (GDEU) of the Ministry of Energy and Natural Resources (MENR) will be
the implementing agencies for the RSM.
Page 2 of 12


﻿Component 2: Loan Facility for Resource Development (US$ 250 million, IBRD loan)
This component aims to address the financing gap that license holders face today in the resource
development stages of geothermal project development by providing debt financing to encourage and
O
U         support both license holders and financiers investing in (i) the capacity/production drilling stage and
(ii) the steam gathering and power plant construction stage.
The Project will capitalize a credit line to financial intermediaries (FIs) with an IBRD loan, which
will be co-financed with FIs' own resources. The FIs will on-lend at market rates, but offer longer
tenors than currently available in the market, to geothermal developers at the capacity drilling stage
and at the construction stage. FIs will also provide co-financing to the Facility from its own
resources. Once the capacity drilling stage is completed, the borrower (i.e. the project sponsor) shall
be required to publicly disclose basic information about its potential project. The information will be
disclosed through the project website that will be created for the RSM. This disclosure is intended to
expand the financing opportunities of the project sponsor and to avoid market distortion through
limits on access to information. The details of the disclosure will be included into the loan agreement
between the financial intermediary and the sub-borrower.
The Loan Facility for Resource Development will be open to any geothermal development that has
reached the capacity drilling stage, regardless of whether it benefited or not from the Risk Sharing
Mechanism under Component 1. Once the capacity drilling is completed, the FI may proceed to
provide additional funds to the sub-borrowers for the construction of the geothermal facility.
The Industrial Development Bank of Turkey (TSKB) and the Development Bank of Turkey (TKB)
will be the financial intermediaries implementing this Component. A share of TSKB's and TKB's
co-financing for this component will be dedicated to capacity strengthening on geothermal specific
technical support. Specifically, this may include support of consultants for technical assessment, due
diligence and monitoring of investments, who would be available to the Fl's team on a needs basis
and at their request.
O
U         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
0
Exact location of the sub-projects to be supported under both components is currently unknown.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Arzu Uraz (GSURR)
Esra Arikan (GENDR)
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (OPSPF)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project has been assigned Category 'Fl' in accordance
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               with World Bank safeguard policy OP/BP/GP 4.01
(Environmental Assessment), this has been confirmed by
the Quality unit as well. Under the first component there
will be exploration-drilling activities, which will be
conducted by 3-4 different drilling companies. Under the
second component private companies will borrow from
Page 3 of 12


﻿TSKB or TKB (FIs of the project) for capacity drilling
activities. It is estimated that both the exploration and
capacity drilling phases of the project will be categorized
as 'B' under OP 4.01, as the types of potential impacts are
expected to be limited and be relatively easy to assess and
mitigate through careful siting and good drilling practices.
Sub-projects (exploration and development) in critical or
sensitive natural habitats will be excluded, and the details
about screening projects accordingly will be explained in
the environmental framework document.
Main environmental issues related to exploration and
capacity drilling phases will be: site preparation, topsoil
management and prevention of soil contamination,
storage and disposal of drill muds, managing the
prevention of contamination of aquifers, monitoring of
gas emissions (C02, H2S, etc.) from the wells,
management and monitoring of geothermal water
discharges (during exploration - Component 1 and
capacity drilling - Component 2) and monitoring of water
quality in the vicinity of drilling area, monitoring noise
during drilling works, construction of access roads,
closure of wells/rehabilitation of areas if the wells are
identified to be unsuccessful, etc. It is not possible to
assess the potential risk of ground water contamination by
geothermal activities in advance of the project as the
implementation sites have not yet been determined.
However, it is known that if geothermal drilling is carried
out according to best practices regarding use of drilling
fluids and well casing there is very unlikely that
geothermal water can contaminate ground water aquifers.
The direct environmental impacts of exploratory drilling
(Component 1) are expected to be minimal, although the
predictable drilling expansion and power plant
development following successful exploration must be
regarded as a linked (induced) impact. The ESMF for
Component 1 outlines the best practices in exploration,
drilling and well management to be followed by the sub-
borrower and the monitoring protocols to be followed for
adequate supervision. For sub-projects that did not benefit
from the risk sharing mechanism under Component 1 but
are applying for capacity drilling financing under
Component 2, the ESMF provides guidance for TSKB
and TKB to carry out a simple "due diligence" audit to
confirm that the exploratory phase was carried out in an
acceptable manner, consistent with national laws and the
Page 4 of 12


﻿principles of the WB Safeguard Policies. The gaps
between national environmental screening and assessment
procedures and WB safeguard policies have been detailed
in the ESMF, and the ESMF specifies that where there are
differences the more stringent requirements will apply.
The ESMF also provides guidance on risk screening of
proposed sub-projects (including assessment of potential
cumulative impacts), mitigation measures to reduce/
manage potential adverse impacts, and recommendations
for "best practice" technologies such as re-using CO2 and
excess heat for productive purposes.
The locations and the scope of sub-projects will be
identified during the project implementation and relevant
environmental assessment documents will be prepared
according to sub-project categorization. As detailed in the
ESMFs, it is expected that for component 2 sub-projects
will be reviewed by TSKB or TKB for having national
environmental clearances and then necessary
environmental assessment documentation in line with OP
4.01 requirements will be completed by the sub-borrower.
Sub-project partial EAs/EMPs will be submitted to WB
for prior review and after getting no-objections these will
be disclosed in client's/sub-borrower's websites and will
be included in the corresponding bidding documents and/
or contracts of the investment projects. The environmental
and social management framework (ESMFs) have also
been prepared by the clients (all 3 FIs) and disclosed (in
DRAFT form) both in country and in Infoshop.
The TA component of the project will also need to
comply with OP 4.01 and therefore it will be ensured that
the TORs for the consultants to be hired for TA studies
covers the safeguard issues related to OP 4.01.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The exploration and capacity drilling activities
4.04                                 (component l and 2) may take place in rural areas which
are potential natural habitats. Therefore, the policy is
considered to be triggered to be on the safe side.
According to this policy, the projects which do not create
any significant adverse impacts on natural habitats and
that are not placed in critical natural habitats will be
eligible for financing. In general, impacts on ecological
resources can be low to moderate and localized during
exploration, drilling and plant operations. Activities such
as site clearing and grading, road construction, well
drilling, ancillary facility construction, and vehicle traffic
have the potential to affect ecological resources by
Page 5 of 12


﻿disturbing habitat, increasing erosion and runoff, and
creating noise at the project site. Issues related to impacts
on natural habitats will be detailed in the EAs and ESMPs
that will be prepared for the sub-projects under
Component 1 and 2.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural        No            Sub-projects will not be conducted in culturally sensitive
Resources OP/BP 4.11                   areas. But in any case, whether or not they are in historic
areas, any sub-project ESMPs/partial EAs will include
procedures and responsibilities for managing accidentally
discovered or chance find cultural artifacts. Consideration
of such concerns is provided in the works contracts that
will include requirements that the contractor is obliged to
look for chance finds and immediately stop work at the
contested location and alert responsible authorities in case
of chance finds, and only continue works after official
approvals from the responsible authorities are secured.
Since the national regulations on the conservation of
cultural properties are strict, it is not anticipated that any
additional requirements would arise from the World Bank
safeguard policies.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes           The footprints of a geothermal power plants requires land
o         OP/BP 4.12                             acquisition for the power plant itself, multiple wells, the
network of interconnecting pipework, a transformer
station, electricity transmission lines to connect to the
grid, access roads and administrative offices.
Accordingly, the World Bank Operational Policy 4.12 on
Involuntary Land Acquisition has been triggered.
In Turkey, the general practice is for the private
developers initially to approach land owners through a
willing buyer-willing seller process. This land acquisition
is considered voluntary as the company has some
flexibility for the siting of wells, and uses this power to
avoid involuntary land acquisition where it can and to
avoid impacts on residential plots. Barring voluntary sale,
the private developer needs to apply to the Provincial
Administration for expropriation procedures during the
exploration and productions stages, or to EMRA and the
Ministry of Finance during the generation stage. In short,
expropriation will be conducted by multiple parties and at
Page 6 of 12


﻿different times. Likely, when the developer is accessing
World Bank financing, some of the land acquisition will
have been completed, for which the developer will
conduct a social audit and a mitigation plan if necessary,
and some of the land acquisition will take place during
project financing, for which the developer will prepare a
RAP outlining how the involuntary land acquisition will
take place.
Since the sub-projects are not known at this time, three
Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs) were prepared
by GDRE, TSKB and TKB in compliance with the policy.
The RPFs outline in detail the expropriation procedures
for geothermal development in Turkey, World Bank's OP
4.12 policy on involuntary resettlement, a gap analysis,
steps to bridge these gaps and institutional
responsibilities.
The RPFs have been prepared by the clients and disclosed
(in draft form) in country and in Infoshop.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No       FI is responsible for ensuring that the projects financed
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                are located/depending on national waterways only. The
waterways identified as NOT an international waterway
(do not trigger OP 7.50) in Turkey are namely: Susurluk,
North Aegean, Gediz, Kuquk Menderes, Buyuk
Menderes, Western Mediterranean, Antalya, Sakarya,
Western Black Sea, Yesilirmak, Kizilirmak, Konya
Kapali, Eastern Mediterranean, Seyhan, Ceyhan, Eastern
Black Sea, Burdur, Afyon, Orta Anadolu, and Van. The
ESMFs provide additional guidance on this policy. In
addition, there are three transboundary aquifers in Turkey.
The first, known as "Svilegrad/Orestiada" is in the
northern border area between Bulgaria-Greece-Turkey.
The second, known as "Evros/Meric" is along the Greece-
Turkey border while the third, known as the
"Topolovgrad karst waterbearing massif' is on the
Bulgaria-Turkey border. FIs will also be responsible for
avoiding these aquifers during drilling works.
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Page 7 of 12


﻿A. Exploration phase: Impacts from surface exploration activities are expected to be minimal or
non-existent. Potential impacts from exploratory drilling activities will be similar to those of
production/capacity drilling and are discussed below.
B. Resource Development and Power Plant Development Phases: Most potential environmental
and social impacts of geothermal development are associated to the resource and power plant
development phases.
o
These impacts include:
-Fluids involved in geothermal drilling and production: Effluents of geothermal development
projects can be classified as i) drilling fluids; ii) spent geothermal fluids; iii) reject water from
injection wells; iv) well cleaning water (for clogging); and v) domestic waste water.
-Drilling Mud (water based or oil based)
-Groundwater :Potential impacts on groundwater during the different phases of a geothermal
project can range from low to high. Survey activities would typically have little or no impact on
groundwater. If geothermal drilling is carried out according to best practices regarding use of
drilling fluids and well casing there is very unlikely that geothermal water will contaminate
ground water aquifers.
-Surface water sources : Impacts on water resources during the different stages of project
development would range from low to high. Surface exploration activities will have little or no
impact on surface water.
-Solid waste:- Geothermal exploratory drilling projects do not generate substantial amounts of
solid waste. Apart from drilling mud, other wastes produced by drilling include used oil and
filters, spilled fuel, spent and unused solvents, scrap metal, pipe dope, etc.
-Noise : Primary sources of noise associated with exploration and drilling wells include drill rig
operations, seismic surveys, blasting, earth-moving equipment (related to road, well pad, and sump
pit construction), and vehicle traffic.
-Air emissions : Presence and concentration of potential air pollutants varies depending on the
characteristics of the geothermal resource. Hydrogen sulfide and mercury are the most toxic air
pollutants contained in geothermal fluids but geothermal fluids also contain environmentally
O
Q)          sensitive gases such as carbon dioxide and methane. Release of these gases can lead to
occupational health and safety problems, especially in confined spaces within power plants and
well head cellars and during initial discharge.
-Well blowouts and pipeline ruptures : Although not common, well blowouts can occur during the
drilling and operation stages of a geothermal project.
-Land use : In general, impacts on land use due to geothermal activities are temporary and
localized. These activities could create a temporary disturbance in the immediate vicinity of
surveying or drilling sites.
-Well abandonment : At the end of operation of a well or if a well fails to provide thermal
groundwater, therefore wells will be closed with concrete.
-Expropriation : From social point of view, development of geothermal resources may involve
occupation of large areas depending on the scale of project (i.e. number of wells, length of
pipelines, and size of power plant and separator stations). Hence, a land acquisition process is
implemented.
-Other social impacts and community health and safety: The construction period creates impacts
on the current infrastructure such as roads and irrigation.
- Occupational Health and safety: Major health and safety issues in geothermal projects comprise
the potential for exposure to i) geothermal gases; ii) confined spaces; iii) heat; and iv) noise. In
addition, the use of acids for well cleaning will be conducted by taking all precautionary measures
Page 8 of 12


﻿and by using protective equipment.
All of the above mentioned potential impacts and suggested mitigation measures&monitoring
arrangements have been discussed in the Environmental and Social Management FW (ESMF)
document which was disclosed publicly. In addition, impacts relevant to the sub-projects will be
assessed via sub-project EA documents.
The footprint of a geothermal power plant requires land acquisition for the power plant itself,
multiple wells, the network of interconnecting pipework, a transformer station, electricity
transmission lines to connect to the grid, access roads and administrative offices. Land acquisition
occurs gradually, starting with only a few well areas (about 0.5 hectares each) for the exploration
drilling and ending with the full footprint described above for a plant in operation. When
developers are having well areas expropriated, the remaining land of the owner may be left with
"holes" and not viable for livelihoods or farming. Similarly, the lattice of interconnecting pipes
(about 2 meters wide, insta 1led above ground) can have a more significant impact compared to
just the base area for land acquisition due to dividing farmers' plots and cutting off access for
people, animals and machinery. Potential impacts of piecemeal expropriation on the livelihoods of
farmers is assessed in the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). In these cases, expropriation of
all of the owner's land or other mitigation measures may be necessary.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Extracting geothermal fluids could also cause drawdowns in connected aquifers, potentially
affecting flow from geothermal springs. The potential for these types of adverse effects is
moderate to high depending on the hydrological conditions. This impact (if arises) will be reduced
through extensive aquifer testing and proper geothermal development planning. Monitoring wells
should also be opened to monitor water levels. In terms of the quantity of resource, cumulative
impacts that are caused by multiple producers (i.e. sponsors) using the same reservoir are
important, and should be taken into consideration when there are two or more geothermal projects
in same geothermal reservoir.But this issue is already assessed for the technical feasibilities of the
projects happening in the same area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Project alternatives will be assessed by each project sponsor and will be detailed in the ESMPs
prepared during their application under Component 1 and 2.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The main counterpart for the first component will be MENR, which will hire an expert consultant
to establish and operate the Risk Sharing Mechanism. This consultant will be a firm with adequate
skills to manage application rounds; to screen applicants according to pre-established financial and
technical criteria, including environmental and social; to prepare legal agreements between the
Mechanism and the applicants; to review claims of a failed well by applicants, and to recommend
the execution of payments to the DGRE. The Operations Manual for the Mechanism will outline
all the procedures to be followed by DGRE and by the consultant. The institutional capacity of
GDRE and their consultants to implement WB's safeguard policies as well as the actual
implementation of the ESMF will be monitored by the WB team during the project preparation
and implementation phases.
Page 9 of 12


﻿TSKB and TKB will be the FIs bank for the second component. Both have significant experience
regarding implementing national and WB policies in environmental and social safeguards.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared by each
O
borrower (GDRE, TSKB and TKB) to set a technical guidance in organizing and handling
environmental and social assessment and management for projects whose specific location and
characteristics (e.g. dimensions, design) are yet to be defined. The ESMFs present the necessary
compliance requirements for prospective investments to achieve approval of national laws as well
as the provisions of the World Bank Operational Policy 4.01.
Since the sub-projects are not known at this time, three Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs)
were prepared in compliance with the policy. The Resettlement Policy Frameworks prepared by
GDRE, TSKB and TKB outline in detail the expropriation procedures for geothermal development
in Turkey, World Bank's OP 4.12 policy on involuntary resettlement, a gap analysis, steps to
bridge these gaps and institutional responsibilities. During project implementation, GDRE, with
support of the RSM consultant, and TSKB/TKB will screen sub-projects for financing, ensure the
preparation of a social audit and/or RAP as necessary by the private developer, and submit for
World Bank review and clearance prior to financing of infrastructure. GDRE, TSKB and TKB will
also oversee and supervise the implementation of these RAPs. TSKB and TKB fully understand
the World Bank's social safeguards requirements and have high capacity to monitor social impacts
thanks to a longstanding relationships with several international finance institutions. GDRE is
currently not familiar with such safeguard policies. Accordingly, the RSM consultant will be
required to possess capacity to oversee and implement the ESMF and RPF and to build capacity in
GDRE as necessary.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
For all Category A and B sub-projects proposed for WB financing, the borrower consults project-
affected groups and NGOs about the project's environmental aspects and takes their views into
account. For meaningful consultations between the borrower and project-affected groups and local
NGOs on all Category A and B projects proposed for WB financing, the borrower provides
relevant material (in local language) in a timely manner prior to consultation and in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to the groups being consulted. Detailed
description of public consultation process is provided in the ESMF documents.
Formal public consultation meetings will be help during preparation of RAPs with affected people.
More broadly, community support will be sought through timely consultations and sub-project
level grievance redress mechanisms will be set up to resolve concerns as they arise. Both
consultations and grievance mechanisms will take into account the different needs and concerns of
men and women.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 10 of 12


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Turkey                                                     05-Oct-2015
Comments: The project has 3 implementing agencies (FIs) which are DG Renewable Energy,
TKB and TSKB. The ESMF has been disclosed as 'Draft' by all of the FIs on their
respective websites. Date of in country disclosures are: October 5, 2015 (for TSKB);
October 15, 2015 (for DGRE); October 19, 2015 (for TKB).
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                12-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             12-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Turkey                                                     05-Oct-2015
Comments: The project has 3 implementing agencies (FIs) which are DG Renewable Energy,
TKB and TSKB. The RPF has been disclosed as 'Draft' by all of the FIs on their
respective websites. Date of in country disclosures are: October 5, 2015 (for TSKB);
October 15, 2015 (for DGRE); October 19, 2015 (for TKB).
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Page 11 of 12


﻿Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ]  No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
a          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shinya Nishimura,Pierre Audinet
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                   Date: 09-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)              Date: 12-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


