INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 137
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ghana                      Project ID:  P145765
Project Name: Ghana Climate Innovation Center (P145765)
Task Team       Michael Ehst,Diletta Doretti
Leader(s):
Estimated       20-Feb-2015                Estimated    01-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCID                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      SME Finance (34%), Other Renewable Energy (33%), Agro-industry, marketing,
and trade (33%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (50%), Technology diffusion (25%), Micro, Small and Medium
Enterprise support (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
0                                                                             .0
Total Project Cost:      17.20            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
InfoDev                                                                    17.20
Total                                                                      17.20
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the project is to support entrepreneurs and SMEs involved in developing profitable
and locally-appropriate solutions to climate change and increase business activity in the climate
technology sector through the establishment of a locally based climate innovation center.
Page 1 of 8


﻿3. Project Description
The proposed project would finance the establishment of a Climate Innovation Center (CIC) in
Ghana through a five year $17.2 million grant package (consisting of two recipient executed grants).
The GCIC project is based on the Ghana Climate Innovation Center Business Plan that is the result
of an infoDev led feasibility study and stakeholder engagement process carried out in 2013. The
GCIC Business Plan is available at http://www.infodev.org/ghana-CIC-business-plan
a        The Business Plan was reviewed and approved for publication by the World Bank in December 2013.
(a)    Project Background and Context
The GCIC's business model and associated services are dependent on, and tailored to, the local
market. To identify market needs, opportunities and challenges from a local perspective, infoDev
developed the GCIC business plan through a detailed analysis and an extensive in-country, multi-
stakeholder engagement process. Over a nine month period in 2013, infoDev undertook a concept
validation workshop, a landscape and market analysis, a preliminary budget model, a quantitative
survey of entrepreneurs and other stakeholders, and in person interviews and focused group
discussions with more than 250 stakeholders in Accra, Kumasi, Takoradi and Tamale to explore the
key barriers to climate technology commercialization and assist in the development and design of
appropriate solutions to overcome barriers. The custom-designed CIC model for the GCIC is based
on the gaps and challenges identified through this stakeholder engagement process.
Selection of Implementation Partners (Grant Recipient)
The grant recipient and its consortium partners have been identified through an open and competitive
selection process. Following a request for expressions of interest (EOI) launched in March 2014 a
public information session was held in April 2014 with local organizations interested in establishing
the GCIC. 24 EOls were received, representing 60 organizations from 15 countries. Following their
evaluation, the review team short-listed 6 consortiums, who were invited to submit a full proposal in
June 2014. Five short-listed consortiums submitted full proposals, all of which were reviewed and
scored by the selection panel. The evaluation was completed with in-person meetings held with each
consortium during July 2014 that enabled each consortium to present their proposal and for the
selection committee members to get a better understanding of the team and location suggested to
establish the GCIC.
(b)    Project Overview
The GCIC will offer a full suite of financing and capacity building services to Ghanaian
technologists, entrepreneurs and new ventures that address challenges to starting and scaling their
climate (clean) technology businesses in sectors such as renewable energy, climate smart agriculture,
energy efficiency and water management and purification. In addition to incubating promising start-
ups, the GCIC will provide dedicated proof-of-concept and seed capital funding to entrepreneurs to
bridge local funding gaps. In parallel to investments, the GCIC also provides business advisory and
training services, market development services, access to product testing facilities and government
engagement on policy. In this way, a CIC acts as a national focal point, coordinating efforts in
promoting the growth of locally relevant climate sectors. CICs also provide a platform to create
international business-to-business linkages, enhance knowledge sharing and facilitate trade.
Page 2 of 8


﻿The model for the GCIC is built around five main service lines, each of which will support the
delivery of various programs that Ghanaian stakeholders have identified as being essential for
successfully developing climate technology businesses. These service lines are (i) entrepreneurship
and venture acceleration, (ii) access to finance, (iii) market growth and access, (iv) technology and
O
U         product development, and (v) policy and regulatory support.
Early stage investments in SMEs will make up over half of the financing under the project. The
GCIC seed capital facility will focus on those innovative companies that are at a stage of
development when they require financing for further market testing and business model validation,
leading to a full market roll-out. The GCIC will pioneer an innovative financing model - among the
first of its kind in the region -by investing patient capital (in the form of equity, debt and/or related
instruments) along with high engagement management and technical assistance. It will target
companies that have the potential for a positive financial return on investment while also creating
social, economic and/or environmental impact. These will include companies developing promising -
but unproven - business models in renewable energy (on-grid, off-grid, and home-based products
such as solar lighting or cook-stoves), water/sanitation and climate-related agriculture. To maximize
deal flow however, portfolio companies for the seed capital facility will include but not be limited to
GCIC clients. Expected returns from the investments will go towards ongoing GCIC operations in
order to enhance the sustainability of the GCIC.
Based on an assessment of 15 climate technology sectors, five technology sectors were identified as
being those that will be the priority focus of the GCIC, listed below in order of importance:
*      Energy Efficiency (industrial and household)
*      Domestic Waste Management
*      Solar Energy
*      Water Management and Purification
*      Climate Smart Agriculture
Other technology areas among the 15 that were also considered to be important included hydro
U         power, improved building design and construction, clean/efficient transportation technologies, power
distribution/storage and biomass energy. These will be included as secondary priority areas for the
GCIC.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
*        analysis (if known)
The CIC will be housed at the Ashesi University campus in Accra. However, the exact locations of
sub-project activities are not known at this stage of project development and design. From the five
identified priority technology sectors, it is likely most of the beneficiary subproject activities will be
undertaken within urban, peri-urban and rural areas of Ghana. Ashesi University who are the main
implementing agency of the GCIC project, has prepared an ESMF which includes subproject
screening to identify salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguards risks.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Felix Nii Tettey Oku (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 because the proposed
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                subproject activities could have negative environmental
Page 3 of 8


﻿and social impacts which could harm human health and
the wider environment. A framework approach has been
adopted through the design of ESMF (because the
locations of subproject works are not yet known) to screen
to identify all potential impacts to aid their avoidance,
reduction or mitigation/compensation where necessary.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          Natural habitats are not expected to be significantly
a         4.04                               impacted by the subproject works under the identified five
prioritized technology sectors of the project; all
subprojects that might trigger OP4.04 are eliminated at
the screening stage.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          Forests are not expected to be significantly impacted by
subproject works identified under the five prioritized
technology sectors of the project; all subprojects that
might trigger OP4.36 are eliminated at the screening
stage.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The works to be undertaken under this project are not
expected to trigger this safeguard policy.
Physical Cultural       No          The project will not involve or affect physical cultural
Resources OP/BP 4.11                resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project will not finance activities that involve land
OP/BP 4.12                          acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement or
restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project does not involve dams.
4.37
-        Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
O
Projects in Disputed    No          N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed subproject activities of the five prioritized service lines or technology sector areas
could have potential environmental and social impacts on the human health and within the wider
environment. Main positive potential environmental impact involves through accelerated funding
and technical support to beneficiary SME activities such as (1) Improved conservation and
preservation of water (sustainable water supply, Reduced vulnerability of ecosystem to climatic
events) (2) Improved use of water and domestic waste management (sustainable water supply
through climate technology, reduced vulnerability of ecosystem to climatic events) (3) Increase
employment (Improved conditions for economic growth through removal of barriers for SMEs,
General economic growth through support to beneficiary SMEs and Poverty reduction) (4)
Page 4 of 8


﻿Increase access and affordability of renewable energy supply (Increase supply of renewable energy
from solar based technologies) (5) Increased sustainable supply of agricultural products (Increase
supply of climate smart technologies and products) (6) Greater equity in allocation of water and
sanitation (Increased access to basic sanitation, Increased access to water, reduced rate of water
O
Q)          related diseases and Improved health) (7) Improved quality of domestic waste management
facilities ( Increased access to recycling, reduced rate of waste related diseases and Improved
general environmental and public health).
However notwithstanding the above listed potential positive environmental and social impacts, the
implementation of the SMEs' activities and climate technology ventures could also result in some
negative environmental and social impacts, albeit insignificant in magnitude at both the
installation/construction and operational stages. The negative environmental and social impacts
may include (i) air pollution from both particulate emission sources and dust from construction
related works, (ii) Soil and water pollution from liquid and solid waste generated from subproject
work activities, (iii) WEEE - waste generation from electrical, electronic, and metallic equipment,
which byproducts that would be produced as a result of construction or installation, manufacture
or operation of SMEs activities, (iv) Noise from construction/installation and operation of SME
subproject works, (v) introduction of invasive plant seedlings or species through climate smart
agriculture subproject works, (vi) unsafe occupational health and safety working conditions and
(vii) child labor.
The potential environmental and social impacts are localized and can be easily mitigated. The
project has therefore been categorized as B: Partial Assessment in accordance with World Bank
Safeguard Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). To comply with the policy
requirements of OP/BP 4.01, an ESMF has been prepared by the main implementing agency of
the GCIC project, Ashesi University dated November 2014.
It is very highly unlikely that any of the proposed activities under this project will result in
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
The ESMF will serve as a safeguard framework to examine the environmental and social impacts
of the private SMEs and technologies to be financed and supported under the GCIC program. The
ESMF has been prepared based to comply with the policy requirements of the World Bank's
environmental and social safeguard policies, as well as the environmental legislative requirements
a           of Ghana. It will provide the necessary guidance to the GCIC in the selection and preparation of
funding proposals for the sustainable environmental and social management of business ventures
where the exact locations and potentially negative localized impacts are not known prior to project
appraisal. The GCIC program will address priority climate innovation objectives and is thus
expected to have positive environmental impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential environmental and social impacts identified under the proposed subproject works of
the GCIC project are not expected to have any indirect and/or long-term impacts. Additionally, the
subproject environmental and social screening process will identifyand eliminate any potential
indirect and/or long term impact during project identification and preparation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Project alternatives were not considered relevant because the potential negative environmental and
social impacts of the proposed subproject activities are considered minimal and localized with
Page 5 of 8


﻿many positive environmental and social impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The GCIC project has been categorized as B (partial assessment) and triggered the World Bank
Safeguard Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) due potential minimal, localized
and easily mitigatable impacts from proposed subprojects.
In compliance with the policy requirements of OP/BP 4.01, an ESMF has been prepared by the
main implementing agency (Ashesi University) dated November 2014. The ESMF has been
consulted on and publicly disclosed on April 10, 2015. The framework approach was adopted
because the exact locations of the proposed subproject activities are not yet known at this stage.
The adopted framework approach includes screening procedures to identify potential
environmental and social impacts associated with the proposed SME subproject works.
Additionally a Project Operational Manual (POM) is being developed to guide the day to day
operations of the project. The adopted safeguard arrangements for the GCIC will be integrated into
the POM to help with subproject identification, selection and design to ensure effective mitigation
of all potential environmental and social impacts associated with the beneficiary subproject
implementation. The Ghana Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has strong capacity and
environmental impact assessment legislative requirements which meet the policy requirements of
the World Bank. All beneficiary and qualifying subprojects will be registered with the EPA to
ensure compliance with country specific environmental legislative requirements.
The GCIC will be hosted in Ashesi University which will be the main project coordinating/
implementing Unit. Ashesi will be assisted by an implementing consortium consisting of (i) Ernst
and Young Ghana, (ii) SNV Netherlands Development Organization, and (iii) United Nations
University Institute for Natural Resources in Africa (UNU-INRA). Ashesi and its associated
consortium partners will be responsible for all aspects of the GCIC establishment and operations
including monitoring and effective implementation of the adopted safeguard arrangements. Ashesi
University is familiar and has experience with World Bank Group Environmental and Social
safeguard policy requirements as it has recently successfully implemented projects with similar
policy requirements with the IFC. This safeguard experience will be sustained and further
O
developed during the implementation of the GCIC.
The GCIC will have its own internal organizational structure which will comprise of an advisory
committee, a management team and key staff. The management team will be managed by a CEO.
The CEO will be responsible for the day-to-day operations of the center, including oversight of
programs, reporting to infoDev, the host Ashesi and advisory committee. The management team
will also consist of a Gender and M&E Specialists to help with implementation of the safeguard
arrangements.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders involved with the GCIC Project include the beneficiary SMEs, academic
institutions, EPA, Community Water and Sanitation Agency (CWSA), NGOs and all relevant
government ministries and metropolitan and municipal district assemblies. Throughout the
Project's development, these stakeholders have been involved in a series of discussions regarding
its rationale and design and this consultation mechanism will be sustained during subproject
implementation.
Page 6 of 8


﻿Additionally, various stakeholder consultations have been held during the preparation of the
Project's ESMF in particular with the Ghana EPA, environmental NGOs and identified beneficiary
SMEs to identify concerns which has been included in the final designed draft of the ESMF.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           15-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Ghana                                                    10-Apr-2015
Comments: Print and web disclosures made by the recipient: http://www.ashesi.edu.gh/about/
climate-innovation-centre.html
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 7 of 8


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No[   ]NA []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michael Ehst,Diletta Doretti
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Klaus Tilmes (PMGR)                  Date: 29-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


