INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR13813
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Sep-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Peru                       Project ID:  P123151
Project Name: PE Basic Education (P123151)
Task Team       Ines Kudo
Leader(s):
Estimated       10-Dec-2012                Estimated    17-Jan-2013
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GED04                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Public administration- Education (40%), Primary education (20%), Secondary
education (20%), Pre-primary education (20%)
Theme:          Managing for development results (50%), Education for all (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     183.00            Total Bank Financing:   25.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                       158.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           25.00
Total                                                          183.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The objective of the Project is to improve MINEDU's capacity to evaluate student learning,
instructional practice, and school leadership in Basic Education.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Page 1 of 6


﻿The objective of the Project is to improve MINEDU's capacity to evaluate student learning,
instructional practice, and school leadership in Basic Education.
3. Project Description
O
A.     Project Components
Component 1. Evaluating student learning (USD10.90 million). Provision of support for the
implementation of Eligible Budget Activities supporting the Program, including, inter alia: (a) the
scale up of the existing second grade student assessment to cover additional grades and subject areas
in Primary Education and Secondary Education schools; (b) the introduction of internationally
validated methodologies for measuring child development outcomes and quality of services in
Preschool Education; and (c) provision of support for the Borrower's continued participation in
international assessments managed by the OECD, UNESCO and IEA in order to compare trends in
national results with international benchmarks.
Component 2. Evaluating instructional practice and school leadership (US$13.87 million). Provision
of support for the implementation of the Eligible Budget Activities supporting the Program,
including, inter alia, activities to strengthen MINEDU's capacity for (i) monitoring and evaluating
the quality of instructional practice at the classroom level and teacher performance, (ii) designing
competency-based systems for selecting and promoting teachers, and (iii) selecting and training
candidates to school management positions.
Component 3. Strengthening MINEDU implementation capacity (US$0.23 million). Provision of
support for the implementation of the Eligible Budget Activities, supporting the Program, including
activities to strengthen MINEDU's capacity to improve education management and monitoring
capacity for the evaluation programs supported by the Project and its operational and fiduciary
capacity for Project implementation, including the carrying out of independent technical, financial
and procurement reviews.
B.     Project Financing
Lending Instrument
a        The lending instrument for the Project is a Specific Investment Loan (SIL) to be disbursed between
2015-2018. The Project would follow a Sector-Wide Approach (SWAp) to co-finance up to US$25
million of selected activities within Eligible Budget Activities under the government's program of
evaluation of student, learning, instructional practice, and school leadership. The Project would take
a results-based financing approach to the implementation of agreed activities. Thus, MINEDU would
be expected to achieve an agreed set of Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs), which would then
trigger disbursements.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
PERU (rural/urban)
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
German Nicolas Freire (GSURR)
Page 2 of 6


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
O
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
a         Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP/BP 4.10) is triggered as the Project is a national program and will
apply across all public schools in Peru. Approximately 15.7 percent of the Peruvian population
use an indigenous language as their primary language and are considered indigenous. Of these,
the largest groups are quechua (83.1 percent) and aimara (11 percent); 5.9 percent of the
indigenous population are comprised of various groups of Amazon origin.
o          Indigenous Peoples in Peru, particularly those who speak Amazonian languages, have higher
levels of poverty and extreme poverty than the non-indigenous population. These gaps are closely
linked to inequalities in access to the labor market, to public services and to lower levels of
academic achievement. Similarly, they have lower rates of school enrollment: only 32 percent of
indigenous children aged 3-5 are enrolled in kindergarten versus 55 percent of non-indigenous
children, and almost 9 percent of indigenous children aged 6-11 are not enrolled in primary school.
While 85 percent of non-indigenous children aged 12-17 are enrolled in secondary education, only
64 percent of ashaninka and 66 percent of other Amazonian children that age are enrolled in
secondary schools. Of the children that are enrolled, 26.7 percent of indigenous children are in
grades that do not correspond to their age, versus only 10.8 percent of non-indigenous children. By
the time they reach 18 years of age, 65.7 percent of non-indigenous children graduate from
secondary education, versus less than 20 percent of Amazonian children. An education system
with a stronger focus on student learning results, teacher and principal quality would benefit
indigenous students and non-indigenous students in the public school system alike. No large
scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse impacts are expected.
Page 3 of 6


﻿2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Overall the Project is expected to have a positive social impact. Improved mechanisms to
evaluate instructional practice, select competent school principals, and track student outcomes, as
well as greater disclosure of the evaluation results are expected to contribute to the more effective
identification of disadvantaged populations, the design and targeting of programs to address those
disadvantages, as well as overall school and school system accountability.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Measures to mitigate adverse impacts were included in the Project design. Project alternatives
were not considered.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In accordance with the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP/BP 4.10) a Social Assessment (SA) and
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) were prepared and consulted with a
representative group of stakeholders on November 9, 2012. The Social Assesment identified the
demographic, social and cultural characteristics of Indigenous Peoples in Peru relevant to
Education, identified current gaps in key education indicators, assessed the potential positive and
adverse impacts of the project and established a set of recommendations that are intended to
improve evaluation and tracking of student outcomes, evaluate instructional practice and improve
school leadership in areas where Indigenous Peoples live.
For this Project, the OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples) requirement for broad community support
will be met through free, prior and informed consultation processes that should result in the broad
community support as expressed by the organizations represented in the National Council for
Intercultural Bilingual Education (CONEIB, Consejo Nacional de Educaci6n Intercultural
Bilingiie). CONEIB, is a formal body recently established by MINEDU to consult Indigenous
peoples and afro communities on education policies and programs at the National level.
The IPPF outlines the issues and opportunities raised by the Project for Indigenous Peoples
(partially from the SA and through the consultation with the CONEIB) as well as the dialogue
process and consultation protocol to establish concrete actions to improve the cultural adequacy of
the assessment system and to ensure a customized approach. These actions will then be
incorporated in an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) that will also be disclosed through the Bank's
website and the Ministry of Education's websites prior to the start of the activities in accordance
with OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are: (i) the Learning Quality Measurement Office (former Quality
Measurement Unit and the General Direction of Teacher Development (responsible for the
development, implementation and monitoring of the IPP); (ii) the Consejo Nacional de Educacion
Intercultural Bilingue (CONEIB) and the indigenous and Afroperuvian organizations that
participate in it; and (iii) the students, teachers, school directors, and parents that will benefit from
improved systems for students evaluation and school leardership. If responsibilities would be
further devolved to regional bodies, the arrangements for implementation and consultation would
be described in detail in the IPP itself.
Page 4 of 6


﻿The SA and the IPPF were developed on the basis of a wide literature review, participatory
consultative interviews and focus group discussions with academic experts, experts across the
departments of the Ministry of Education and the Ministry of Social Inclusion, representatives of
Indigenous Communities, principals, teachers, parents and students in Lima, the district of
O
Sangarara (Cusco) and Nieva (Amazonas). The IPPF was consulted through the CONEIB with a
representative group of stakeholders, including national indigenous organizations and associations,
education experts, and academic inclusion experts.
A second consultation on the final draft of the IPPF and summary SA was held on November 9,
2012 with representatives from the indigenous organizations that comprise CONEIB. At the
meeting, the indigenous representatives confirmed the risks identified in the document and
mitigation actions proposed by MINEDU. They suggested giving more emphasis to research into
other competencies such as verbal communication for indigenous groups, and distributing videos
that show teachers how to use the test results to improve their instructional practice. These
suggestions were incorporated in the final version of the IPPF. IP representatives also raised other
concerns regarding the quality of the teacher mentoring program and teacher quality, which fall
outside the scope of this Project but were recorded by MINEDU officials for attention.
The IPPF was disclosed on December 4th, 2012 on the Ministry of Education's website and on
December 5th, 2012 on the Bank's website. The more detailed IPP will ensure further opportunity
to consult IP groups on the mechanisms to maximize benefits for IPs.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                30-Nov-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                             05-Dec-2012
"In country" Disclosure
Peru                                                       04-Dec-2012
O
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Page 5 of 6


﻿All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ No       NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ No     NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes    No        NA
o          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ No        NA
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ines Kudo
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)             Date: 15-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Reema Nayar (PMGR)                  Date: 16-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


