                                  The World Bank
                                  CAFI AF Forest Dependent Community Support Project




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2017 | Report No: ISDSC21838




                         Oct 10, 2017                                                                                            Page 1 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  CAFI AF Forest Dependent Community Support Project



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                    Project Name                  Environmental Category        Country
                                                         CAFI AF Forest Dependent
                                                                                                                     Congo, Democratic Republic
                           P163835                       Community Support             B - Partial Assessment
                                                                                                                     of
                                                         Project
                           Team Leader(s)                Estimated Date of Approval    Managing Unit                 Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                     Investment Project
                           Loic Jean Charles Braune      22-Dec-2017                   GEN07
                                                                                                                     Financing

                           PROJECT FINANCING DATA
Public Disclosure Copy




                          FINANCING


                          FINANCING SOURCES

                            Select all that apply

                           [ ] Counterpart Funding       [ ✔ ] Trust Funds                  [ ] Parallel Financing



                           SUMMARY (USD)

                           Total Project cost                                                                           1,800,000
                           Total Financing                                                                              1,800,000
                            Trust Funds                                                                                 1,800,000
                           Financing Gap                                                                                        0

                           DETAILS      -OldFin1




                           Trust Funds
                           Source                               Currency                           Amount                        USD Equivalent
                           3A Africa REDD+ Program(REDD)        USD-US Dollars                   1,800,000                            1,800,000




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective (PDO) of the parent project is unchanged: to strengthen the capacity of targeted

                         Oct 10, 2017                                                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  CAFI AF Forest Dependent Community Support Project



                           Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities (IPLCs) in selected territories and at the national level to participate in
                           REDD oriented land and forest management activities.

                           C. Project Description
                           Scope of the Additional Financing

                           The proposed Additional Financing of US$ 1.8 million will provide additional resources to support the same objectives
                           and activities as the parent project over expanded project territories (from 16 to 19 territories): strengthen the
                           participation of Indigenous Peoples and Local Communities (IPLC) in forest and land management activities, support
                           sustainable community forest and land management, build their capacities to implement development activities and
                           capture their feedback. The proposed AF will aim to achieve this by: (i) increasing the budget for select activities
                           financed by the Forest Dependent Community Support Project through the Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM) in
                           order to boost the development impact, as well as the resources made available for the various management models
                           tested; (ii) expanding the scope of the FDCSP to adjacent and priority areas in order to increase the potential for pilot
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management initiatives for Indigenous Peoples; (iii) including three additional territories (Bikoro, Kalehe, and Walikale)
                           in the FDCSP’s governance mechanism, with local representation on the Steering Committee; (iv) financing ten
                           additional micro-projects; and (v) contributing to the establishment of two additional areas with community
                           governance and coordination with integrated programs so as to promote management by indigenous communities.
                           The proposed operation would support the following activities, consistent with the parent project scope and
                           description:

                           Component 1. Reinforce the participation of IPLC in forest and land management processes related to REDD+ (US$
                           0.3 million). This component would provide tailored support to organizations representing the IPLCs on technical
                           matters, in areas such as land tenure and forest management, in addition to strengthening administrative and financial
                           management. Following the same structure as the parent project, the AF would encompass two sub-components: one
                           at the national level, and one for local support.

                           Sub-component 1a. Building capacities at the national level for strengthening IPLC voices on land and forest policies
                           (US$ 0.12 million). This activity would include: (i) strengthening the expertise of IPLCs on matters relating to forestry,
                           and in particular the deployment of Local Community Forestry Concessions (CFCL); (ii) fostering the participation of
                           legitimate IPLC representatives in the process to reform land tenure policies; and (iii) providing assistance for the
                           formalization of the recognition of the customary rights of IPLCs over specific forested areas. This will aim to be
                           achieved either by drawing on an existing legal framework or by supporting the development of innovative initiatives
                           concerning community-based management of natural resources in the country, building on the experience in other
                           countries where such initiatives have already been tested. Where possible, collaboration with the Civil Society Support
                           Program and the various PIREDD will be sought.

                           Sub-component 1b. Strengthening the capacities of the IPLCs to participate in forest and land management activities
                           (US$ 0.18 million). Building on the project’s progress to date, the AF would deploy activities designed to increase the
                           representation of IPLCs at the local land level, strengthen the capacities of their organizations (e.g. in particular, their
                           expertise in matters concerning forestry and tenure system management), and to strengthen their capacity to
                           influence discussion at the provincial level.

                           Component 2. Support community-based sustainable forest and land management (US$ 0.96 million). This
                           component would promote the empowerment of IPLCs by supporting official recognition of their customary usage
                           rights, and financing micro-projects aimed at sustainable natural resource management (including alternative activities

                         Oct 10, 2017                                                                                                            Page 3 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  CAFI AF Forest Dependent Community Support Project



                           designed to reduce pressure and change practices) to improve livelihoods in rural areas.

                           Sub-component 2a. Promoting sustainable forest and land management through alternative livelihood activities and
                           promotion of the IPLC culture (US$ 0.7 million). This sub-component would provide micro-grants for communities to
                           engage in alternative activities that will: (i) generate additional incomes; (ii) improve community livelihoods; (iii)
                           provide educational value through improved capacity for identification, facilitation, dialogue, dedicated monitoring and
                           evaluation, and capitalization. While the micro-projects will be carried out mainly in the project areas and the 19 focus
                           territories, the overall component would benefit from a national approach. In areas outside of the 19 territories,
                           priority areas may be targeted depending on available funding. Co-funding would be sought to cover high-stake areas
                           with substantial representation of Pygmy and indigenous communities.

                           Sub-component 2b. Empowering the IPLC for the formal recognition of their user rights (US$ 0.26 million). This activity
                           would support experiments in community-based forest management. The end-goal consists in securing usage rights
                           over specific plots through the recognition of an official status that will give the established communities the power to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           fully benefit from their local resources. Once the areas concerned will have been approved, the project will support
                           work on their legal status as well as on the governance system for administering their usage rights. In these areas,
                           micro-projects (financed under Component 2a) will enable the implementation of policies for preservation, protection,
                           reasonable logging, and, in some cases, changes to practices in favor of extensive livestock farming or production
                           instead of pure gathering.

                           Component 3. Increase the capacity to implement development activities for IPLC and consolidate feedback (US$
                           0.54 million). The objective of this component would be to ensure the smooth implementation of the Project in
                           accordance with the Bank’s procedures but with sufficient flexibility to be able to adapt to the communities’ capacities.

                           Sub-component 3a. Project coordination (US$ 0.31 million). This sub-component would finance the costs of the
                           National Executing Agency (NEA), which is responsible for the implementation of the Project. The NEA will also be
                           responsible for fiduciary management, notably procurement (e.g. screening, contractual terms, and management of
                           contracts) and financial management (e.g. disbursements for micro-projects, cash management, accounting, and
                           documentation). It will define the criteria for examining and evaluating risks, ensure the proper use of FDCS project
                           funds, and keep project and micro-project documentation up-to-date, followed by periodic reporting to the Bank on
                           the use of funds. It will also be responsible for the management and monitoring of safeguards. The NEA has been
                           selected under a competitive process in accordance with DGM guidelines.

                           Sub-component 3b. Strengthening feedback channels at the local and national levels (US$ 0.23 million). The objective of
                           this sub-component is to promote the establishment of an inclusive national network of IPLC representatives that will
                           maintain direct relations with leaders and organizations on the ground. It is envisaged that through a learning-by-doing
                           approach, capacities as well as recognition of the impact of the network will be strengthened by monitoring the
                           implementation of micro-projects on the ground, measuring communities’ satisfaction, and reporting to the National
                           Steering Committee (NSC). Monitoring and measurement of the satisfaction rate by the network of IPLC
                           representatives is intended to ensure that communities benefit from the project and that the IPLCs deal adequately
                           with any grievances.

                           Given that the proposed activities represent a natural continuation and expansion to the parent project’s activities,
                           an additional financing is being proposed while maintaining the same Implementing Agency. This has been deemed the
                           most suitable option to maximize development outcomes. This instrument will also enable a faster and more cost-



                         Oct 10, 2017                                                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  CAFI AF Forest Dependent Community Support Project



                           effective response to the client’s request to strengthen and scale-up the parent project.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          From an environmental and social perspective, the Parent Project is rated Category B (partial assessment). This would
                          be maintained, as no significant negative environmental and social impacts are expected. The scaled up Component 2
                          will have a direct impact on the ground, given its community-driven approach, however, it will be limited, reversible,
                          and small-scale. The additional finance will continue to promote sound natural resources and sustainable management
                          in an additional three territories (Walikale, Kalehe, and Bikoro) in addition to the 16 already targeted territories.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The additional financing will use the similar arrangements as the parent project. Under the parent project, a Safeguard
                          Specialist and 4 local focal points are currently being hired by the implementation agency (CARITAS). The
                          environmental risks should be very limited, as the primary goal of the sub-grants and local investment is the sound
                          environmental management of the forest and the reduction of deforestation. However, as part of component 2b, the
                          project and the additional financing plan to set up and secure land concessions to be managed by the local
                          communities – including Indigenous Peoples. Thus, restrictions of access are expected. The main tool to be used will
                          probably be the concessions for community forest, which are a new legal instrument whose application decrees have
                          been adopted recently (2015) after several years of discussion between the civil society organizations, the
                          international NGOs and the government, and there is still on-going work on the operational documents. Therefore, the
                          methodology to consult for the restriction of access may be updated during the project, and the implementation team,
                          as well as the safeguard team, will carefully ensure that the local consultations are always implemented according to
                          the latest guidelines.




                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Douglas J. Graham, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Lucienne M. M'Baipor, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          , Social Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes                      Project’s activities to be financed under
                                                                                                      component 2 to enhance communities’
                                                                                                      livelihood may have negative impact on the

                         Oct 10, 2017                                                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  CAFI AF Forest Dependent Community Support Project



                                                                                       environment. The project will update the
                                                                                       parent project Environmental and Social
                                                                                       Management Framework (ESMF),
                                                                                       considering three new territories (Walikale,
                                                                                       Kalehe, and Bikoro), consulted upon. The
                                                                                       ESMF must be disclosed in the country as
                                                                                       well as in the Bank external website.
                                                                                       To avoid or mitigate negative impacts on
                                                                                       natural habitats because of project’s
                                                                                       support to communities, he ESMF will
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                     Yes
                                                                                       provide guidelines on how natural habitats
                                                                                       will be protected during project
                                                                                       implementation.
                                                                                       To avoid and minimize communities’
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                       footprint in the forest, Forest policy and
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                              Yes          management are a primary
                                                                                       focus of this project. The ESMF will include
                                                                                       guidance on managing forestry issues.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                         No
                                                                                       In anticipation of any harm to physical and
                                                                                       cultural resources representing a cultural
                                                                                       value for Indigenous Peoples or other
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11          Yes
                                                                                       forest communities in the project area, the
                                                                                       ESMF will provide guideline on how they
                                                                                       will be protected and preserved.
                                                                                       The policy is triggered, however, seeing as
                                                                                       the project is specifically targets IPs as the
                                                                                       main beneficiaries, the project will not
                                                                                       require an IPP. The design of the project
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                   Yes
                                                                                       itself is conceived in consultation with IPs,
                                                                                       and applies culturally appropriate benefits
                                                                                       based on the needs expressed by the
                                                                                       indigenous groups.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Yes          The project may potentially restrict or limit
                                                                                       community members’ access to natural
                                                                                       resources as the project activities include
                                                                                       securing of land for concessions
                                                                                       (component 2B) in the three new
                                                                                       territories of Walikale, Kalehe, and Bikoro.
                                                                                       Therefore, to manage impacts that could
                                                                                       result from the restriction, the project will
                                                                                       update the process framework (PF)
                                                                                       prepared under the parent project, and will
                                                                                       be based on wide and culturally
                                                                                       appropriate consultations with IPs living in

                         Oct 10, 2017                                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  CAFI AF Forest Dependent Community Support Project



                                                                                                         the three new territories. The main
                                                                                                         objective of the PF is to set forth
                                                                                                         procedures and functional approaches that
                                                                                                         are acceptable to the communities in view
                                                                                                         of the restriction of access to
                                                                                                         forests/protected areas and that provide
                                                                                                         alternatives to their livelihoods.
                                                                                                         The project will recruit a social safeguards
                                                                                                         specialist to provide support to the firms
                                                                                                         contracted to work with IP communities on
                                                                                                         the project design (write up) and the
                                                                                                         implementation (in collaboration with
                                                                                                         communities) of some activities.
                                                                                                         Should any of the activities proposed in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                         component 2A (micro-projects) trigger
                                                                                                         physical resettlement , the project will
                                                                                                         prepare a resettlement policy framework
                                                                                                         (RPF) that will guide any resettlement
                                                                                                         action plan for micro projects as they are
                                                                                                         identified.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                            No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50       No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           15-Dec-2017
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           As the project will expend in three new Territories (Kahele, Walikale and Bikoro), the team plans to: - revise the project
                           safeguard documents (Environmental and Social Management Framework and Process Framework) to include the new
                           geographic scope of the project; - organize consultations in the three Territories to (i) present the project, (ii) select the
                           representatives for the Steering Committee, following the same methodology as the one for the first 16 territories and
                           (iii) present the revised safeguard documents - in particular the role of REPALEF for grievance management and the
                           representation process.



                           APPROVALS

                            Team Leader(s):                            Loic Jean Charles Braune


                         Oct 10, 2017                                                                                                           Page 7 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  CAFI AF Forest Dependent Community Support Project




                           Approved By

                            Safeguards Advisor:

                            Practice Manager/Manager:


                          1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country

                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Oct 10, 2017                                                                                                                               Page 8 of 8
