INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12148
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Myanmar                     Project ID:  P153113
Parent        P132500
Project ID:
Project Name: National Community Driven Development Project (P153113)
Parent Project Myanmar National Community Driven Development Project (P132500)
Name:
Task Team       Ingo Wiederhofer,Nikolas Myint
Leader(s):
Estimated       31-Mar-2015                 Estimated    28-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (30%), Irrigation and drainage
(20%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%), General
education sector (15%), Health (15%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (65%), Participation and civic engagement
(25%), Gender (5%), Social Inclusion (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     453.35             Total Bank Financing:   380.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           40.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                 380.00
ITALY Dev. Coop. Department (MOFA)                                           22.35
Japan Social Development Fund                                                11.00
Total                                                                       453.35
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 17


﻿Is this a        Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The development objective is to enable poor rural communities to benefit from improved access
to and use of basic infrastructure and services through a people-centered approach and to enhance
the government's capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or emergency.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The ongoing Project consists of five components. This structure will be maintained under the
Additional Financing, with components scaled up to increase the Project's geographic coverage and
further refined to reflect lessons learned during the first year of implementation. All Project
activities will follow the requirements of OP 4.01 and other applicable World Bank Safeguards
policies, particularly in the screening and preparation of EA instruments (EMPs and ECoPs) for sub-
projects, including with regard to disclosure and consultation.
This component finances four annual cycles of block grant budget allocations of on average US
$33,000 per village tract per year. A village tract typically comprises 4-5 villages in rural Myanmar.
Village tract budget allocations vary depending on the population of a given village tract, but provide
annual grants equivalent to about US$12 per capita. Village tract budget allocations are typically
divided among villages, with an average individual sub-project size under US$10,000. Individual
sub-projects are limited to a ceiling of US$110,000, and any sub-projects over US$40,000 would
require prior review and a no objection by the World Bank.
The initial Project envisaged coverage of 15 townships (home to about 640 village tracts), using a
gradual rollout to allow for adaptive learning. In the first community cycle, three townships took
part in the project, expanding to nine townships in the second cycle (currently underway). The
infrastructure to be financed includes small feeder roads, footpaths and small bridges, water supply
systems for villages, rehabilitation of class rooms and health centers, small scale irrigation schemes
and small-scale rural electrification schemes. Given the lack of familiarity of local authorities and
communities with the concept of community empowerment, the first annual cycle in each township
is limited to a positive list of sub-projects that are easier to implement (using standardized designs)
focused on rehabilitation and minor extension work. In subsequent years, communities may select to
rehabilitate or construct new small scale public infrastructure for types of investments that meet
eligibility criteria specified in the project's Operations Manual and the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF). Block grants are allocated through a participatory planning
process covering all villages within a village tract. All village tracts in selected townships are
covered for equity purposes. Planning and prioritization of sub-projects is undertaken by villagers
and representative village tract fora. Under the Additional Financing, the Project will roll out block
grants in an estimated additional 40 townships using a range of financing sources (e.g. Government
contributions, proceeds from the original IDA grant and the proposed IDA credit, bilateral
concessional loan financing from the Italian government, and a proposed grant from the Japanese
Page 2 of 17


﻿Social Development Fund [JSDF]). All financing, regardless of source, will comply with applicable
project and safeguards policies as outlined in the project's Operations Manual and the ESMF.
Component 2: Facilitation and Capacity Development. This component finances technical assistance
and institutional support at the union and township levels, including the hiring of community
facilitators for the purpose of supporting the implementation of community driven activities under
component 1. The Project supports capacity development in areas such as participatory planning
processes, project management, gender equality and social inclusion, environmental management
and social accountability for local committee members as well as government staff at the township,
region/state and union levels. This component also includes a grievance handling mechanism.
During the Additional Financing phase, this component will further strengthen and institutionalize
capacity development of township and Region/State level Department of Rural Development (DRD)
staff and facilitators.
Component 3: Knowledge and Learning. This component supports government staff and community
and civil society representatives through learning from community based approaches implemented
within and beyond Myanmar. This builds on successful south-south learning exchanges undertaken
during implementation to date to expose government counterparts to successful community driven
development approaches in ASEAN countries and other regions. The Project in August 2014
organized a first annual multi-stakeholder review to share experiences from the previous cycle and
discuss ways to improve the project's design and implementation for the next cycle. These reviews
included lessons learned with regard to governance, social accountability and anti-corruption
measures and informed a substantial revision o f the Project Operations Manual. This component
will be further strengthened to include additional analytical, monitoring, evaluation studies and
financial and technical audits during the AF. This component will also test models for enhanced
social accountability for front line service delivery in selected Project townships.
Component 4: Implementation Support. T. This component supports project management by DRD
at the union and township 1 evels including reporting and communications as well as administration
and logistical support for project implementation. This component will allow for financing of civil
works for the rehabilitation and/or construction of DRD office space required for Project
implementation.
Component 5: Emergency Contingency Response. This contingency component allows for the rapid
reallocation of grant proceeds from other components in order to provide preparedness and rapid
response support to disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic events, as needed. Intended as a
contingency in case of disasters, it has a zero budget allocation and has not yet been activated during
implementation to date.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will operate in at least 50 townships, including at least one in each of the country's 14
regions and states as well as the union territory. Criteria for the selection of townships are primarily
poverty, with additional criteria being presence of external funding for similar activities, accessibility
and commitment by regional government and local stakeholders to the objective of the project. All
village tracts in selected townships will be covered for equity purposes. While rural areas have
sensitive ecosystems such as rivers and forest areas, the eligible activities to be financed focus on
small-scale rural infrastructure that are not anticipated to have any significant impacts on such
ecosystems, and the ESMF contains measures to screen and manage potential impacts on natural
Page 3 of 17


﻿habitats. Furthermore, the average annual block grant allocation of US$33,000 per village tract is
spread across all villages in a tract (in Myanmar, village tracts consist of on average four to five
villages). Given the country-wide coverage of the proposed project interventions, it is conceivable
that some sub-projects (for example village water supply, sanitation systems or irrigation schemes)
could be implemented along the Ayeyarwaddy river and/or its tributaries. This river meets the
definition of an International Waterway as stipulated in paragraph 1 of the World Bank's Operational
Policy 7.50 on International Waterways, although the combined flow outside of Myanmar is
estimated to be less than 1%.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes           The original project was classified as environmental
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  category "B." The AF is also considered a category "B"
as it will continue to finance small-scale rehabilitation and
construction rural infrastructure works. The infrastructure
to be financed will be based on eligibility criteria and
typically include small roads, foot-paths and small
bridges, village drinking water systems, rehabilitationof
class rooms and health centers, and small-scale rural
electrification such as pico hydro or solar panels. The
physical rehabilitation of existing infrastructure will not
involve significant structural modifications. New
construction of infrastructure that has the potential to
cause significant impacts (e.g. degradation of natural
habitats, protected forests, or cultural resources) is not
eligible for financing under the project. The envisaged
investments are typical to similar CDD projects in the
region and are not expected to have significant adverse
and unprecedented environmental and social impacts.
Temporary negative impacts will be related to typical
small scale construction activities. The Borrower
prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) based on a revision of the
Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment
Framework (ESSAF) prepared and adopted for the
ongoing operation. The ESMF provides (i) the process
and procedures for conducting the assessment of
environment and social impacts of specific sub-projects
and activities during project implementation once
investments are proposed; (ii) the requirements and
process for screening and assessing sub-project eligibility
and potential impacts; and (iii) the identification and
implementation of mitigation measures while following
relevant World Bank safeguards policies and existing
environmental protection laws, regulations and standards
Page 4 of 17


﻿in Myanmar. Given the small scale and limited impacts
envisaged for the proposed investments, Environmental
Codes of Practice (ECoPs) and/or simplified
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) will be the
safeguards instruments used to reflect, assess, mitigate
and monitor for any possible impacts related to sub-
projects. Any sub-projects larger than 40 million kyats
(ca. $40,000) would require notification to the union level
DRD office and a prior no objection from the World Bank
to screen potential environmental and social risks
associated with sub-projects of this size. The draft ESMF
was disclosed in country in English and Myanmar on
January 26, 2015 and in English in the World Bank
Infoshop on January 28, 2015. The ESMF was the subject
of public consultations, including with civil society and
other project stakeholders. These were conducted on
February 9, 2015 in Yangon, February 11, 2015 in
Mandalay and February 16, 2015 in Naypyitaw. The final
ESMF, revised following public consultations, will be re-
disclosed in accordance with the World Bank's Access to
Information Policy, and will be disseminated in project
communities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          This policy is triggered because of the potential negative
4.04                                 impacts that subproject activities might have on natural
habitats. While these activities are expected to be small-
scale, typical for CDD operations, and with overall
limited impacts manageable through application of
mitigation measures, the policy is triggered for
precautionary reasons to ensure that any physical
interventions (including those proposed in known
reserved or declared national forests zones) will not
adversely impact or lead to the degradation of critical or
other natural habitats. The ESMF provides for the
screening of potential project impacts and how safeguard
issues under this policy should be addressed during
project implementation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The Project does not anticipate it will have and will not
consider eligible for financing any activities that:
(a) have impacts on the health and quality of forests;
(b) affect the rights and welfare of people and their level
of dependence upon or interaction with forests; and
(c) aim to bring about changes in the management,
protection, or utilization of natural forests or plantations,
whether they are publicly, privately, or communally
owned.
All sub-projects will be screened accordingly.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           Project activities are not expected to use pesticides, nor
Page 5 of 17


﻿lead to increased usage of pesticides. Any sub-project that
would require the use of pesticides or increase their use
will not be eligible for financing.
Physical Cultural        No           Archaeological and cultural heritage sites are not
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  envisaged to be affected by project interventions. While
there are religious buildings such as monasteries, pagodas,
churches, and mosques in project villages, given the small
grant size and small-scale impacts of the proposed rural
infrastructure works, the project does not anticipate it will
have and will not consider eligible for financing any
activities that have a potential direct or indirect impact on
cultural properties. Periodic checks will ensure that no
subprojects impact on cultural assets.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes          The policy was triggered for the original project since it
BP 4.10                               was expected that ethnic minority communities would be
present in the project areas of influence. Ethnic Minority
screening was conducted with the participation of almost
all village households, and no discriminatory treatment of
ethnic minorities was reported. Social audits conducted
between June and August 2014 also did not find any
grievances or complaints from Ethnic Minority groups.
The safeguard review identified some gaps in the
implementation of the Environmental and Social
Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF),
including challenges in relation to the translation of
project documents into ethnic languages. To address the
Department of Rural Development (DRD) as the
implementing agency adopted a two-step approach to
ensure the translation of key project materials into all
relevant ethnic languages. In the first instance, DRD at
the union level defined a list of key documents to be
translated into ethnic languages to ensure that Ethnic
Minorities are adequately informed and consulted. As a
second step, DRD requested each project township office
to identify ethnic languages used in the townships, into
which these documents will be translated. This approach
was developed given the multitude of ethnic languages in
use in Myanmar. In addition, for those ethnic languages
that do not have a written alphabet or for areas with very
low levels of literacy, DRD developed a communications
strategy based on illustrations and visuals.
The Indigenous Peoples policy will be applied for the AF
since the expanded geographical coverage under the AF
will in all likelihood include areas where ethnic minorities
are present, although the exact list of townships to be
covered as part of the scale up financed through the
Page 6 of 17


﻿proposed AF would be implemented will only be
determined during implementation. The ESSAF was
updated based on the experience of the original project as
the Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF). The AF will continue to support the
participatory social assessments (SA) to be conducted by
affected community members themselves including
Ethnic Minorities under the support of a trained
Community Facilitator. The participatory SA will include
Ethnic Minority screening, and free, prior and informed
consultations with Ethnic Minorities. The broad
community support of affected Ethnic Minorities for
priorities to be supported by the Project will be
ascertained as part of the participatory SA. The result of
the participatory SA, including the findings of free, prior
and informed consultations, will be used to develop
Village Tract Development Plans (VTDP) which will
serve as the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) under this
project and meet all requirements of the Indigenous
Peoples Policy. The ESMF includes specific guidance and
requirements to ensure that VTDPs fulfill the
requirements of an IPP. VTDPs will be updated when
detailed designs are prepared and impacts of sub-projects
become clear. Detailed subproject designs will be
presented to affected communities including ethnic
minorities at free, prior and informed consultations and
their broad community support will be sought. Comments
received will be reflected in the revised VTDP and
disclosed in all affected local communities in a language
that is understandable to them. Where broad community
support is not ascertained, sub-projects will not be
implemented in respective communities.
The key principles, processes and procedures for the
participatory SA, including Ethnic Minority screening;
free, prior and informed consultations with affected ethnic
minorities leading to their broad community support; and
the preparation of the VTDP as the IPP, are described in
the EMDF and more detail in the project Operations
Manual.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Sub-projects financed under the original project supported
OP/BP 4.12                           small scale civil works to rehabilitate, improve or
construct small-scale rural infrastructure, and did not
require involuntary acquisition of private land or private
assets. However, since sub-projects are developed on a
demand driven basis, minor land acquisition or loss of
assets cannot be fully ruled out. For this reason, OP 4.12
Page 7 of 17


﻿was triggered for the original project. The Environmental
and Social Screening and Assessment Framework
(ESSAF) provided measures to comply with the Bank's
OP 4.12, including non-eligibility of any sub-project that
requires involuntary land acquisition (including
involuntary asset loss) during the first community cycle in
each township. Going forward, these measures will be
included in the ESMF and RPF.
No involuntary land or asset acquisition occurred under
the original project. Minor losses of land or assets
occurred to a small number of households which were
addressed through voluntary donations. A technical
review carried out in August 2014 and the social audits
carried out between June and August 2014 confirmed that
all affected households willingly and knowingly donated
land or assets in accordance with the specified protocol,
and did not find any outstanding grievances. A World
Bank implementation support mission conducted in July
2014 confirmed overall compliance with the ESSAF,
based on a desk review of reports and voluntary donation
forms developed, site visits and interviews with affected
people and confirmed that affected people had voluntarily
donated land or assets. Overall, voluntary donation forms
were properly prepared according to the voluntary
donation protocols and signed by the affected people,
although in some instances both voluntary donation forms
and involuntary donation forms were prepared (even
though assets were donated voluntarily). One
recommendation following the Cycle 1 was to further
strengthen the knowledge of Technical Facilitators (TF)
and Community Facilitators (CF) both on safeguard
documentation and on overall safeguard processes. The
Department of Rural Development subsequently engaged
international consultants to deliver additional training on
safeguard processes and documentation for community
and technical facilitators as well as for DRD township
staff. Additional capacity development on these issues is
provided on an on-going basis by the Bank task team and
the Union technical assistance team contracted by DRD.
The ESSAF was updated based on the experience under
the original project. The Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) includes a Resettlement
Policy Framework. Under the AF, as in the original
project, sub-projects will be screened for land-related
impacts. If any land acquisition or asset loss is found to be
Page 8 of 17


﻿unavoidable, measures to mitigate such impacts will be
developed and implemented. To limit potential safeguards
risks associated with sub-projects, the AF would apply a
relatively low budget ceiling of 110 million kyats (US
$110,000) for sub-projects, and sub-projects exceeding 40
million kyats (US$40,000) would require a prior approval
from the union DRD and no objection from the World
Bank.
Sub-projects that will likely require a physical relocation
of household will not be eligible for financing. Designs
would be adjusted, and alternative locations would be
sought, in order to avoid or minimize loss of land or
assets.
Where a minor loss of private land or assets is
unavoidable, impacts will likely be addressed through
voluntary donations by the affected people for most cases.
If their informed consent to donate assets is not obtained
as specified in the Voluntary Land Donation Protocol, an
abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
developed and compensation would be provided at full
replacement cost as per the policies and procedures laid
out in the RPF included in the ESMF. In exceptional cases
where project impact is significant, a full RAP will be
developed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance the construction of any new
4.37                                 dams or the rehabilitation of existing dams including
structural and or operational changes.
Projects on International  Yes       The Ayeyarwaddy rises in the Himalayas, bisects
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 Myanmar from north to south and empties through a nine-
armed delta into the Bay of Bengal. A portion of the
catchment areas that feed two of the tributaries of the
river (the Maykha which is referred to as the Daying in
China, and the Malikha which is referred to as the Jiang in
China) are located in China. The Malikha tributary in turn
is fed by a sub-tributary originating within India. This
meets the definition of an International Waterway as
stipulated in paragraph 1 of the World Bank's Operational
Policy 7.50 on International Waterways, although the
combined flow outside of Myanmar is estimated to be less
than 1%.
OP 7.50 applies since the project will finance the
construction, rehabilitation and improvement of small
scale village-based rural water supply and sanitation
systems (e.g., tube wells, latrines) as well as the
Page 9 of 17


﻿rehabilitation and construction of modest new village
based small scale irrigation schemes (less than 25
hectares) and pico-hydro facilities. For the Additional
Financing phase, the project will not finance sub-projects
that may use water from international waterways
including activities such as community water supply,
small scale irrigation or pico-hydropower generations
facilities on the mainstream of the Ayeyarwaddy River.
The Project also will not finance community water supply
and small scale irrigation on or along the the Maykha and
Malikha tributaries of the Ayeyarwaddy River. The
Project will however finance community water supply
systems, small scale irrigation and/or pico-hydropower
investments that would draw water from tributaries of the
Ayeyarwady which run exclusively within the territory of
Myanmar. These tributaries include the following: the
Chindwin, the Mu, the Chaungmagyi Chaung, the
Myitnge, the Mon Chaung and the Nawin Chaung. The
project is not expected to adversely affect the quality or
quantity of water flows to other riparians and will not be
adversely affected by other riparians' possible water use.
On this basis, the Bank has determined that the proposed
project does not require riparian notification in
accordance with paragraph 7(c) of OP 7.50.
Projects in Disputed    No           No activities are planned in areas considered as disputed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     under OP7.60.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is rated category "B" in line with the WB OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment
due to the small-scale works for the rehabilitation or minor extension and construction of
community infrastructure that use standardized designs. Typical works considered for financing
will be for schools, community recreation and health centers rehabilitation and/or expansion; small
rural roads, rural water supply systems and sanitation facilities (public latrines); and the
rehabilitation of small scale irrigation schemes (<25 ha). Some small scale civil works will be
carried out to improve and/or expand rural water supply systems, sanitation facilities (latrines),
and minor irrigation schemes which could be implemented along the tributaries of the
Ayeyarwaddy River. Similarly, some subprojects could be located in known parks and/or reserved
forests areas where communities are living for years. Finally, may also be minor civil works on
public land to rehabilitate and/or construct office space for DRD for Project implementation
purposes.
The impacts of these small works are expected to be localized and can be prevented or reduced to
acceptable levels through the use of Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) or Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs) that provide for good construction practices and planning. Such
Page 10 of 17


﻿potential temporary impacts are related among other thing to: (i) air pollution/dust, noise,
vibration, and access restriction; (ii) improper disposal of construction related waste; (iii)
temporary pollution of soil and surface waters due to accidental spillage of fuel from construction
activities; (iv) safety hazards including worker safety; and (v) damage to forests or existing
vegetation. These impacts should be properly managed during the construction phase by
communities or contractors hired by them and closely supervised by DRD at the township level
supported by the township technical assistance teams.
Cumulative impacts for the project as a whole at sub-project sites and regionally are expected to
be insignificant given the small-size of the grants and the dispersion of resources across village
tracts.
In order to assess the potential impacts of the project and to propose related mitigation measures to
address such impacts, the Borrower/DRD has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to meet the OP/BP 4.01 requirements. The ESMF covers all investments and
activities financed by the Bank. The ESMF describes eligible investments; procedures to
addressing environmental and social safeguards requirements; previous safeguard implementation
experience and lessons learned during ongoing operation; existing legislative and organizational
structures for environmental management; existing institutional and capacity building and
measures to address; outlines environmental impact mitigation and monitoring actions; as well as
institutional responsibilities and implementation arrangements. It also describes the grievance
handling mechanism and the public consultation process during project preparation. Finally, it
includes annexes with examples of and simple guidance notes for screening forms, ECOPs for
specific rural infrastructure investments eligible under the project, sample formats for
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), and minutes of
the public consultations on safeguard documentation.
A general ECOP applicable to most small scale rehabilitation and construction works in project
villages is presented in the ESMF and the project's Operations Manual (part V, chapter 3).
Similarly, specific environmental codes of practices for various eligible subprojects' activities
such as construction/rehabilitation of small scale buildings; village rural roads; small bridges (less
than five meters) and jetties; village rural water supply (wells, rainwater collection, and
installation/rehabilitation of pipelines from natural springs); rural electrification (solar panel, pico
hydro < 20kV, solar street lightening, diesel and biomass generator < 15 kV amps); small scale
irrigation and sanitation facilities (small latrines and village scale waste treatment facilities) are
detailed in the ESMF.
The AF, like the original project, will operate in areas where Ethnic Minorities who meet the
eligibility criteria under the OP 4.10 are present, although the exact locations where the AF would
be implemented will be determined during implementation. OP 4.10 is thus triggered. The impact
on Ethnic Minorities is expected to be positive. The AF would continue to support bottom up
processes to strengthen the social inclusion of ethnic minorities in a participatory manner. Ethnic
minorities will participate in the planning and implementation of subprojects to be financed under
the AF. Potential negative impacts would include minor loss of land or assets. The scale of any
adverse impacts are expected to be minor. The subproject ceiling is 110,000,000 kyat (about US
$110,000), however any subproject above 40,000,000 kyat (about US$40,000) would require a
prior review and a no objection by the Bank.
The AF will continue to support the participatory social assessments (SA) to be conducted by
Page 11 of 17


﻿community members themselves including Ethnic Minorities under the support of a qualified
Community Facilitator. The participatory SA will include Ethnic Minority screening, and free,
prior and informed consultations with Ethnic Minorities as well as other requirements for SA as
specified in Annex A of OP 4.10. The broad community support of affected Ethnic Minorities to
priorities to be supported by the Project will be ascertained as part of the participatory SA. The
result of the participatory SA, including the findings of free, prior and informed consultations, will
be used to develop Village Tract Development Plans (VTDP) which will serve as the Indigenous
Peoples Plan (IPP) under this project and meet all requirements of the OP 4.10 for the IPP. VTDPs
will be updated when detailed designs are prepared and impacts of subprojects become clear.
Detailed subproject designs will be presented to affected communities including Ethnic Minorities
at free, prior and informed consultations and their broad community support will be sought.
Comments received will be reflected in the revised VTDP and disclosed in all affected local
communities in a language that is understandable to them. Where broad community support is not
ascertained, sub-projects will not be implemented in respective communities.
The AF would continue to support small scale civil works to rehabilitate and improve small-scale
rural infrastructure, which is not anticipated to require significant acquisition of land or assets.
However, since sub-projects would continue to be developed on a demand driven basis and will
render eligible new small infrastructure construction, minor land acquisition or loss of assets
cannot be fully ruled out. For this reason, OP 4.12 is triggered to the AF.
Under the original project, an Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework
(ESSAF) was developed which provides measures to comply with the Bank's OP 4.12, including
the prohibition of any sub-project that requires involuntary land acquisition (including involuntary
asset loss) during the first community cycle in each township. No involuntary land or asset
acquisition occurred under the original project. Minor losses of land or assets occurred to a small
number of households which were all addressed through voluntary donations. The technical audit
carried out in August and October 2014 and the social audits carried out between June and August
2014 confirmed that all affected households willingly and knowingly donated land or assets, and
did not find any outstanding grievances. A World Bank supervision mission conducted in July
2014 found overall compliance with ESSAF, and confirmed that affected people had voluntarily
donated land or assets. Overall, voluntary donation forms were properly prepared and signed by
the affected people, although in some instances both voluntary donation forms and involuntary
donation forms were prepared (even though assets were donated voluntarily). One
recommendation following from cycle 1 was to further strengthen the knowledge of Technical
Facilitators (TF) and Community Facilitators (CF) both on safeguard documentation and on
overall safeguard processes, which DRD has acted upon through an intensified training process for
both TFs, CFs and the Project's township staff.
Under the AF, sub-projects will continue to be screened for land-related impacts and, if any land
acquisition or asset loss is found to be unavoidable, measures to mitigate such impacts would be
developed and implemented. The ESSAF was updated taking into account the experience of the
original project that provides detailed procedures so impact on private land or assets would be
addressed in line with the Bank OP 4.12. An RPF was developed and included as part of the
ESMF.
To limit potential safeguards risks associated with sub-projects, the AF would apply a relatively
low budget ceiling of 110,000,000 kyat (about US$110,000) for sub-projects, and sub-projects
exceeding 40,000,000 kyat (about US$40,000) would require a prior review and no objection from
Page 12 of 17


﻿the Bank. Sub-projects that will likely require a physical relocation of household are not eligible
for project financing. Designs would be adjusted, and alternative locations would be sought, in
order to avoid or minimize a loss of land or assets. Where a minor loss of private land or assets is
unavoidable, impacts will likely be addressed through voluntary donations by the affected people
for most cases in line with the Voluntary Land Protocol contained in the ESMF. If informed
consent to donate assets is not obtained, an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
developed and compensation would be provided at replacement value as per the policies and
procedures laid out in the ESMF. In exceptional cases where project impact is significant, a full
RAP is developed.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No indirect or long term negative environmental and social impacts are expected under the project.
It is unlikely that the implementation of subprojects would lead to a significant change in land use
patterns in local areas. If investments are proposed in existing communities living in protected
areas or reserved forests, any impacts will be assessed in line with the requirements provided in
the ESMF, and if an investment is considered for financing, mitigation measures will be developed
to minimize or avoid damage.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project has developed eligibility criteria that render non eligible for financing under the
project investments that would potentially generate significant adverse impacts. Specific designs
are followed for subprojects.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environmental and Social Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF) which was
prepared under the original project was updated and an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) was prepared for this AF, taking into account the experience and lessons
learnt from the original project. The ESMF will replace the ESSAF and will apply to the entire
project regardless of the source of financing.
The Department of Rural Development (DRD) under the Ministry of Livestock, Fisheries and
Rural Development will continue to implement this AF as under the original project. The CDD
Secretariat of the DRD, and its staff at township level, is responsible for the overall safeguard
compliance of this AF as well as for communications and outreach, and capacity development of
all project stakeholders. DRD will also make regular monitoring and supervision visits to project
locations, review township monthly reports, resolve management and implementation issues as
they arise, and provide a learning feedback loop with the townships. The DRD will provide
quarterly progress reports to the steering committee and the World Bank. A technical assistance
team at the union level will continue to provide safeguard capacity development support to the
DRD.
The Village Tract Project Support Committee (VTPSC) and village project support committees are
responsible for ensuring that the community planning process and sub-project implementation
cycle at the village tract and village levels, respectively, are carried out with due diligence and
efficiency and in accordance with the project Operations Manual and ESMF. Technical assistance
teams at the township level will provide safeguard capacity development support to the VTPSC.
Page 13 of 17


﻿The VTPSC reviews the respective village development plans and prioritizes the interventions
against the needs of the tract and the available funding envelope in a 3-year village tract
development plan. In each village tract, a village tract grievance sub-committee is established
under the VTSPC, whose tasks include supporting the grievance handling mechanism, monitoring
progress of grievance handling activities, and collecting/receiving and responding to complaints/
grievances and, where necessary, referring such to the township level. The grievance sub-
committee is composed of one to two representatives from each village who are not members of
the village tract project support committee.
At the community level, the village monitoring sub-committee monitors progress in implementing
the village sub-project including safeguard compliance. As under the original project, during
construction, the village monitoring sub-committee will monitor progress in implementing any
environmental and social mitigation measures. Monitoring reports will be publicly displayed on
the village notice board. Village sub-project monitoring forms will capture information that is
consistent with the project results framework.
At the township level, the DRD township engineer together with the township technical assistance
team, CFs and TFs will continue to monitor subprojects regularly, including on safeguard
performance, as under the original project. The DRD township engineer and the township M&E
officer will undertake regular supervision visits to the village sub-project sites, review progress in
implementing the village sub-project and any environmental and social mitigation measures, and
recommend solutions to problems faced. The DRD township M&E officer will incorporate key
findings from the supervision visits into the quarterly township progress report. The township
engineer will undertake additional visits to advise the VPSCs on technical issues, as requested.
At the union level, the DRD union office staff and relevant union TA consultants will continue to
undertake regular supervision and monitoring visits to townships, village tracts and village sub-
project sites. Visits will serve to assess project implementation progress across the village tracts in
a township. The DRD union office will ensure that experiences from other townships are shared in
order to enhance implementation quality. DRD union office staff and union TA consultants will
continue to provide technical support to the DRD township office staff and VTPSCs, as needed.
The DRD union M&E officer will incorporate the findings from safeguard supervision visits as
well as the data provided in the quarterly township progress report into the quarterly project
progress report.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During safeguard consultation meetings held on February 9, 2015 in Yangon, February 11, 2015 in
Mandalay and February 16, 2015 in Naypyitaw, this ESMF was the subject of consultations with
key stakeholders including civil society and other project stakeholders. The revised ESMF
following public consultations will be disclosed in accordance with the World Bank's Access to
Information Policy. This document will be translated into Burmese and made available to the
public and to Project stakeholders.
During implementation, the VTDPs (which serve as the Ethnic Minority Development Plan
(EMDP) for this project and include a summary of participatory social assessment). If relevant, an
abbreviated or full Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be disclosed in local languages at places
accessible to affected people. Copies of VTDPs and RAPs will be made available at DRD
Township office.
Page 14 of 17


﻿The VTPSC prepares a monthly consolidated report for all village sub-projects under
implementation, including safeguard aspects, and submits it to the DRD township M&E officer.
With the assistance of the volunteers, the village monitoring sub-committee organizes a village
monitoring meeting about every two months or when major milestones have been achieved. Every
effort will be made to ensure that as many villagers as possible attend the meeting. The village
monitoring sub-committee will update villagers on all aspects of implementation progress
(procurement activities, percent of works undertaken, number of person days of work and wages
paid, expenses to date and cash on hand, women's involvement, safeguards and mitigation
measures, etc.). Villagers will be given opportunities to discuss progress and raise any concerns
they may have regarding village sub-project implementation. The VTPSC will file all safeguard
instruments including voluntary donation forms, monitor their successful implementation through
field visits and regular meetings with MSCs and record the current status of safeguard
implementation including outstanding issues and grievances collected.
Villagers will be invited to attend social audits at the end of each annual cycle to review the
expenditures made and progress achieved, discuss the findings of any financial and technical audit
findings, and suggest local adaptations to the project cycle or community implementation
structure. As long as the project is active in a township, villagers will have the opportunity to
provide feedback or express complaints through a grievance handling mechanism. The summary
of the social audit conducted at the end of the Cycle 1 is provided in Section F of the ESMF.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                28-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Jan-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                28-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                28-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Myanmar                                                    26-Jan-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 15 of 17


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [ X ]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [ X ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [ X ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [ X ]    NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [X] No [     ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X] No[  ]  NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 16 of 17


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]   No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ingo Wiederhofer,Nikolas Myint
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Jan Weetjens (PMGR)                   Date: 02-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 17 of 17


