                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                Report No.:ISDSC20989
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-May-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Indonesia         Project ID:               P162960
    Project Name:                     Peatland Environment Accelerated Transformation Project
    Team Leader(s):                   Marcus J. Wishart,Ann Jeannette Glauber,Ijeoma Emenanjo
    Estimated Date                    01-Jun-2017
    of Approval:
    Managing Unit:                    GEN2A                   Lending                   IPF
    PHGlbPracLbl                                              Instrument:
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       4.5                       Total Bank Financing: 0
    Financing Gap:            0
      Financing Source                                                                            Amount
      Sustainable Landscapes MDTF                                                                       4.5
    Environmental Category:           A - Full Assessment

    B. Project Development Objective(s)
    This is the first in a Series of Projects aimed at supporting the Government’s efforts toward the
    restoration and management of at least two million hectares of peatland and promoting a framework for
    the sustainable development, restoration and conservation of lowland areas inIndonesia.

    The Program Development Objective is to improve the integration and coordination among multi-sector
    stakeholders to promote the sustainable development, restoration and conservation of targeted lowland
    areas in Indonesia. This is a common objective for all projects within the Lowlands Program. This will
    be achieved through:
    i. Integrated multi-sectoral planning for lowland development, restoration and conservation;
    ii. Improved policy instruments for lowland development, restoration and conservation; and,
    iii. Multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms for development, restoration and conservation of lowland
    areas.

    The Project Development Objective is to improve the capacity to plan, coordinate, and monitor the
    restoration, conservation and development of selected peatlands in Indonesia.
    C. Project Description


    D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis

                                              Page 1 of 6
(if known)
The proposed project aims to provide TA to BRG to be able to meet its goals to restore critical peatland
areas. Although no direct impacts are envisioned to be associated with the TA project, the proposed
operation will inform future strategic options for BRG both financed by the WB and other sources.
Depending on the locations and nature of restoration efforts, which remain largely unknown at this
stage, strategic options formulated under the TA project can potentially be classified as high and
medium risks. A wide range of potential impacts, both positive and negative could therefore be
anticipated once physical investments have been made as a result of financing and investment plans
supported by the project.

In light of the potential future risks and impacts, the TA seeks to strengthen the BRG and its partners’
capacity to develop and implement impact mitigation measures, as well as monitor potential impacts of
relevant instruments and future resources mobilized. Under Component 2, capacity strengthening for
BRG and its partners is proposed to be supported through a Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) process which would include broad public consultations to identify impacts and
mitigation measures, capacity building activities (i.e. workshops, training) and the development of an
integrated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for BRG-financed operations.
The ESMF will incorporate the risk assessments and potential mitigation measures from the SESA
consultations and other technical assessments. Under the TA, the project seeks to institutionalize the
ESMF and other relevant safeguards measures into the BRG’s environmental and social management
system. Since peat restoration activities cover a wide geographic area and involve multiple stakeholders,
safeguard instruments in the ESMF will take into account the practicality of measures and instruments to
be developed given the diversity and complexity of interventions and multiple actors and financing
sources to be involved. The ESMF will be developed to be applicable at the national level and relevant
safeguards plans will be developed based on the contexts and needs of specific activities, including
capacity building requirements.

Both the SESA and ESMF constitute the key safeguard processes that will be supported under the TA
implementation. The project seeks to ensure that safeguards assessments and proposed measures are
fully informed by and aligned with BRG’s technical studies of potential investments and provincial
spatial plans for peat restoration, which will only be known during the TA implementation. For this
reason, the SESA and ESMF will be treated as key outputs of the TA project and during the process,
various capacity building on safeguards will be mainstreamed into the TA project design.

The ToRs for both the SESA and ESMF will be prepared by BRG with technical support from the WB
and disclosed prior to the appraisal.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The BRG has developed some technical guidelines for best practices of activities related to peatland
restoration (e.g. tree nurseries, agriculture) and participatory community mapping. However, these
guidelines have limited value in fulfilling safeguard policies and BRG has limited experience with
implementation and capacity for safeguards management. Further assessments will be made as part of
project preparation to identify capacity gaps and needed measures to strengthen current capacity during
the appraisal. Based on the capacity assessment, capacity building strategies for BRG and its partners
will be developed and mainstreamed into the TA project design. During preparation of this project, BRG
will also have UNDP TA support, which will likely include some safeguard-related assistance.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Fajar Argo Djati (GSUID)
George Henry Stirrett Wood (GEN2A)

                                           Page 2 of 6
Lucy Madeline Mitchell (GSUID)
Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (GEN2A)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                 Triggered ?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes           In light of the potential risk levels and
                                                  impacts, an environmental assessment (in this
                                                  case the SESA) will be prepared for the
                                                  operation to inform the larger program with
                                                  regards to risks and impacts associated with
                                                  potential investments. The SESA process will
                                                  be developed in parallel with various
                                                  feasibility and spatial plan analyses during the
                                                  TA implementation to ensure that the
                                                  recommendations produced are fully aligned
                                                  and mainstreamed into the BRG roadmap. The
                                                  SESA process will also constitute various
                                                  consultations, awareness-raising, and capacity
                                                  building on safeguards measures for BRG
                                                  staff and its implementing partners, including
                                                  the Public Works and various NGOs/CBOs.

                                                  Since the locations and potential activities will
                                                  be only determined once investment plans and
                                                  financing sources are secured, the TA project
                                                  will use a framework approach to establish
                                                  modalities and procedures to address potential
                                                  negative environmental and social impacts.
                                                  Risk assessments on potential strategic
                                                  options as well as recommendation on
                                                  mitigation measures and implementation
                                                  arrangements resulting from the SESA will be
                                                  used as the basis for the development of the
                                                  ESMF for BRG-financed peat restoration
                                                  activities in priority provinces. The ESMF
                                                  will also incorporate various existing sectoral
                                                  guidelines relevant to environmental and
                                                  social management already to be developed by
                                                  the BRG and those developed under the
                                                  proposed project. Although it is not clear yet
                                                  whether feasibility studies, technical designs,
                                                  or other activities directly supporting
                                                  investment activities will be supported by the
                                                  PEAT Project, the ESMF will be prepared to
                                                  include physical BRG restoration activities,
                                                  with more specific safeguard management
                                                  plans prepared when possible.



                                    Page 3 of 6
                                                    Recognizing the range of restoration efforts
                                                    under BRG’s mandates, some of which may
                                                    be high risk, the TA project seeks to support
                                                    capacity strengthening for BRG on safeguards
                                                    and also aims to institutionalize the ESMF and
                                                    other relevant safeguards measures into the
                                                    BRG’s system to ensure that the same
                                                    approach is applied regardless of financing
                                                    sources. Since the ESMF development is part
                                                    of the TA process, the final product itself will
                                                    be one of the key outputs of the TA.

                                                    The ESMF and necessary safeguards
                                                    instruments will be prepared by BRG with
                                                    support from various technical experts
                                                    financed by the TA. The TORs for both SESA
                                                    and ESMF will be disclosed prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          Yes            Despite high rates of deforestation, there are
                                                    still intact terrestrial and aquatic ecosystems
                                                    of global significance in the Indonesian
                                                    lowlands, including national parks. The
                                                    Strategic Environmental and Social
                                                    Assessment carried out under the project will
                                                    include risks and mitigation measures to
                                                    natural habitats and their biodiversity. The
                                                    SESA and ESMF ToRs will be disclosed prior
                                                    to appraisal.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                   Yes            Peatlands in their natural state (as well as
                                                    disturbed state) are forested. Although
                                                    peatland restoration would be presumed to
                                                    have positive impacts on forests, this is not
                                                    necessarily the case. The Strategic
                                                    Environmental and Social Assessment will be
                                                    carried out under the project to will include
                                                    risks and mitigation measures to forest cover
                                                    and quality. The SESA and ESMF ToRs will
                                                    be disclosed prior to appraisal.
Pest Management OP 4.09              TBD            The project will not directly finance the
                                                    procurement of pesticides nor will it include
                                                    any physical works but could inform the
                                                    preparation of activities to be implemented
                                                    through subsequent support that could result
                                                    in a shift in the use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 TBD          The Indonesian lowlands are a very large area
                                                    that encompasses many areas that contain
                                                    human-made and natural physical cultural
                                                    resources (PCR). The Strategic Environmental
                                                    and Social Assessment will be conducted and
                                                    an subsequent ESMF will be developed under

                                      Page 4 of 6
                                                    the project to inform the nature of any
                                                    potential peatland restoration risks to PCRs
                                                    and mitigation measures if necessary. The
                                                    SESA and ESMF ToRs will be disclosed prior
                                                    to appraisal.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes           Future investments in peat restoration will
                                                    likely be implemented in areas inhabited by
                                                    Indigenous Peoples (Masyarakat Hukum
                                                    Adat) and co-existence between Adat and
                                                    local communities (IPLCs). Such investments
                                                    may adversely impact the lands and access to
                                                    natural resources vital to the sustenance of
                                                    their livelihoods and cultural and social
                                                    identities if not properly consulted or
                                                    assessments and mitigation measures do not
                                                    take such impacts into account. Therefore,
                                                    inclusion of IPLCs is central in the design of
                                                    peatland restoration in Indonesia. The SESA
                                                    will seek further understanding about the
                                                    approach to ensure participation and inclusion
                                                    of IPLCs in peatland restoration activities.

                                                    The project’s ESMF will incorporate
                                                    mechanisms for Free, Prior, and Informed
                                                    Consultations and relevant frameworks
                                                    including Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                    Framework (IPPF) and Community
                                                    Participation Framework (CPPF). The ESMF
                                                    will utilize findings from the SESA analytical
                                                    and consultative process and other studies
                                                    commissioned by BRG.

                                                    Strategic Environmental and Social
                                                    Assessment will be carried out under the
                                                    project to inform that broader context and
                                                    larger program. The ToRs will be disclosed
                                                    prior to appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes           The proposed investment plans for peatland
                                                    restorations should avoid promoting
                                                    involuntary resettlement and/or livelihood
                                                    displacement to the extent feasible and foster
                                                    partnership with lowlands communities to
                                                    improve their livelihoods, support the
                                                    sustainability and acceptance of investments
                                                    to be introduced and avoid land-related
                                                    conflicts. Since potential investments are yet
                                                    to be determined through the support from this
                                                    project, the ESMF acknowledges the
                                                    possibilities for peat restoration investments to


                                      Page 5 of 6
                                                                             require and/or induce some forms of land
                                                                             acquisition and/or involuntary access
                                                                             restrictions for people who depend on critical
                                                                             lowland areas for livelihoods. Given this
                                                                             consideration, a Resettlement Policy and
                                                                             Process Frameworks will be established in the
                                                                             ESMF together with a list of ineligible
                                                                             activities and screening criteria. In the event
                                                                             that resettlement (both physical and
                                                                             livelihoods displacement) is expected as part
                                                                             or linked to BRG’s investments, a
                                                                             Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be
                                                                             developed in conjunction with the ESMF.
      Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                          No
      Projects on International Waterways                No
      OP/BP 7.50
      Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60              No
.




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




    PHAPPRNO




               A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?:        Yes
               i. Explanation
               N/A

               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
               09-Jun-2017

               A. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                  The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
               The ToRs for the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment and ESMF will be disclosed prior to
               appraisal.

IV. Approval
      Task Team Leader(s):                      Name: Marcus J. Wishart,Ann Jeannette Glauber,Ijeoma Emenanjo
      Approved By:
      Safeguards Advisor:                       Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                            Date: 12-May-2017
      Practice Manager/Manager:                 Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                         Date: 16-May-2017


        1 Reminder:The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
      InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
      affected persons.




                                                          Page 6 of 6
