INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR14640
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Jul-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                      Project ID:   P114338
Project Name: Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor - I (P114338)
Task Team       Benedictus Eijbergen
Leader(s):
Estimated       14-Apr-2011                Estimated     31-May-2011
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT106                       Lending       Adaptable Program Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Railways (97%), Public administration- Transportation (3%)
Theme:          Infrastructure services for private sector development (97%), Climate change
(3%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    1458.44            Total Bank Financing:   975.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
Borrower                                                       483.44
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          975.00
Total                                                         1458.44
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The development objectives of the Project are to: (a) provide additional rail transport capacity,
improved service quality and higher freight throughput on the                 343
km Khurja to Kanpur section of the Eastern rail corridor; and (b) develop th
Page 1 of 15


﻿e institutional capacity of DFCCIL to build and maintain the DFC infrastructure
network.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The development objectives of the Project are to: (a) provide additional rail transport capacity,
improved service quality and higher freight throughput on the                  343
km Khurja to Kanpur section of the Eastern rail corridor; and (b) develop th
e institutional capacity of DFCCIL to build and maintain the DFC infrastructure
a        network.
3. Project Description
The Eastern Corridor is 1,840 km and extends from Ludhiana to Kolkata. World Bank support for the
Eastern Dedicated Freight Corridor (EDFC) was designed as a series of projects in which three
EDFC sections would be delivered sequentially, but with overlapping construction schedules.
EDFC1 was approved by the Bank in May 2011 and is under construction. EDFC2 was approved in
April 2014 and its two civil works contracts were awarded in March 2015. The Government of
India's request for a loan of USD 650 million loan for the EDFC3 section (Ludhiana- Khurja: 401
kin) was approved on June 30, 2015 by the Board of Directors of the Bank.
EDFC 1, approved by the Bank's Board of Executive Directors on May 31, 2011 (Loan No. 8066-
IN), became effective on December 30, 2011 and is being implemented by the Dedicated Freight
Corridor Corporation of India Limited (DFCCIL).
(a) Design and construction of Khurja-Kanpur rail corridor: Design, construction and
commissioning of 343 km of double track electrified railway on the Khurja-Kanpur section of the
Eastern DFC, including related consultancy services under this Part 1 of the project.
(b)    Institutional Development: Institutional development to assist DFCCIL and MOR to
develop their capabilities to best utilize heavy haul freight system.
Project Restructuring-Key Elements: A successful procurement of civil works yielded significant
loan savings which along with the saving due to Indian Rupee depreciation are planned to finance a
key connector link between Khurja and Dadri (47 km). As per the current financing percentage (66%
World Bank and 34% counterpart funds under category-1 of the project consisting of Goods, Works,
Consultants' services and Training under Part-1) for EDFC 1, savings of about US$ 281 million are
expected in the loan, owing to the competitive bidding in the civil works contract and the
depreciation of the Indian Rupee (INR 45/US$ at the time of appraisal to about INR 60/US$ at
present). In order to utilize these savings Government of India requested the Bank to (1) revise the
funding percentage of the Bank to 80% for Category - I (Goods, Works, consultants' services and
training under Part 1) of the project which will utilize about US$ 123 million of the savings. And (2)
include the cost of goods, works (civil and systems) and related consultancies for the Khurja-Dadri
(47 km double track) section under part-I of the project. Therefore the Project is proposed to be
restructured with the following changes.
a)     Percentage of expenditure to be financed for Part-I of the project from existing 66% to 80%.
b) Include cost of works and related consultancies of Khurja - Dadri section (47 km) in the
Project.
Changes in Development Objectives/ Results: Target values of the following two indicators will be
revised due to the complimenting change of including the Khurja - Dadri section (47 kms) in the
Page 2 of 15


﻿project.
i.     DFC Freight traffic (GTKM bn ton)
ii.    DFC Freight traffic (NTKM bn ton-km)
O
U         Compliance: No new safeguards policies have been triggered.
Infrastructure Component: In addition to the 343 km Khura- Kanpur corridor, additional physical
infrastructure proposed to be financed is construction of the 47 km rail corridor between Khurja- and
Dadri. The route alignment of the Khurja-Dadri section will run mostly parallel to the existing IR
track; however, the alignment will detour near big cities and towns.
On the parallel track section, existing level crossings that have relatively high traffic will be replaced
by Road Over Bridges or Under Bridges (ROBs/RUBs) spanning new and existing tracks. The
remaining level crossings will be improved by interlocking them with the train signaling system and
by providing electrically operated booms. Audio-visual warning systems will ensure safety of
pedestrians and vehicles. Some of these level crossings would be replaced over time by ROBs/RUBs.
The alignment will be fenced at critical locations. On the detour sections there will be no level
crossings. A four-aspect automatic block system will utilize trackside signals.
Construction will be under Design & Build contracts, with one civil works contract (consisting of
sub-grade, bridges and track). Separate system contracts for electrification and for signaling and
telecommunications will be awarded for the entire Khurja-Dadri section. The Design & Build
contract will be awarded on the basis of Performance Specifications (PS), which will permit bidders
reasonable freedom to carry out detailed design. DFCCIL has engaged a General Consultant/Owner's
Engineer (GC/OE) for preliminary design and procurement.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The EDFC1 originally included a 343 km section between Kanpur and Khurja in the state of
Uttarpradesh. The additional stretch proposed to be financed is a 47 km corridor between Khurja and
Dadri in Uttarpradesh. The total EDFC 1 corridor will thus become a 390 km corridor between
Kanpur-Khurja-Dadri. The EDFC corridor traverses the Indo-Gangetic plain connecting the port of
Kolkata on the Bay of Bengal in the east, to the industrial heartland of northern India in the north-
west (Ludhiana). The corridor would be mostly parallel to the existing railway route with diversions
in densely populated areas to minimize displacement of people and economic activities. The EDFC 1
stretch between Khurja to Kanpur passed through 283 villages and the additional 47 km stretch of
Khurja-Dadri passes through 38 villages in Uttar Pradesh. The inclusion of the Khurja-Dadri section
(47 km) in EDFC 1 does not bring any changes in the salient physical characteristics relevant to the
safeguards analysis. No new safeguards policies have been triggered.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GENDR)
I. U. B. Reddy (GSURR)
Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Page 3 of 15


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
O
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project involves major construction activities such as earthen embankments for the rail track,
number of major and minor bridges, rail fly overs and ancillary buildings. These activities are
expected to cause significant environmental impacts comprising diversion of forest land, cutting of
trees, impact on community and cultural resources, and land acquisition and involuntary
resettlement. Considering the above, the Project has been categorized as 'Category A' and triggers
four safeguards policies- Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Physical Cultural Resources
(OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). Inclusion of Khurja - Dadri Section of
the project does not involve triggering any new safeguard policies than the ones indicated above.
Environmental Impacts:
Railway projects, especially new alignments such as the current project passing through large
geographical areas, could cause significant impacts, if not planned, designed and implemented
without considering environmental sensitivities of the project area. Based on the inputs from
environmental assessment, number of alignment alternatives to avoid significant environmental
impacts and the final alignment for Khurja - Kanpur (Bhapur) includes (i) detours at 5 locations to
avoid impacts on major settlements and cultural properties along the alignment (ii) minimum right
of way at critical locations, to avoid impacts on communities residing close to the alignment and
forest areas (iii) 5 major bridges and adequate cross drainage works to avoid impacts on local
drainage (iv) provision of Rail Over Bridges and Pedestrian over passes to facilitate safe
movement of local traffic, etc. Despite the above measures, the project is expected to lead to (i)
acquisition of small parcels of forest land in seven locations along the alignment amounting to a
total of 10.59 hectares (ii) cutting of about 17901 trees for the entire 272 km of alignment (iii)
involvement of about 17 million m3 of earth work in embankment and 1.35 million m3 of quarry
Page 4 of 15


﻿material (iv) increased noise and vibration levels in about 37 sensitive receptors situated close to
the alignment (v) impacts on 22 physical and cultural properties and (vi) significant health and
safety issues due to the construction activities of the project.
Similar approach has been followed for the newly added Khurja - Dadri section of the project,
O
which includes (i) detours at 2 locations to avoid impacts on major settlements (ii) 4 major
bridges, 49 minor bridges and adequate cross drainage works to avoid impacts on local drainage
(iii) provision of 13 major and 15 road under bridges and 18 level crossings, to facilitate easy
movement of local traffic. After incorporation of these measures in the project design, the project
is expected to (i) convert 3.9 hectares of forest land at various locations along the alignment (ii)
cut 2193 trees (ii) involve 0.18 m3 of earthwork in cutting 0.73 m3 of earth work in embankment
and 0.2 million m3 of ballast material (iii) increase in noise and vibration levels at 3 locations
along the alignment (iv) impact 4 physical and cultural properties and (v) health and safety issues
during construction phase of the project.
Social Impacts: The key social impacts associated with this Project include the loss of land,
shelter/business, farming livelihoods, incomes and community properties and temporary
construction related impacts. The SIA and RAP for the 343 km long EDFC 1 corridor (Khurja to
Kanpur) was prepared in two stages for 272 km and for the Tundla detour of 71 km. Overall, the
Khurja-Kanpur section of EDFC1 required a total of 1410 ha of land, of which 179.5 ha land is
government owned. A total of 29,253 land owners were affected for the loss of agricultural land.
In addition 585 residential and commercial structures and 78 community properties were affected.
Social Impact Assessment (SIA) and RAP for the Khurja-Dadri section has been prepared,
approved by the Bank and disclosed by DFCCIL at the local level on July 23, 2015 in line with the
Resettlement Policy Framework. (RPF). A total of 221.6 ha of land is required for Khurja-Dadri
section, of which 145.6 ha is privately owned land and 66 ha government owned land.
A total of 1974 households (5841 persons) are affected with 1893 households losing their
agricultural land (694 of which are small/marginal farmers) and 121 households losing their
residential/ commercial structures. 121 private residential/commercial properties and 14
community property structures are affected. Of the 121 structures, 96 structures losing over 25%
of built-up area, will be treated as displaced and will receive the full range of R&R benefits.
Traditional occupiers living on 'abadi deh' lands are recognized as title holders and will receive
compensation for their occupied land.
Impacts on livelihoods: According to a Social Safeguards Quality Audit carried out in January
2013 for EDFC1, the loss of farm-based livelihoods of marginal farmers is a key adverse impact,
a          which has to be addressed applying appropriately the resettlement framework. Given that the
affected farmers have limited skills in non-farm activities, they will require livelihood skill
training support in addition to financial assistance as R&R support.
Impact on women and vulnerable sections. Vulnerable households including single women and
women headed families lacking support of any earning members, poor and aged, physically
handicapped, etc are likely to face additional hardship as a result of resettlement impacts. The
affected squatter households dependent on wage labor could lose their incomes as a result of
resettlement.
The temporary construction related impacts such as health and safety, labor in-migration, accident
risks, dust and noise, movement of materials etc. are covered in the EIA.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Page 5 of 15


﻿The environmental assessments carried out for all the three sections of EDFC 1 (Khurja -
Kanpur, Tundla Detour and Khurja - Dadri) -I, highlights, a few long-term environmental impacts
due to quarrying large quantities of stone material (about 1.5 million m3), borrowing earth for
laying the track (about 20 million m3), increased noise and vibration levels during operation phase
at about 40 locations along the railway track, impacts on physical and cultural properties at about
26 locations and land use changes over a long term. The environmental management plans
prepared for the project, proposes specific mitigation measures to minimize the above impacts,
through specific management plans for the borrow areas and quarry sites, noise barriers and
cultural property management plans.
At few locations including habitations close to the new EDFC tracks, movement of local
communities and local traffic may also be affected due to including increased risk of accidents.
The project proposes Rail Over Bridges and Pedestrian Over Bridges to minimize these risks.
There is a likelihood that DFCCIL may seek to develop along the EDFC corridor a few transport
hubs and undertake other business development activities. Whereas, the exact nature and impact of
such development activities is not known, these activities may require acquisition of additional
lands, and on the positive side, could generate new employment and income opportunities for the
local people. As such, on the positive side, the project is expected to provide employment and
income opportunities to the local communities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Minimum land acquisition and disturbance to existing features has been a prime objective of the
design for EDFC1. Several measures were taken to minimize displacement including changes in
alignment in the Tundla detour of 71 kms and small detours to avoid impactson urban areas and /
or villages.
The steps taken to reduce corridor of impact to minimize displacement in the Khurja-Dadri section
include: a) Reducing track distance between IR network and DFC network to minimum level,
these locations are Jamalpur, Ajayabpur, Rithauri and Sultanpur; b) Ruling out service roads in the
built-up stretches, c) Providing retaining wall/fencing of DFC at suitable distance from last track
of DFC, three meters extra width (if land is available) from houses to retaining wall in order to
provide access to local residents, if additional land is not available, with access to residents from
other side of their house, which will be planned during implementation of the project; and d) Re-
modelling of yard and reducing distance between yard and DFC tracks. Alignment has been
designed in such a way to avoid physical displacement of large number of people. Mostly the
alignment of DFC project has been planned in parallel to existing Railway alignment. To avoid
displacement of large number of people, short detours have been planned at congested locations.
Alternative analysis of the proposed Wair and Bodaki detour portion was carried out. The result of
analysis of the alternative alignments indicates that bypasses have been proposed to avoid
congestion and large scale magnitude of displacement of people. Analysis of these alternative
alignments indicates that displacement and resettlement issues have been minimized at these
critical locations under the project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
(a) Borrowers Measures to address environmental safeguard Issues
Environmental Management Plan: DFCCIL has carried out EA for all the three sections (including
Page 6 of 15


﻿the newly added Khurja - Dadri Section) of the project, and prepared comprehensive
environmental management plans to address the impacts identified and specific mitigation
measures. The measures include (i) compensatory afforestation to compensate with the loss of
forest land and the loss of tree cover, in complete compliance with the Forest Conservation Act of
O
Government of India (ii) Avenue Plantation at 10 trees per km all along the alignment (iii)
Rehabilitation Plan for the Borrow Areas developed for the earth work for the project (iv) noise
barriers in 16 critical locations affected with high noise levels and mitigation measures for the
management of increased noise levels in other sensitive locations (v) specific vibration reduction
and management measures in the locations where vibration levels are expected to be high (vi)
cultural properties rehabilitation plan for all the affected properties and (vii) specific construction
safety and environmental management measures for the construction phase of the project. The
EMP measures have been integrated in the bid documents of first two sections of EDFC 1 and will
also be included in the bid documents of Khurja - Dadbri Section, for implementation by the
contractors of the project.
Silicosis Reduction Strategies: Considering the large quantities of quarry material handled in the
project, a separate analysis of measures required to mitigate the potential impacts of 'Silicosis' on
the construction workers of the project was carried out in EDFC 1 and specific measures were
recommended to be integrated in to the bid documents of the project, for implementation by the
contractor. These measures including the EMP have been integrated in the bid documents for
implementation by the contractors of the project.
Environmental Management Framework: The borrower has developed an Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) during the preparation of EDFC 1, for the eastern dedicated
freight corridor. The framework defines environment management approach for identifying the
environmental issues associated with the proposed projects, identifies the requirements of
conducting EA studies and provides guidance to integrate environment safeguard measures during
the planning, designing and construction phase of DFC East. DFC continues to follow the
framework for all the activities being carried out for the Eastern Corridor, including the newly
added Khurja - Dadri Section.
GHG Emission Analysis: By virtue of its potential to shift freight traffic from road transport to
more efficient rail transport, the project offers significant reduction of Green House Gas (GHG)
emissions. An analysis of this potential to reduce GHG emissions was carried out in EDFC 1,
which estimated that the eastern corridor will reduce about 13.19 million GHG emissions by
2041-42 - a reduction of 55 percent of GHG emissions from 23.29 million ton without DFC to
only 10.48 million tons with DFC. In addition, the analysis has also recommended a number of
measures such as (i) regenerative breaking (ii) communication based train control (iii) green
building measures for offsite construction activities (iv) solar and wind power generation in
railway properties / lands. DFCCIL is actively pursuing these measures, which will further reduce
GHG emissions.
(b) Assessment of Borrowers Capacity to Plan and Implement the Safeguard Measures
The environmental regulations of Gol do not mandate railway projects to obtain environmental
clearances from the Ministry of Environment & Forests (MoEF). However, as part of the
programmatic implementation of eastern corridor supported by the Bank, DFCCIL has developed
an Environmental Policy and Environmental Management Framework applicable for all its
activities. As part of these proactive initiatives, the agency has also carried out "Green House Gas
Page 7 of 15


﻿Emission Analysis" of both the eastern and western corridors. Considering the nature and scale of
construction activities DFCCIL has also developed 'Silicosis Reduction Strategies' to be
implemented in its construction activities.
To implement these initiatives, DFCCIL has set up a Social and Environmental Management Unit
O
)           (SEMU) headed by a General Manager (GM). SEMU implements all the safeguard activities at
DFCCIL, and is supported by a GM and one environmental and social specialist each.
This unit has successfully carried out the safeguard due diligence activities such as (i) Carrying out
Environmental Assessments for all three sections of EDFC 1 (Kanpur - Khurja - Dadri), EDFC 2
(Kanpur - Mughal Sarai) and all the two sections of EDFC 3 Khurja - Ludhiana. (ii)
Environmental Assessment of Rail Over Bridges in APL 1 (iii) Secured clearances from Taj
Trapezium Authority, Archaeological Department for Tundla Detourn in EDFC1 and (iv)
permissions for forest land diversion and tree cutting clearances, etc for all the three phases of
EDFC.
By performing these safeguard activities; DFCIL has demonstrated its commitment to
environmental management and ability to comply with safeguard policies of the Bank. However,
DFCIL has limited experience in implementing Environmental Management Plans (EMP). This
would require further handholding and capacity building of SEMU and Project Managers Staff in
the field. The Bank team would work with DFCIL and will ensure these capacities are developed
at DFCCIL.
Social Safeguards Measures: The safeguards policy arrangements for APLI restructuring are a
continuation of those agreed for the APL1. The World Bank Operational Policy 4.12 (Involuntary
Resettlement) and OP 4.11 (Physical and Cultural Resources) are triggered and appropriate
safeguard measures proposed. OP 4.10 has not been triggered as no tribal people are affected.
For EDFC 1, originally one RPF and two RAPs were prepared for 272 km and Tundla detour (71
km) respectively. The original corridor path was altered before Appraisal in recognition of the
affected farmers' reluctance to part with their land in the Tundla detour. As a result, the alignment
for Tundla detour was altered and separate SIA and RAP were prepared and disclosed for this 71
km stretch in line with the RPF of 2011 approved for EDFC1. These RAPs are in an advance stage
implementation.
O
DFCCIL has prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the additional Khuja-Dadri section
a          (47 km) with stakeholder consultations held at 30 locations in line with the Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF), which has been cleared by the World Bank and disclosed on the DFCCIL
website and at the local level on July 23, 2015. The RAP has been disclosed on the World Bank
portal on July 27, 2015.
As per the RAP, 221.6 ha of land is required for Khurja-Dadri section, of which 145.6 ha is
privately owned land and 66 ha government owned land. A total of 1974 households (5841
persons) are affected with 1893 households losing their agricultural land (694 of which are small/
marginal farmers) and 121 households losing their residential/ commercial structures. 121 private
residential/commercial properties and 14 community properties are affected. Traditional occupiers
living on village common lands are provided with LA compensation and R&R benefits at par with
the titled PAFs, as spelt out in the RAP.
The LA process is carried out in accordance with the RAA (2008) with providing R&R assistance
as per the entitlement matrix agreed with the Bank and in compliance with the National
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy, 2007 and the applicable provisions of the Right to Fair
Page 8 of 15


﻿Compensation and Transparency in Land Acquisition and Resettlement and Rehabilitation Act of
2013 (RFCT-LARRA). The RFCT-LARR Act applies to LA carried out under RAA, 2008 with
regard to determining land compensation for all awards declared with effect from January 1, 2015.
The RFCT-LARRA prescribes calculation of compensation at one-to-two times of the government
O
Q)         recognized land rates in urban areas and at two-to-four times that in rural areas. The RFCT-
LARRA provisions on land compensation have limited implications for EDFC 1 including the
Khurja-Dadri section where land acquisition has been over 80 percent completed. All land
compensation awards made with effect from January 1, 2015 shall be compliant with the RFCT-
LARRA, 2013. Wherever awards have been made after 1st Jan 2015 at old rates, the difference
will be paid to farmers as supplementary award in accordance with the new RFCT-LARRA.
Given that of 150 ha of private land, LA award has already been made for 130 ha or over 85% of
land required, RFCT-LARR shall apply in a limited way for this stretch in cases where award is
pending. DFCCIL will take the following steps to deal with any confusion emerging out of the
application of RFCT-LARR, 2013 for LA Awards declared w.e.f. January 1, 2015, which may be
more than what has been awarded under RAA, 2008 prior to January 1, 2015.
a)     DFCCIL will establish a communication strategy to educate the PAFs regarding the
applicability of RFCT-LARR for LA and R&R entitlements provided under RAP with explaining
the eligibility criteria, entitlements, and implementation procedures.
b)     DFCCIL will strengthen the Grievance Redress Mechanism with holding special
grievance hearing camps in the affected villages as may be required to resolve grievances relating
to the application of the RFCT-LARR to the LA process carried out under RAA, 20018 w.e.f.
January 1, 2015.
c)     DFCCIL and MoR will establish an apex level Resettlement Monitoring Committee to
monitor the LA and R&R process as also address any major obstacles affecting the LA and R&R
award and disbursement process.
Resettlement Lessons. Resettlement planning for Khurja-Dadri section benefited from the
implementation experience of EDFC1. The adaptive approach to safeguards management
established for EDFC1 allows course correction in resettlement policy and practice through
independent monitoring and evaluation arrangements. Some of the good practices adopted include:
(i) holding wide community consultations; (ii) hiring land survey and LA facilitation consultants
a          for demarcating impacts and for preparing land plans; (iii) regular updating of land records
ensuring transfer of land titles after LA compensation payment,; (iv) resolution of compensation
related grievances through arbitration; (v) provision of land compensation to traditional occupiers
settled on village lands (abadi deh); and (vi) holding regular monitoring and inter-agency
coordination meetings with the state governments.
In response to the resettlement quality audit of January 2013, DFCCIL has taken specific measures
to improve implementation quality. These include: (i) expanding the scope of jurisdiction of the
district grievance mechanisms enabling them to address complaints relating to type and magnitude
of land affected, and compensation awarded; (ii) ensuring payment of compensation at
replacement value through arbitration; (iii) giving financial assistance to those losing livelihoods,
or/ and those rendered marginal or landless farmers, and (iv) appointing two social development
specialists in the SEMU. A few actions agreed with DFCCIL during EDFC2 that require follow up
action include: (iv) imparting job skill training to the poor, eligible, and affected youth as a part of
livelihood skill building plan; and (vi) improving implementation capacity at field level with
hiring additional field staff.
Page 9 of 15


﻿Cut-Off Date: The Cut-off date for identifying the affected families including land owners, those
having title claims recognized under other state and central laws, squatters and other non-titled
holders shall be the date of first land acquisition (LA) notification issued under 20A of Railway
O
Q)          Amendment Act of 2008. It is provided that the "PAP census survey" shall be the basis for
finalizing the eligibility for extending R&R benefits including assistance towards the replacement
of affected structures of untitled PAPs.
Income Restoration. The RPF/ RAP provide for financial assistance to the affected families losing
their livelihoods. Given that the affected farmers have limited skills in non-farm activities, they
will require livelihood skill training support in addition to financial assistance. DFCCIL has
experimented with providing job skill training to a limited number of affected youth along Eastern
and Western Corridors. It has committed to prepare and implement a Skill Building Plan as a part
of RAP implementation in order to strengthen income generation amongst the poor, eligible and
affected youth as agreed with the Bank. This income generating initiative will focus on financial
literacy, skill building and entrepreneurship development for the affected people, in collaboration
with potential partners.
The support measures already provided in the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) restoring
livelihoods of the people affected by the EDFC1 extension (Khurja-Dadri) section include: (i)
livelihood assistance @ 750 days of minimum wage for the affected farmers rendered small,
marginal or landless farmer due to land acquisition, and affected people losing shops, or mixed use
structures (residences also used as work sheds) for income generating activities, and those losing
any other livelihood; (ii) Onetime grant of Rupees 25000 to affected artisans, small shops,
vendors, self-employed people; (iii) Subsistence allowance @ 300 days of minimum wage for
displaced families living the below poverty line, (iv) Special rehabilitation assistance @ 300 days
of minimum wage to the vulnerable persons including the poor, widows, women headed women
families, physically challenged, and the aged.
The PAFs awarded LA compensation w.e.f. January 1, 2015 will receive the following
entitlements as livelihood support measures as per the RFCT-LARR Act, 2013: (i) Compensation
for land payable at market value multiplied by a factor of 1-2 in rural areas and 1 in urban areas
with 100% solatium plus interest @ 12% per annum from the date of LA notification, (ii) One
a           time resettlement grant of Rupees 50,000 to affected families, (iii) Employment opportunity to at
least one member of the affected family, or annuity @ minimum Rupees 2000 per month for 20
years suitably indexed to the consumer price index or onetime payment of Rupees 500,000 to the
affected family, (iv) Subsistence allowance @ Rupees 3000/month for one year with additional
Rupees 50,000 for the affected Dalit (SC) families, (v) Onetime grant of rupees 25000 to the
artisans, small shops, vendors, self-employed people.
Gender and Social Inclusion. The RAP for Khurja-Dadri is socially inclusive and gender sensitive
with special R&R provisions for women, poor, artisans, small/marginal/landless farmers, and
vulnerable persons. The vulnerable families eligible for special assistance will also include aged
and disabled persons irrespective of sex, if they are poor. There shall be no discrimination based
on age, sex, caste or faith in offering LA compensation and R&R assistance, consistent with the
Chapter-III (Fundamental Rights) of the Indian Constitution.
Borrower's Social Safeguards Management Capacity: There shall be no change in the
institutional arrangements for EDFC1 including the Khurja-Dadri section. The Social and
Page 10 of 15


﻿Environment Management Unit (SEMU) of DFFCIL, led a General Manager, assisted by an AGM
and a Social Development Specialist, plays a coordinating role with hiring of NGOs for field-level
implementation support and Social and Environment Safeguards Monitoring and Review
Consultant (SESMRC) for third party monitoring and quality audit. The Chief Project Managers
O
(CPM) will continue to operate as Chief Resettlement Officers, assisted by a number of Assistant
Project Managers (Social). SEMU has enhanced its capacity with hiring two Social Development
Specialists. Whereas, the SEMU has demonstrated its capacity to prepare SIA and RAP, and
manage extensive land acquisition, gaps in field implementation capacity has affected
effectiveness with regard to areas such as information dissemination and people's mobilization,
and resolving compensation related disputes. In this context, DFCCIL will need to enhance its
staff capacity at the field level, and will require training and sustained technical support during the
implementation period. The Bank team will assist the Ministry of Railways (MoR) to establish
institutional capacity for planning, monitoring and coordinating LA and R&R activities through
technical assistance and will work closely with the DFCCIL to address the above issues including
through regular field visits, and training support.
Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). Regular performance monitoring of RAP implementation will
be carried out by the internal oversight mechanisms of DFCCIL, in which SEMU and the CPM
office will have key roles. SEMU and the CPM office will be assisted by PMC and the facilitating
NGOs. DFCCIL will hire SESMRC for third party monitoring and quality audit of LA and R&R
measures. SESMRC will provide quarterly progress reports (QPR) and yearly Safeguard Review
Reports for necessary follow up and any remedial action that may be required.
Independent Grievance Redress Mechanism. The GRM will remain the same with the Competent
Authority for LA will be the first level for hearing and resolving objections relating to land
acquisition. Independent Arbitrators will hear and redress grievances demanding higher
compensation. The district level GRC will be the second level GRM, chaired by the District
Collector or her/his nominees, and comprising representatives from civil society and the district
local body. DFCCIL has issued detailed guidelines, including on the scope of GRM's hearing of
complaints relating to land use type, impact area, eligibility, and structure and land valuation.
DFCCIL has appointed Additional Revenue Division Commissioners as Arbitrators to resolve land
compensation award related complaints. An Ombudsman has already been appointed to address
unresolved grievances. DFCCIL will further strengthen the field level GRM with organizing
a          grievance hearing camps in the affected villages as may be required to resolve grievances relating
to the application of the RFCT-LARR to the LA process carried out under RAA, 20018 w.e.f.
January 1, 2015. DFCCIL and MoR will establish an apex level Resettlement Monitoring
Committee to monitor the LA and R&R process as also address any major obstacles affecting the
LA and R&R process.
Grievance Redress Service of the World Bank:
Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB)
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms
or the WB's Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are
promptly reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected communities and
individuals may submit their complaint to the WB's independent Inspection Panel which
determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-compliance with its
policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have been
brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an
Page 11 of 15


﻿opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank's
corporate Grievance Redress Service (GRS), please visit www.worldbank.org/grs. For information
on how to submit complaints to the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.
inspectionpanel.org.
o
Safeguards Linkages: Concurrent to the construction of EDFC3, DFCCIL is expected to construct
some ROBs/RUBs without Bank financing along the corridor. DFCCIL is taking measures to
ensure that, all these activities physically connected to the project including ROBs/RUBs will
comply with the requirements of EMF agreed for the project. The western Dedicated Corridor
financed by JICA is not directly or significantly related to the Bank financed corridor, as this
corridor is on a separate alignment spread in a different geographical zone and does not meet the
lineage criteria outlined in the OP 4.12.
Risks and Mitigation Measures: The key social safeguards risks identified in the resettlement
audit, quarterly independent quality reports submitted by SESMRC and the Bank implementation
support mission Aide Memoires include: (i) delays in resettlement implementation due to (a)
change in alignment over 71 km of the Tundla section requiring fresh notification for land
acquisition, (ii) farmers' dissatisfaction with low compensation offered in some villages at older
circle rates in Uttar Pradesh; (iii) slow legal process affecting early resolution of court litigations
related to LA, (iv) recent changes in the legal framework for LA and R&R applicable to land
compensation payment for EDFC 1 after January 1, 2015, (v) income restoration of land losers;
(vi) delays in payment of R&R assistance; (vii) challenges in coordinating LA process with the
concerned revenue officers of the state government; (viii) poor public awareness regarding GRM
established at district and DFC levels; (ix) inadequate field capacity for managing LA and R&R
and absence of social scientist in the SEMU; (x) disputes regarding eligibility for compensation
and R&R benefits; (xi) loss of access to local roads in affected villages adjacent to the existing
railway tracks and loss of access to agricultural fields in bypass stretches and (xii) impacts on
affected squatter wage laborer residents without land, marginal farmers and vulnerable groups.
The above risks will be mitigated through the following key steps:
*      Updating the RAP with guidelines for providing compensation at replacement value and
R&R assistance to various PAP categories as per their entitlements.
*      Commitment to prepare and implement Livelihood Skill Building Plan focusing on job
skill training, financial literacy and entrepreneurship development as income generation support
measures as per the RAP.
*      Hiring NGOs to assist in verifying R&R eligibility through community consultations and
assisting with R&R benefit distribution.
*      Holding regular meetings with the state governments for effective coordination with
competent authorities and Arbitrators to resolve compensation issues.
*      Wider dissemination of entitlements/ GRM through NGOs and using other technology
platforms.
*      Expanding DFCCIL staff capacity in the field with deploying community mobilizers.
*      Resolving eligibility disputes through proactive efforts by GRM and NGOs.
*      Provision of minimum 3-meter wide service roads along railway tracks at habitations.
* Livelihood assistance for landless/ marginal farmers, displaced wage laborers and self-
employed people as per the entitlements matrix.
* Third Party R&R Monitoring and Quality Review through independent consultants.
* Award of contract and site hand over with clear linkage to progress in LA and R&R.
* Follow up stakeholder consultations by NGOs during implementation.
Page 12 of 15


﻿*      Undertaking impact evaluations during the implementation phase.
Any emerging risks will be addressed based on the reports received from the SESMRC.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key elements of DFCCIL's citizen engagement strategy include: (i) consultations with the
affected people during project planning and implementation, (ii) information disclosure and
dissemination, (iii) grievance redress mechanisms, and (iv) people's feedback on R&R
implementation through third party monitoring (SESMRC).
Stakeholder Consultations: Primary stakeholders for EDFC 1 include farmers losing land, owner
and squatter households losing residence and business, general public that may be affected by the
relocation of community properties, and people exposed to the likely temporary impacts.
Secondary stakeholders include the ministry of railways, DFCCIL, the concerned state
government, other government departments/agencies including forests and environment, etc.
EDFC1 272 km stretch: Public consultations were held with the affected people during SIA and
EIA studies in the form of focus groups discussions at several locations. These included 227 focus
group discussions (FGD) at the village level; 54 FGDs at the Tahsil or Taluk level; and 18 FGDs
at the district levels. In addition to this, consultations were held at 18 locations to discuss the
potential environmental impacts of the project.
RAP for Tundla detour: 54 consultation meetings were held in addition to one to one consultations
during BSES with the local community. District level public consultations were held in each of
affected two districts where PAFs, PAPs, NGOs and Government agencies were involved.
RAP for Khurja-Dadri corridor: During Base Line Socio Economic Survey (BSES) PAP
consultations were conducted to understand their perception and concerns. About 30 meetings
were held with the local community. Tahsile level public consultations were held in each of 4
Tehsils where PAFs, PAPs, NGOs and Government agencies were involved. The outputs obtained
from these meetings helped in formulating strategies for minimizing impacts. Follow up
consultations are being conducted during implementation.
o
Disclosure: The RPF/RAPs, EA and EMPs for EDFC1 were earlier disclosed on DFCCIL website
and Bank Infoshop. The draft RAP (Khurja-Dadri) was disclosed on the DFCCIL website on
January 22, 2015 and has been re-disclosed after it was formally approved by the World Bank on
July 23, 2015. The RAP has been disclosed at the World Bank portal on July 27, 2015. The EA
and RAP executive summaries have been translated in Hindi and disclosed locally. The full RAP
shall be also be disclosed locally in Hindi. The list of PAPs eligible for different R&R benefits
will be disclosed at the village and panchayat levels. DFCCIL will disseminate project information
brochures amongst the PAPs in villages explaining their entitlements and contact details of GRM.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              22-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Jul-2015
Page 13 of 15


﻿For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  01-Feb-2011
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                      22-Jan-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?             Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                25-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             27-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                      23-Jul-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
o          in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 14 of 15


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Benedictus Eijbergen
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)           Date: 03-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)     Date: 03-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 15 of 15


