                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA12932

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Tunisia                          Project ID:    P154713
                                                      Parent         P117082
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Tunisia - Northern Tunis Wastewater Project Additional Finance (P154713)
   Parent Project    Tunisia Northern Tunis Wastewater Project (P117082)
   Name:
   Task Team         Richard Abdulnour
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         27-Apr-2015                      Estimated   01-Jul-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GWADR                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Wastewater Collection and Transportation (100%)
   Theme(s):         Pollution management and environmental health (70%), Water resource
                     management (30%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      28.00           Total Bank Financing:              25.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                      Amount
     Borrower                                                                                 3.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   25.00
     Total                                                                                   28.00
   Environmental A - Full Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                           Page 1 of 12
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The project development objectives of the Project are to: (a) provide an environmentally safe
   disposal system for the treated wastewater which will not be reused in agriculture in the North of
   Tunis; and (b) increase the quantity and quality of treated wastewatermade available to farmers to
   encourage its reuse in agriculture in the Borj Touil area.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The Project’s Development Objective is to provide an environmentally safe disposal system for
   the treated wastewater in the North of Tunis.
3. Project Description
The Project’s main aim is to provide an environmentally safe disposal system for the treated
wastewater in the North of Tunis. It is designed to remedy the current situation (see section I.4 -
Project location) through the construction of a 12 kilometer transfer system for the 70,000,000 cubic
meters of TWW from the Northern Tunis urban area. To achieve this, a 6 km-long submarine outfall
is a critical component of the transfer system financed under the Project, as without it treated
wastewater would continue to be discharged at the Raoued Beach causing serious additional health
and environmental damage. In addition to the objective of environmentally safe discharge of treated
wastewater, project design is also oriented towards increasing the quantity and quality of treated
wastewater made available to farmers to encourage its reuse in agriculture in the contiguous Borj
Touil area. It includes a segregation mechanism to allow farmers or other potential users to access
only TWW which is of acceptable quality.

The evaluation of bids received for the construction of the critical submarine outfall conducted by
ONAS showed that there would be a significant cost overrun. ONAS consequently requested an
Additional Financing of US$ 25 million, and a twelve month extension of the closing date to June
30, 2018 to allow sufficient time to complete the original project activities. The AF does not alter
project design in any significant manner, as it mainly finances a cost overrun and the design of the
transfer infrastructure remains the same, while the overall project’s development objectives are
consistent with the original project. The Project and Additional Financing’s Development Objective
(PDO) are still to provide an environmentally safe disposal system for the treated wastewater in the
North of Tunis, while the Project’s Global Environment Objective (GEO) remains to support
increasing the reuse of treated wastewater in agriculture, thereby reducing treated wastewater
discharge from Greater Tunis into the Gulf of Tunis, an environmentally sensitive area of the
Mediterranean Sea.

The AF does not trigger new safeguards policies, change safeguard categories or raise safeguard-
related issues that were not covered in the original project’s ISDS. The existing instruments continue
to be adequate and do not need to be updated, with the exception of the Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment (ESIA) which was revised following the completion of the dispersion modeling
studies, though its main findings and mitigation measures were confirmed and remain unchanged.

The project remains organized in three components:

Part A: transfer of treated wastewater to increase its reuse in agriculture.
This component is now mostly financed under the GEF grant. It focuses on the investments
necessary to transfer the TWW from its existing discharge point close to the El Kehlij agriculture
drainage canal, through a double pipeline of 1800mm of diameter, up to a 160,000 cubic meter
compartmented storage basin from which better-quality TWW will be made available for reuse in


                                             Page 2 of 12
agriculture;

Part B: improvement of the discharge of the remaining TWW in the Mediterranean Sea.
This component includes (i) one pipeline of which will convey the TWW for about 5km from the
storage basin to the Raoued beach following the North side of the El Hissiène Oued; and (ii) a
submarine outfall about 6 km long which will discharge the TWW at a depth of about 20 meters. The
length, depth and point of discharge of the submarine outfall were confirmed by a dispersion
modelling study aimed at optimizing the design in order to maximize dilution and mixing of the
TWW with the sea water at the point of discharge.

Part C: monitoring and capacity strengthening.
This component includes technical assistance for supervision of works and environmental and water
quality monitoring systems in the Project area; consultant services for the reinfo rcement of human
and technical resources, and design studies for future projects such as a future WWTP in the North of
Tunis, or future transfer of TWW in the South of Tunis.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The current environmental conditions in the Project influence area are very poor:
- The land environment is characterized by increasing aridity, salinization of soils (hydromorphic
soil, low agricultural potential) and poor groundwater quality (high salinity, bacteriological
contamination and nitrate);
- The marine environment is relatively poor in biodiversity, characterized by species belonging to
heavily silted biotic environments and biocoenosis typical of deeper habitats.

The current discharge of treated wastewater into canal El Khelij which conveys TWW to the sea near
Raoued beach has significantly contributed to this deterioration, particularly in the Gulf of Tunis.
The existing system of WWTPs in the North of Tunis consists of two WWTPs able to consistently
meet the threshold for quality of treated wastewater discharge set under the national norm NT106.02,
while the two remaining WWTPs are saturated and provide poor treatment quality, which is only
partially offset by the effect of dilution. These WWTPs discharge 70 million cubic meters of treated
wastewater by gravity through concrete pipes into the open air El Khelij irrigation drainage and
storm water canal. TWW quality quickly deteriorates after exiting the WWTP system due to
recontamination as it is mixed with irrigation drainage, storm water, local discharge of untreated
wastewater, and unregulated solid waste disposal which has increased since the 2011 Revolution. As
a result, Biochemical Oxygen Demand (BOD), Chemical Oxygen Demand (COD), Suspended Solids
and Fecal Coliforms levels in the TWW flow significantly exceed acceptable thresholds, with in
particular about 3 million tons of suspended particles are discharged onto the sea shore each year.
The results are (i) a seabed heavily silted and polluted by organic matters; (ii) very low transparency
of sea water; (iii) complete absence of benthic macroflora; and (iv) contamination of bathing water of
Raoued beach. Overall, it appears that environmental conditions of this region have been
deteriorating rapidly and may deteriorate further if nothing is done to reverse this trend.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Arbi Ben Achour (GSURR)
John R. Butler (GSURR)
Mohamed Ghourabi (GENDR)
Taoufiq Bennouna (GENDR)


                                             Page 3 of 12
6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental               Yes        The Project is classified as Category A - full assessment.
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  Although the project will improve the current state of the
                                       natural and socio-economic environment, potential
                                       negative impacts may be significant given the nature and
                                       size of proposed works, the complexity of their
                                       implementation, the nature and quantity of treated
                                       wastewater (70 million m3/year) involved, and the project
                                       influence area that goes beyond the location of the outfall
                                       into the Gulf of Tunis. A comprehensive Environmental
                                       and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was prepared in
                                       2010 and revised in 2015, in accordance with the
                                       Operational Policy (OP 4.01) and legal covenants.
Natural Habitats OP/BP      No         The project will not modify or significantly degrade
4.04                                   terrestrial, coastal or marine natural habitats. Instead, it
                                       will contribute to the regeneration of the coastal
                                       ecosystem at the beach of Raoued and will contribute to
                                       improve the marine ecosystem of the Gulf of Tunis,
                                       which is currently in very poor shape.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No         The project area does not include natural forests, critical
                                       forest sites and areas that can be treated as forest, as
                                       defined in Annex A to OP 4.36.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The project does not include the use of insecticides or
                                       larvicides.
Physical Cultural        No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes           Of all the sites of the project, only the site for the storage
OP/BP 4.12                             and regulation basin and contiguous pumping station
                                       requires the acquisition of a single plot of privately-
                                       owned land. Therefore, a Land Acquisition Plan (LAP)
                                       has been prepared in 2010 in accordance with OP 4.12.

                                       All remaining project sites for the transfer pipelines are
                                       situated on public domain

                                       The project does not lead to physical displacement, either
                                       residential or commercial, of local inhabitants, nor does it
                                       pose any threats to income or livelihoods, or create/
                                       intensify poverty or vulnerability.
Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
4.37
Projects on International   No         At appraisal, the team discussed the applicability of
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   OP7.50 with LEGEN, and confirmed it would not be



                                        Page 4 of 12
                                            triggered. Although the Mediterranean Sea is an
                                            International Waterway as defined by the Bank, the
                                            project will have significant positive impacts by
                                            improving the manner treated wastewater is discharged so
                                            as to maximize the depollution power of the Sea.
   Projects in Disputed      No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Environmental Impacts:

    An ESIA has been conducted and the project is consistent with the provisions of the Barcelona
    Convention (Art 4) and the Convention on Biological Diversity (Article 14). The project will be
    permitted and inspected by the competent national authorities (ANPE, APAL, Ministry of Public
    Health, etc.) to assess compliance with authorizations and environmental regulations (Barcelona
    Convention Article 6) .
    Regarding the protocols for the Barcelona Convention, the project generates no release of toxic,
    persistent and bioaccumulative substances in the Mediterranean Sea (LBS Protocol) and prohibited
    wastes listed in Annex 1 of Dumping Protocol. It includes specific measures to prevent the
    dumping of dredged material (Immersion Protocol). These materials will be managed and disposed
    of on land.

    The project has been designed to improve the TWW discharge in the Gulf of Tunis through
    submarine outfall and ensure good dispersion and dilution of pollutants. The submarine outfall has
    been designed to ensure a concentration of pathogens below 100 coliforms/100 ml at the beach.
    According to national and international standards relating to quality of bathing water, this
    concentration corresponds to a water of excellent quality (class A). These results are obtained by
    simulation and prediction of pollution carried on advanced mathematical models. The detailed
    design of the submarine outfall has been reviewed and confirmed through a detailed dispersion
    and wave modeling which was conducted from September 2013 to June 2014.

    The project complies with relevant international environmental treaties and agreements, to which
    Tunisia is a signatory, including:
    - The Barcelona Convention for the Protection of the Mediterranean Sea against pollution and its
    protocols;
    - The Convention on Biological Diversity;
    The project is consistent with the general obligations contained in the Barcelona Convention and
    in particular those relating to reducing pollution in the area of the Mediterranean Sea, improving
    the marine environment and the development of EIA procedures. In this regard, it will contribute
    to improving the quality of TWW, reducing the amount of the RWW discharged at sea, improving
    the quality of bathing water, the dispersion and dilution of pollutants in the sea and the gradual
    regeneration of the marine ecosystem, currently in very poor shape.

    Although the project will improve the current state of the natural and socio-economic


                                             Page 5 of 12
  environment, potential negative impacts may be significant given the nature and size of proposed
  works, the complexity of their implementation, the nature and quantity of treated wastewater (70
  million m3/year) involved, and the project influence area that goes beyond the location of the
  outfall into the Gulf of Tunis. The project will not cause adverse or irreversible impacts on the
  environment. The main potential negative environmental impacts likely to be generated by the
  project are: (i) temporary degradation of marine waters and bathing water caused by the dredging
  operations and the management of dredging material during construction of the submarine outfall;
  and (ii) water and soil pollution in cases of equipment failure and / or accidental pollution
  (electromechanical equipment malfunction, broken pipes, etc.) during the operation phase. Other
  negative impacts such as dust, noise and waste, are less significant given the agricultural vocation
  of the project area and distance to the residential area. The negative impacts are mostly temporary,
  minor and can be significantly mitigated through the set of adapted measures included in the
  Environmental Management Plan, which implementation and monitoring will be funded as part of
  the Project.

  Involuntary resettlement:

  Land take has been minimized to the extent possible in accordance with Tunisian law, which
  requires public infrastructure projects of any nature to make maximum use of public lands and
  only to resort to expropriation when there is no alternative. Care has been taken to avoid affecting
  existing structures in the project area, in particular living quarters, farms, cultural heritage zones,
  religious sites or other areas of public value.

  As a result, of all the sites of the project, only the site for the storage and regulation basin and
  contiguous pumping station requires the acquisition of a single plot of privately-owned land, of a
  total area of 9 ha 23 ca 10 ca . This single plot jointly belongs to 171 co-owners and cannot be
  divided into individual and identifiable lots. Most of the co-owners have shares of 0,6ha. 29
  owners have more than 0,1ha or 1000m2, while more than 100 owners have a share of less than
  200m2. The acquired land is halophyte, thus cannot sustain any agricultural and livestock
  activities.

  All remaining project sites for the transfer pipelines are situated on public domain with no people
  living or working on these lands. The pipeline upstream of the basin runs along a road, within the
  public road area. The pipeline downstream of the basin runs along a drainage canal (public
  hydraulic domain), as well as on the beach (public coastal domain) and sea (public maritime
  domain) areas affected by the project.

  Therefore, the project does not lead to physical displacement, either residential or commercial, of
  local habitants, nor does it pose any threats to income or livelihoods, or create/intensify poverty or
  vulnerability.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Indirect impacts of the Project can only be positive. The benefits of the implementation of the
  project will be felt immediately after the infrastructure is put in service. In particular, the improved
  discharge of TWW through a submarine outfall and the suppression of current TWW discharge
  right at the Raoued Beach will generate significant and immediate benefits, including:
  improvement of the quality of bathing waters at the seashore, improvement of population health
  conditions and of the quality of the environment for residents. In the long term, the project will


                                              Page 6 of 12
  have a significant positive impact on socioeconomic development. It is expected to contribute to:
  the development of tourism, urban development, improving the reuse of TWW in agriculture,
  reducing TWW quantities discharged in the Gulf of Tunis, an environmentally sensitive area of the
  Mediterranean Sea and recovery the ecological balance in coastal areas in northern Tunis.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  The alternative without project will further deteriorate the degraded situation in the project area
  and the continued negative impacts of the current TWW discharge which could become
  irreversible. The proposed project is the first action initiated by the the Government to reverse this
  trend by improving the discharge of TWW in the Gulf of Tunis through a submarine outfall.

  Possible alternatives were considered and a number of options in terms of possible locations of the
  storage basin, possible locations of the submarine outfall in terms of bathymetry and possible
  effects of wind, wave and streams on the effluents, as well as possible pipe layouts were looked
  into. The analysis of these alternatives has shown that they have similar technical and
  environmental implications. Consequently, the choice was focused more on the most economical
  option and on maximizing the potential for TWW reuse in agriculture. As a result, the technical
  option of having the transport infrastructure follow the El Khelij drainage canal, which is the
  shorter way to the Sea and therefore the cheaper option for ONAS, was rejected as it would have
  made more difficult the reuse of treated wastewater in the Borj Touil irrigation perimeter, which is
  the only area in the North of Greater Tunis were such agricultural reuse can be envisaged.

  The analysis of alternatives led to the selection of the proposed design, which was confirmed
  following the detailed dispersion and wave modeling which was conducted from September 2013
  to June 2014.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environmental Safeguards:

  The main mitigation measures recommended by the ESIA to reduce the negative impacts at
  acceptable level consist of:
  - Programming the construction of the submarine outfall outside the period of high heat to avoid
  adverse impacts during the summer period and the risk of development of toxic phytoplankton;
  - Limiting the spread of suspended particles during dredging operations by installing an anti-
  turbulence geo-membrane screen;
  - Evacuating the dredged materials (about 2000 m3) to a dewatering system consisting of basin
  and filter before transporting them to the Choutrana WWTP, where they will be duly disposed
  together with sewage sludge.
  - Developing appropriate procedures to manage and maintain operating equipment, including an
  emergency response plan in case of pollution incident, malfunction or critical equipment failure.

  Other mitigation measures are planned to mitigate less significant negative impacts, such as
  management of solid wastes, mitigation of noise and dust, the reuse of surplus excavated material.
  These measures have been incorporated as specific clauses in all construction contracts.

  To ensure proper implementation of these measures, the ESIA report includes a monitoring and
  capacity building program for ONAS. The monitoring program includes measuring the quality of
  dredged material, the air quality, noise and waste management. These measures are a joint

                                             Page 7 of 12
responsibility of the construction firms and ONAS and their applications have been integrated as
specific clauses in the contract. During the operation phase, the efficiency of the submarine outfall,
the evolution of the marine ecosystem, the quality of bathing water, of treated wastewater and of
the underground water will be regularly monitored. The capacity building program of ONAS
includes: (i) technical assistance for supervising the construction and monitoring the operation of
the submarine outfall (in final procurement stage, pending contract approval); (ii) technical
assistance for EMP implementation and monitoring for both the land and marine portions of the
Project (currently fully-mobilized); and (iii) training in monitoring the marine ecosystem and
water bathing quality, warning and response system and management of TWW quality. It includes
a monitoring program of the quality of TWW at the discharge point and bathing water quality at
the Raoued beach with reference to national standards relating to TWW and Bathing water quality,
respectively the NT 106,002 and the NT 09.11. A monitoring program is planned to ensure the
effectiveness of the effluent in terms of diffusion and dilution of pollutants on the basis of
simulation results. It should be noted that due to other land based pollution sources, it is likely that
the concentrations of coliform will be higher than the results obtained by simulation. The project
will certainly improve the quality of bathing water and a monitoring program for the quality
bathing water at Raoued beach has been provided in this sense. The monitoring of the
effectiveness of the submarine outfall will focus on dilution and dispersion of pollutants in the area
not affected by the land based sources mentioned above. Nevertheless, further study to identify
and classify these other sources of pollution by risk and impact is on-going, and will enable ONAS
to recommend actions it could either implement directly or jointly with other institutions or local
stakeholders (such as dredging the canal or expanding the dredging area to increase soil
decontamination).

Tunisia has an established and effective EIA system hosted by the National Environmental
Protection Agency (ANPE), which is in general relatively advanced in terms of institutional and
legal capacity. ANPE has good experience in reviewing and approving the EIA in compliance with
Bank procedures and standards. In particular, ONAS has proved to be a competent and reliable
partner throughout the implementation of many World Bank and international donor projects,
including in ensuring compliance which Bank Safeguard Policies. ONAS, through its
environmental focal point, is consistently supervising the implementation of the ESIA
recommendations, particularly the EMP, and its compliance with safeguard policies and national
regulations in close coordination with the ANPE. Nonetheless, the Bank continues to encourage
ONAS to strengthen its environmental monitoring capacity by the creation of a formal
environmental monitoring department, to ensure its sustainability. Project activities include actions
towards this goal such as the purchase of laboratory equipment, and training activities.

In addition, ONAS developed a plan to improve the TWW quality of the North Tunis WWTPs,
which will be implemented before investments under the Project enter into operations. This plan
includes:
- Closure of the Côtières Nord WWTP (the poorest performing one);
- Reduce the wastewater load in existing WWTP of Charguia and Choutrana, with the start of
operations of the new El Attar WWTP, currently under construction under the West Tunis
Sewerage project (commissioning expected January 2016);
- Rehabilitation and capacity increase of the sewage aeration system of Choutrana II WWTP and
rehabilitation of the entire Choutrana I WWTP (on-going);
- Rehabilitation of the upstream sewage transfer section located between the Choutrana WWTPs
and the pumping station of the MARH by June 2018.



                                            Page 8 of 12
 Social Safeguards:

 Out of all of the sites of the project, only the site for the storage and regulation basin and the
 contiguous pumping station requires the acquisition of a single plot of privately-owned land,
 without leading to physical displacement or loss of income. Therefore, a Land Acquisition Plan
 (LAP) was prepared to ensure that the acquisition of land is appropriately conducted, with due
 compensation to current owners, and ensure that potential adverse impacts are mitigated, in
 compliance with OP4.12. The LAP was received by the Bank on February 16, 2010, then
 disclosed in-country on February 16, and to the Infoshop on February 19, 2010. The LAP made
 reference to both the Tunisian legislation and regulations and OP 4.12. In essence, the acquisition
 and compensation processes were conducted exclusively by applying Tunisian regulations, which
 have been found to be generally acceptable and overall compatible with the requirements of
 OP.4.12 on involuntary resettlement. All remaining project sites for the transfer pipelines are
 situated on public domain, with no people living or working on these lands. Access to these areas
 follows administrative regulations, and ONAS has obtained the necessary authorizations by the
 appropriate authorities to access public domain for the execution of the project.

 In practice, in 2010, the land acquisition assessment was submitted to the relevant recognition and
 reconciliation commission to explore negotiated land acquisition, which resulted in a
 compensation offer in accordance with the resettlement plan and at full replacement cost based on
 prevailing market prices. Given the complex ownership status and documentation limitations, and
 after extensive consultations with the owners, some of whom rejected the compensation offer, the
 commission instructed ONAS to proceed with expropriation in the interest of the owners to ensure
 the transparency of their access to compensation. An expropriations decree was published in
 October 2012, and ONAS set aside the agreed compensation amount in an interest-bearing account
 consigned under the Tunisian treasury for that specific purpose, in accordance with national
 legislation and OP 4.12. The judicial process for the compensation of the owners of the land was
 initiated in July 2013 under the jurisdiction of the independent Tribunal of Ariana. This process
 experienced several delays, due mainly to frequent audience adjournments, of up to a month at a
 time, to allow parties to respond to any new elements of information. In May 2014, the relevant
 judicial authority determined that there was no opposition to the project, and that the main reason
 for these delays were that many owners have difficulty assembling basic ownership documentation
 or are difficult to reach, delaying transfer of ownership and payment of any compensation. It
 therefore instructed ONAS to take possession of the land (ONAS proceeded as instructed and
 works on the basin and pumping station site started in August 2014), while it continues its
 proceedings to resolve the dispute concerning the offer of compensation in a timely and equitable
 manner, helping the owners assemble missing documentation and access their compensation. As
 this independent judicial process follows its course, ONAS continues to monitor and fully
 document this process, providing assistance in any manner it can, and repor t regularly to the Bank
 on its progress.

  The borrower's capacity to plan and implement land acquisition issues is considered to be strong.
  ONAS has a “Division Patrimoine et Assurance” with a “Service des Affaires Foncieres” staffed
  with competent personnel with in-depth knowledge about land acquisition issues and the
  applicable Tunisian legislation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  During project preparation and as part of the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment, two


                                           Page 9 of 12
  public consultations were conducted on November 25th 2009 and January 8th 2010 respectively.
  World Bank representatives were present at both occasions, together with Ministry representatives,
  key stakeholders, farmers, land-owners, local municipalities and representatives of interested civil
  society organizations. During the public consultations within the framework of the Environmental
  and Social impacts analysis and in a separate follow up meeting for landowners, the owners of the
  affected land were also consulted. During the consultations the project concept, the choice of sites,
  risk mitigating measures and implementation measures were discussed. The owners of the
  affected land areas as well as neighboring communities received the Project well, as (i) the piece
  of land to be acquired under the project has little agricultural value and no alternative use, (ii) the
  project will benefits farmers in the area through the provision of improved TWW which will likely
  increase agriculture production in the irrigation perimeter of the Borj Touil area, (iii) there is wide
  popular support for the project in the North Tunis area, as it shall improve the overall quality of
  life in the area.

  Following the revision of the ESIA per article C.4 of Section II of Schedule 2 of the legal
  agreements, ONAS conducted an additional public consultation on December 26, 2014, which was
  attended by Ministry representatives, key stakeholders, farmers, affected people, local
  municipalities and representatives of interested civil society organizations. During the
  consultations, the project concept and benefits, risk mitigation measures and implementation
  measures were discussed. ONAS reiterated the reason for the revision of the ESIA and presented
  the conclusion of the dispersion modeling which confirmed that project design was appropriate to
  ensure that the TWW plume is diluted enough with respect to bathing norms prior to reaching the
  shoreline, in any given circumstance. The discussion also raised (i) the issue of complementary
  actions to clean-up the Khelij Canal and monitor and control other sources of pollution to
  capitalize on the positive impacts of the Project, and (ii) the issue of impacts on fishermen, which
  are taken into account in risk mitigation measures, and which could be positive overall given the
  limited disruption caused by works and the positive impacts on water quality and increase in
  tourism. Overall, the Project remains well received.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                           05-Mar-2015
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                        11-Mar-2015
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive           ////
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                             Page 10 of 12
"In country" Disclosure
  Tunisia                                                       10-Mar-2015
  Comments: The initial ESIA was received by the Bank, and disclosed in-country and to the
               Infoshop on February 15, 2010.

                Article C.4 of Section I of Schedule 2 of the Loan and Grant agreements mandates
                that upon completion of the dispersion modeling studies, the Borrower would update
                the ESIA and publicly disclose it as approved by the Bank. The dispersion modeling
                studies largely confirmed project design and did not alter any of the ESIA findings
                and mitigation measures. The ESIA was therefore updated to reflect this conclusion
                as well as include a grievance redress mechanism. The revised ESIA was approved
                by the Bank on March 5, 2015, and publicly disclosed on ONAS’ website on March
                10, 2015, and to the Infoshop on March 11, 2015.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                        15-Feb-2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                     19-Feb-2010
"In country" Disclosure
  Tunisia                                                            16-Feb-2010
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                           Page 11 of 12
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Richard Abdulnour
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                 Date: 30-Apr-2015
   Practice Manager/    Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)                  Date: 01-May-2015
   Manager:




                                            Page 12 of 12
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
