                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR18133
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Lao People's Democratic                     P131201
                                                                            Project ID:
                                                Republic
                            Project Name:       Lao PDR - Small and Medium Enterprise Access to Finance Project (P131201)
                            Task Team       Jose De Luna-Martinez
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       28-Mar-2014                 Estimated     09-Jun-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFM02                        Lending       Financial Intermediary Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        20.00           Total Bank Financing:       20.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                           20.00
                              Total                                                                                                 20.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description
                           This project is being restructured at the request of the Government of Laos. There are two changes in
                           the proposed restructuring. First, the ➢❨ risk-sharing facility➢❨ (component 2) will be cancelled and
                           funds of this component will be reallocated to the line of credit (component 1). The risk-sharing


                                                                                  Page 1 of 9
                         facility is being cancelled because the client and IFC could not reach an agreement on the operating
                         rules of the facility. Moreover, the client felt the risk-sharing facility was a complex product that did
                         not fit the specific needs of the Lao banking system at its current stage of development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The second change in the project involves revising the institutional arrangements for project
                         implementation. Given the delays faced by the project in the past two years, the Ministry of Industry
                         and Commerce (MOIC) will become the implementing agency of the entire project. The project will
                         be executed by the MOIC➢❨ s Department of Planning and Cooperation (DPC). Looking forward,
                         this change will accelerate project execution and disbursements.


                         The project has currently three components: a) line of credit ($12 million), b) risk-sharing facility ($3
                         million), and c) technical assistance ($5 million). The restructured project will only have two
                         components:

                         1)      A Line of Credit
                         2)      Technical Assistance

                         Component 1: Line of Credit (IDA US$15 million)

                         MOIC will receive IDA funds and provide long-term funding in local currency to participating
                         financial institutions (PFIs) - financially-sound and well administered commercial banks. Because
                         MOIC is not a financial institution, the funds to be provided by MOIC to PFIs will be in the form of
                         long-term bank deposits (5-7 years) in local currency (maximum US$4 million per PFI). The PFIs
                         will pay interest to MOIC same as the 3 month deposit rate in local currency (or interbank rate), and
                         pay back the entire deposit amount to MOIC at the end of the agreed period. The PFIs will on-lend
                         these funds for long term loans (up to US$200,000 equivalent in local currency with 2-7 years
                         maturity at market rates) to privately-owned SMEs enabling them to carry out long term capital
                         investments that increase their business operations and enhance their productivity. Although SMEs
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operating in any sector will be eligible, it is expected that most of the demand for credit will come
                         from SMEs in the manufacturing, services and trade sectors.

                         Component 2: Technical Assistance (US$5 million)

                         This component will provide technical assistance (TA) to strengthen capacity of DOSMEP in areas
                         such as formulation and implementation of a SME development strategy, SMEs census, design of
                         new SME lending and non-lending products, impact assessment, and SME business advisory
                         services. The project will also provide TA to PFIs to improve their SME lending business such as the
                         design of SME banking strategy and new SME banking products, and help PFIs comply with the
                         World Bank➢❨ s environmental and social standards.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will provide financing to eligible SMEs through Participating Financial Intermediaries
                         (PFI). The banking system in Lao is small, with only 82 bank branches. Banks outreach is highly
                         concentrated in urban areas. Most banks are reluctant to serve rural areas given the difficulties that
                         banks have faced in executing collateral in those areas in the past. Banks also find difficult to find
                         registered SMEs in those areas, as most firms operate in the informal sector. This operation will
                         finance projects that take place mainly in urban areas (cities and towns with more than 10,000


                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         people).

                         The target beneficiary SMEs are registered small (1-19 employees) and medium private enterprises
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (20 to 99 employees) operating in Lao PDR that have been in business for at least two years and wish
                         to expand their business activities. As a minimum, SMEs must present a viable business plan to the
                         commercial banks, have a good credit history, and have all legal documents required by banks
                         willing to finance them, including collateral. It is anticipated that the majority of beneficiary SMEs
                         are in the trade, manufacturing, and services sectors. Specifically, beneficiary SMEs are expected to
                         comprise of the following private business types: Restaurants, coffee shops, hotels, grocery stores,
                         transportation firms, medical laboratories, information technology companies, private schools, radio
                         and TV stations, cable companies, gasoline stations, travel agencies, private tour operators,
                         production and distribution of construction materials, automobile repair centers, etc.

                         Types of activities to be financed are: Acquisition of new transportation equipment (automobiles,
                         trucks, other specialized equipment, and replace parts), acquisition of communications equipment
                         (phone and fax equipment, computers, printers, servers, software, other hardware, etc.), purchase of
                         construction materials, building of warehouses or expansion of existing physical premises in the land
                         fully-owned by the SME, acquisition of fixed assets (industrial machines, refrigerators, industrial
                         equipment, replace parts, tools and equipment, etc), and working capital needs (loans for payment of
                         salaries, marketing costs, audit and accounting costs, etc).

                         The project will not finance land acquisitions, namely because banks are not able to provide long-
                         term loans with maturities of 15 to 30 years, which is the usual maturity required to finance this type
                         of operations. Moreover, the project is expected to close in 5 years or so.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Satoshi Ishihara (GSU02)
                         Sybounheung Phandanouvong (GSU02)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Waraporn Hirunwatsiri (GEN2B)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            Beneficiary SMEs of line of credit (Component 1) are
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       expected to engage in diverse types of activities, some of
                                                                     which may have negative environmental and/or social
                                                                     impacts and risks. The exact location, nature, scale and
                                                                     scope of environmental and social impacts can only be
                                                                     known during implementation when PFIs receive
                                                                     applications from eligible SMEs. However, the potential
                                                                     negative impacts are likely to be minor, localized, and
                                                                     reversible and can be mitigated with simple measures and
                                                                     environmental good practice.

                                                                     Category A transactions are not foreseen because of the
                                                                     type of activities and the limited size and capacity of
                                                                     Financial Intermediaries and Banks. In the unlikely case
                                                                     that the results of project screening or assessment
                                                                     determine that a transaction to be supported under the



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                                                        project is a Category A, the FI will contact the World
                                                        Bank to determine whether such a transaction is eligible
                                                        based upon significance of potential impacts, risks and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        capacity of the counterpart."

                                                        To screen, minimize and mitigate potential environmental
                                                        and social impacts and risks on the line of credit to the
                                                        SMEs under Component 1, an environmental and social
                                                        management framework (ESMF) was developed during
                                                        preparation which includes environmental and social
                                                        screening of transactions, environmental categorization,
                                                        environmental and social review and assessment,
                                                        monitoring and supervision.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   The project activities are not envisaged to create
                         4.04                           significant negative impacts on natural habitats.
                                                        Nevertheless, the ESMF includes provisions to screen
                                                        impacts of transactions on natural habitats. Transactions
                                                        that will have adverse impacts or will cause significant
                                                        degradation of critical natural habitats will not be
                                                        supported in line with the policy. Transactions that will
                                                        cause adverse impacts or degradation of non-critical
                                                        natural habitats may be supported provided that the
                                                        benefits of the transaction outweigh the negative impacts
                                                        and that measures are devised and implemented to address
                                                        negative impacts in line with the ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   The project will not support transactions that may
                                                        significantly affect or degrade critical natural forests.
                                                        However, production and distribution of construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        materials is one of the eligible activities under the project,
                                                        which will likely involve wood/lumber production. The
                                                        ESMF includes provisions to screen transactions and their
                                                        potential impacts on forests, forest health and forest-
                                                        dependent communities. The screening will also ensure
                                                        that lumbers are sourced legally and further due diligence
                                                        of the sources will be pursued as part of processing and
                                                        approval of the transaction.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     None of the transactions is expected to involve
                                                        procurement of pesticides or pesticide equipment or lead
                                                        to an increase in usage of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural        No    The project activities will be limited to acquisition of new
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           equipment, purchase of construction materials, building of
                                                        warehouses or expansion of existing physical premises in
                                                        the land fully-owned by the SME, acquisition of fixed
                                                        assets, and working capital needs. There is no civil works
                                                        in new areas that would affect PCR.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   Some transactions may entail sourcing of materials from



                                                         Page 4 of 9
                            BP 4.10                                  areas that have the presence of indigenous peoples (e.g.,
                                                                     production and distribution of construction materials) or
                                                                     some transactions may involve IP businesses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     The ESMF includes an Ethnic Minority Development
                                                                     Framework detailing the process and requirements to be
                                                                     undertaken in case a transaction triggers OP 4.10 in the
                                                                     course of project implementation. This includes screening
                                                                     for the presence of IPs in areas where these transactions
                                                                     take place and, where they are present, the project will
                                                                     ensure that they are consulted and are benefiting from
                                                                     these transactions and are not excluded. The ESMF also
                                                                     includes provisions to assess if a transaction in an area
                                                                     with indigenous peoples may have any adverse impacts
                                                                     and measures to avoid or mitigate for such impacts as per
                                                                     OP 4.10.
                            Involuntary Resettlement No              The project will not imply any involuntary resettlement or
                            OP/BP 4.12                               acquisition of lands as civil works such as building of
                                                                     warehouses or expansion of existing physical premises
                                                                     will be undertaken in the land fully-owned by the SMEs.
                                                                     Moreover, in practice commercial banks cannot finance
                                                                     land purchases due to the long time usually needed for
                                                                     repayment of loans (20 to 30 years). Banks simply do not
                                                                     have access to long-term sources of funds to finance loans
                                                                     with a maturity of more than 10 years. It is expected that
                                                                     the sub-projects supported by this operation will not have
                                                                     a maturity of more than 8 years. This project is expected
                                                                     to close in four years. Loan applicants will be required
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     under ESMF to demonstrate that transactions will be
                                                                     carried out on their own land to which there is no legacy
                                                                     issue or competing claims.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No           The project is not envisaged to support any transactions
                            4.37                                     that will involve any dam construction and rehabilitation
                                                                     or any transactions that would depend on existing dam or
                                                                     dam under construction.
                            Projects on International   No           The project activities/transactions will be located in urban
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     areas in Lao and are not expected to trigger the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed        No           The project activities/transactions will be located mainly
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                         in urban areas and are not expected to be located in
                                                                     disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:




                                                                       Page 5 of 9
                           With the cancellation of the Component 2 ➢❨ Risk Sharing Facility➢❨ , all the provisions in the
                          ESMF that required compliance with IFC➢❨ s Performance Standards will no longer be
                          applicable. As a result of the restructuring, the project will no longer have any IFC participation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          No other change is anticipated under the restructuring that would result in new environment or
                          social impacts that have not been anticipated in the original ESMF or which require additional
                          revisions in ESMF. Also, the loan ceiling of $200,000 per eligible SMEs that was approved by the
                          WB Board in 2014 remains unchanged.

                           Beneficiary SMEs of line of credit (Component 1) are expected to engage in diverse types of
                           activities some of which may entail negative impact on local people or environment. The exact
                           location, nature, scale and scope of environmental impacts can only be known during
                           implementation when PFIs receive applications from eligible SMEs. Given the nature and size of
                           credit to be provided to each SME (approximately US$50,000 for small firms and US$200,000 for
                           medium-sized firms) the potential negative impacts are likely to be minor, localized, and
                           reversible and can be mitigated with simple measures and environmental good practice. To ensure
                           that the potential environmental and social risks are adequately mitigated, an environmental and
                           social management framework (ESMF) has been developed describing the safeguard measures to
                           be carried out by the Participating Financial Intermediary (PFI) and the eligible SMEs including
                           safeguard screening, assessment, and mitigation of potential negative impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The Project will not create any potential indirect and/or long term negative impacts. It is
                           anticipated that given rapid development of hydropower projects and socioeconomic development
                           in Lao PDR, development of service providers and other related activities would likely to be
                           rapidly increased mostly in Vientiane and large cities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The Ministry of Industry and Commerce (MOIC) is responsible for management of SME services
                           and will be the responsible for the implementation of the project.

                          To screen and manage the environment and social risk of the project, MOIC has developed an
                          ESMF to guide the project implementation unit and the participating financial intermediary to
                          screen and manage the social and environmental risk and monitor the implementation of the
                          ESMF.

                          The ESMF also has an Ethnic Minority Development Framework detailing the process and
                          requirements to be undertaken in case it applies to specific transactions in the course of project
                          implementation. This includes screening for the presence of IPs in areas where these transactions
                          take place and, where they are present, the project will ensure that they are adequately consulted,
                          are benefiting from these transactions in a culturally appropriate manner and are not excluded. The
                          ESMF also includes provisions to assess if a transaction in an area with indigenous peoples may
                          have any adverse impacts and measures to avoid or mitigate for such impacts in a culturally
                          appropriate manner.



                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           Due to project implementation delay, no funds have been transferred to SMEs yet. However, last
                           July two banks received funds from the project (total $4 million) and will soon be on-lending to
                           SMEs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Selected participating financial institutions have already received training in the application of the
                           ESMF. They have also received the Project Implementation Manual cleared by the Environmental
                           and Social Safeguard specialists in the team which outlines the Environmental and Social Due
                           Diligence Processes to ensure compliance with the ESMF. A consultant has also been hired to
                           support and provide further training to the PFIs.

                           To enhance the capacity of MOIC, PFIs and SMEs to fulfill all the environmental and social
                           safeguards of the project, sufficient funds have been earmarked in the project (component 2) to
                           ensure assistance is provided through the entire life of the project. In 2016, two workshops on
                           safeguard issues have been conducted for MOIC staff as well as the PFIs.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders for this project include small and medium enterprises, local entrepreneurs'
                           associations and chambers of commerce, and NGOs supporting SMEs and entrepreneurs as well in
                           broader manner beneficiaries of increased investments and services by SME in Laos.

                           The project is not expected to create significant negative impacts on stakeholders or other people
                           in Lao PDR. The ESMF provides a checklist that will be used by all PFIs to ascertain the absence
                           of involuntary resettlement as part of the appraisal of proposals for credit lines. All the provisions
                           of the ESMF are further elaborated in the project's implementation manual, which contains a
                           description of all steps and procedures to ensure compliance with ESMF. The ESMF was uploaded
                           at World Bank's Infoshop on April 25, 2014 and translated into Lao language in 2015. The
                           document is easily available to anyone interested in this project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In addition, on March 11, 2014, DOSMEP organized a workshop in Vientiane open to all the
                           public to present the ESMF and receive feedback from participants. Participants included
                           representatives from SMEs' Associations, NGOs, commercial banks, as well as other government
                           institutions in Laos. During the workshop, most questions of participants were related to the
                           interest rates of the loans to SMEs, minimum amount of loans, list of activities that will not be
                           financed (negative list), and technical assistance to be provided under the project to commercial
                           banks in order to meet the standards described in the ESMF. During project implementation, the
                           ESMS will remain available to the public. In 2016, DOSMEP and the WB have organized several
                           workshops with PFIs to ensure they fully understand the ESMF and are ready to intermediate WB
                           funds.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                          Date of receipt by the Bank
                          Date of submission to InfoShop
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 04-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Mar-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 04-Mar-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jose De Luna-Martinez
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                             Date: 24-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Margaret J. Miller (PMGR)                     Date: 25-Aug-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
