                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA12139
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Feb-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Congo, Democratic Republic                     P149233
                                                                               Project ID:
                                                 of
                            Project Name:        Quality and Relevance of Secondary and Tertiary Education Project (P149233)
                            Task Team       Dung-Kim Pham
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       11-Mar-2015                 Estimated     26-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GED07                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       200.00           Total Bank Financing:    200.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               130.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                  70.00
                              Total                                                                                     200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a            No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objectives of the project are to: (i) improve the teaching and learning of Mathematics and
                           Science in general secondary education, and (ii) enhance relevance of technical and vocational
                           education and training (TVET) in priority sectors at secondary and tertiary levels.
                            3. Project Description
                           Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         34.      The proposed project will support post-primary education, as a continuum of the progress
                         made in primary education by previous and ongoing implementation of International Development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Association (IDA) and Global Partnership for Education (GPE) financed operations. Challenges in
                         post-primary are enormous and wide-ranging. There are challenges on the supply side as regards to
                         quality and relevance of education and training programs that is leading to graduates who lack
                         appropriate skills to be considered employable. In addition, there is an increasing stock of
                         unemployed and underemployed youth having mixed education levels and economic situations
                         (drop-outs, never attended school, graduated but not employed, employed in low productivity jobs in
                         the informal sector, etc.). Different demand-side mechanisms will be needed to provide this group of
                         youth with opportunities for insertion in the active labor market (second chance education, reskilling
                         programs, internship and apprenticeship programs, entrepreneurial programs, etc.). Furthermore,
                         human capital will need to be significantly strengthened to spearhead DRC socio-economic
                         transformation with strong postgraduate studies, and research and development work.

                         35.       Urgent attention will be needed to address the above challenges in order to support DRC
                         maximize returns on its rich resources and investments with value addition and the creation of
                         downstream manufacturing industry. This project is intended to constitute an initial step to tackle the
                         challenges focusing on the supply side of education. It will focus on improving the quality of
                         mathematics and science teaching and learning in secondary education, and on strengthening the
                         relevance and governance of TVET education provision at the secondary and tertiary levels.
                         Competence in mathematics and science is an important prerequisite for life-long learning and the
                         development of job-relevant skills for growth sectors contribute to growth and job creation in the
                         Congolese economy, with concurrent positive effects supporting poverty reduction and shared
                         prosperity. The project will extend its coverage to selected geographical areas, using pre-identified
                         criteria, and the identified priority sectors of agriculture, construction and extractive industries. New
                         technologies will be considered in a cross-sectorial manner.

                         36.    The project has two main components and a supporting component for overall project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coordination as follows:

                         Component 1: Improving the teaching and learning of Math and Science in general secondary
                         education with two subcomponents: (i) Development and initial implementation of Secondary
                         Education Policy and Math and Science curriculum for general secondary education, and (ii)
                         Upgrading Math and Science curriculum and in-service and pre-service training of teachers at ISP.

                         Component 2: Enhancing the governance and relevance of secondary and tertiary level TVET in
                         priority sectors with thee subcomponents: (i) Development of TVET Strategy and enabling
                         framework, (ii) Enhancing the quality and relevance of TVET at the secondary education level, and
                         (iii) Enhancing the quality and relevance of TVET at the tertiary education level.

                         Component 3: Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation.

                         A.      Project Components

                         Component 1: Improving the teaching and learning of Math and Science in general secondary
                         education

                         37.     Project activities will support the development of quality teachers with appropriate

                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         knowledge of their subject matter, equipped with effective teaching methodologies and associated
                         materials; the provision of appropriate curricula through the updating of existing material and
                         curriculum development; and the establishment of suitable teaching and learning environments that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         encourage experiment ation.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Development and initial implementation of Secondary Education Policy and
                         Math and Science curriculum for general secondary education

                         38.       Develop secondary education policy. In alignment with the sector-wide education strategy
                         and the government’s promulgation of a national education law, the project will provide technical
                         assistance to support the development of a strategic framework and implementation plan for
                         secondary education. The DRC has demonstrated impressive gains in expanding access to education
                         at all levels, but challenges persist with regard to quality and efficiency. The ongoing abolition of
                         school fees, the introduction of an eight year cycle for basic education, and the continued expansion
                         of educational enrollment necessitate a complete rethink of the administration and governance of the
                         current system as well as the formulation of strategic options for the development of secondary
                         education. The framework will address issues of quality, equity and sustainable financing.

                         39.     Upgrade Math and Science curricula and develop practical teacher’s handbook and provide
                         science kits. Secondary curricula have failed to keep pace with shifting socio-economic realities in
                         DRC. Current curricula, developed in the 1960s, are obsolete with regard to content and teaching
                         methodologies. Moreover, school timetables are overloaded with insufficient attention paid to math
                         and science education. There is an urgent need to efficiently reorient and reorganize school timetable
                         with an appropriate emphasis on relevant learning.

                         40.     The project will support the upgrading of secondary curricula, including the provision of
                         technical assistance towards the rewriting and implementation of math and science curricula to more
                         effectively integrate contemporary pedagogical and technological methodologies. It will also
                         introduce innovative educational approaches that provide teachers with essential teaching materials
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that enable them to teach without mandatory individual training. The renewed curricula and
                         programs will become national programs with countrywide implementation.

                         41.      The project will finance the development and distribution of teaching handbooks and science
                         kits to be distributed nation-wide to an estimated 3,000 secondary schools that have math and science
                         options. Innovative pedagogical approaches will be used to make the handbooks user-friendly and
                         practical. Science kits will also be provided to complement the teaching. The project will also
                         support the design and delivery of a training program for inspectors and pedagogical advisors to help
                         ensure that teachers in the field sufficiently understand the new curricula.

                         42.      Improving/installing science laboratories in selected secondary schools for a demonstration
                         effect. The project will finance the improvement and installation of the science laboratories in
                         selected secondary schools. Access to a modern science laboratory is critical for improving the
                         quality of science teaching and learning in secondary education. The introduction of modern science
                         labs nationwide is not fiscally or operationally feasible in the short to medium term. As a
                         consequence, the project will equip approximately 36 schools with science laboratories in the six
                         targeted provinces to demonstrate modern science teaching and learning. Schools will be selected on
                         the basis of a set of core criteria, including the availability of qualified teachers on government
                         payroll; the availability of math and science options; adequate infrastructure; and proximity to
                         teacher training institutes (Instituts Supérieurs Pédagogiques – ISP). These schools will serve as

                                                                     Page 3 of 13
                         practice schools for math and science teachers being trained at ISPs, and will be part of both in-
                         service and pre-service teacher training (subcomponent 1.2). ISPs will receive relevant teaching
                         materials and equipment to support efforts to improve the quality of teaching and learning in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mathematics, physics, biology and chemistry.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Upgrading Math and Science curricula and in-service and pre-service training for
                         teachers at ISPs

                         44.      Improving the capacity of new Math and Science teachers. Effective understanding and
                         delivery of the revised math and science secondary curricula requires competent teachers in the
                         classrooms with relevant knowledge in these subjects. The revision of secondary curricula will
                         necessitate a concurrent curriculum review for the teachers training institutes (Instituts Supérieurs
                         Pédagogiques – ISPs). The ISP Sciences exactes (Mathematics, Physics, Biology and Chemistry)
                         curricula will be revisited and teacher training programs strengthened, including revisions to in-
                         service training. The project will finance the upgrading of math and science curricula for ISPs, and
                         refresher courses for professors at ISPs, premised on the upgrading of general secondary curricula.

                         45.      The renewed curricula will be disseminated countrywide and benefit ISPs that provide
                         training in math and science. Moreover, in an effort to strengthen the professional development of
                         teachers, the project will introduce a more structured pre-service program based on a partnership
                         between ISPs located in the capitals of the six selected provinces and local secondary schools. In
                         practice this will entail the selection of three to four secondary schools (catering for the teaching of
                         math and science) in proximity to each ISP, to serve as practice schools for the placement of ISP
                         students to complete their theoretical courses with practical application. It is expected that revised
                         training programs will allocate substantial time for practical training. As part of the partnership with
                         neighboring secondary schools and under the improved training program, students and teachers from
                         these secondary schools will have access to ISP.

                         46.      Improving the capacity of existing math and science teachers. Approximately 11,000
Public Disclosure Copy




                         teachers are currently deployed to teach math and science in general secondary, but presumably lack
                         proper training. The professional development of existing teachers, in line with the new curriculum,
                         will be critical for improving the overall quality of teaching and learning. The project will support six
                         weeks of in-service training for 8,600 existing math and science teachers in the six selected
                         provinces. Training will take place at ISPs during summer recess. The project will support ISPs to
                         develop an intensive in-service training program focused on familiarizing teachers with the new
                         curricula, upgrading subject knowledge and exposing teachers to contemporary teaching methods.
                         Teachers will be assessed on their knowledge and skills at the beginning and end of in-service
                         training to evaluate the effectiveness of training programs and delivery. This activity will be rolled
                         out for selected teachers in the six beneficiary provinces from Year 3 of implementation, following
                         the finalization of the new curricula.

                         Component 2: Enhancing the governance and relevance of TVET in priority sectors at secondary and
                         tertiary levels

                         48.     This component will implement a dual strategy for the development of knowledge and skills
                         in support of priority sectors for accelerated economic growth; and to more effectively align the
                         delivery of TVET education with labor market demand. The contemporary TVET system in the DRC
                         does not provide Congolese youth with knowledge and skills relevant to the needs of a growing and
                         changing economy. Training programs are overly theoretical with insufficient attention paid to

                                                                       Page 4 of 13
                         workplace application. The majority of students from tertiary programs continue to graduate with
                         poor qualifications and skills that undermine their ability to find employment and participate in
                         accelerating economic growth. Despite a signed agreement between line ministries and the private
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sector to develop a sustained partnership, the involvement of the private sector in contributing to the
                         improvement of TVET and tertiary education has remained limited.

                         49.     This component will intervene at two levels:

                         •       At the system level: It will support the development and introduction of an enabling
                         regulatory framework incorporating critical reforms for the progressive development of a demand-
                         driven TVET system.

                         •        At institution level: It will support the strengthening of the governance and relevance of
                         TVET in a number of public secondary schools and tertiary institutions to more effectively cater to
                         the labor needs of priority sectors of the economy, using principles and approaches that will lead the
                         institutions to assume reforms adopted at the system level.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Development of TVET Strategy and enabling framework (system level)

                         50.      The reform agenda published under the auspices of the newly promulgated National
                         Education Law (2014) incorporates the following key interventions. For technical and vocational
                         education: (i) a renewed and strengthened public-private partnership (PPP) to ensure private sector
                         consultation and involvement in the development of the system; (ii) an improved model for the
                         management of TVET schools based incorporating greater responsibilities for local government and
                         strengthene d accountability; (iii) a competency-based approach for curricula development and
                         related teacher training program; (iv) the establishment of a system for TVET training certification;
                         (v) a sustainable financing model; and (vi) the M&E of training activities. For tertiary education: (i)
                         the replacement of current undergraduate programs with three-year programs, in alignment with the
                         Licence-Masters-Doctorate (LMD) system; (ii) the introduction of shorter institution-specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programs designed to develop particular competencies; and (iii) quality assurance in the delivery of
                         academic programs.

                         51.      Development of a coherent strategic policy framework for TVET education. The project will
                         support the development of a new TVET policy framework to improve the governance of the system
                         and more effectively align educational outcomes with labor market demand. Within this support, a
                         twining arrangement with government entities in other countries to encourage learning and the use of
                         international best practices will be considered. The twinning arrangement will help to inform the
                         conceptual framework for the revitalization of the TVET sector, and ensure that the DRC benefits
                         from the lessons learned by others. The development of the policy framework could explore the
                         feasibility of: (i) establishing a Skills Development Fund; and (ii) a National Center for Vocational
                         Education and Training Development.

                         52.      Public-private partnership (PPP). The project will support the revision of the current PPP
                         agreement (2010) signed between MEPS-INC and four professional federations. Parties to the
                         agreement need to clearly define their roles and responsibilities and formally commit to existing
                         institutional, technical and financial arrangements. Further development and optimization of the PPP
                         will include: (i) cooperation in the organization of internships and training, and private sector
                         participation in curriculum development; (ii) financial flows and management; (iii) monitoring and
                         reporting mechanisms; and (iv) the optimal alignment of central and local responsibilities.

                                                                      Page 5 of 13
                         Signatories of the PPP will extend to all ministries in charge of education. The PPP review process
                         is envisioned to be participatory and will involve all key stakeholders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         53.      Improvement of the management model for secondary TVET schools. The project will
                         support the introduction of an improved management model for secondary TVET schools based on
                         local government and private sector participation, accountability and results. Changes will include:
                         (i) effective PPP with participation of representatives of the private sector in school management
                         committees to more effectively identify and address skills shortages, the development of training
                         programs that alternates academic study and practical work experience, as well as examinations, and
                         (ii) a coherent financial management framework linking needs and priorities to the relevant use of
                         available resources, adhering to the following basic principles: a) develop a school development plan
                         (SDP) that ranks priorities based on a an analysis of the school’s needs to improve the teaching and
                         learning conditions of teachers and students; b) take stock of available resources and allocate these to
                         identified needs; c) draft budgets linking expenditure to priorities; and d) adopt uniform and
                         harmonized book keeping practices/ procedures for all expenditure regardless their provenance.

                         54.     Certification of TVET training and quality of academic programs. Innovative learning
                         approaches introduced into TVET curricula and training programs require the development of a
                         National Qualification framework that: (i) validates professional experience; (ii) certifies work-study
                         programs and traineeships in enterprises; and (iii) the adoption of competency-based teaching
                         methodologies and learning modules. At the tertiary level, the current quality assurance system will
                         be strengthened to become an independent Quality Assurance Agency. Its procedures and standards
                         will guide the local quality assurance units within the institutions and help them ensure the quality of
                         the newly-developed undergraduate professional programs.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Enhancing the quality and relevance of TVET at the secondary education level

                         56.     Activities envisioned under this subcomponent will focus on improving the quality and
                         relevance of TVET education at secondary level, aligned to priority economic growth sectors at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selected schools in the six targeted provinces. T he project will support the revision of curricula and
                         improving the supply of qualified secondary TVET instructors in the targeted priority sectors. In
                         addition, it will provide block grants to pilot TVET delivery with increased private sector
                         participation within a coherent financial management framework.

                         57.      Development and implementation of curricula and accompanying training programs. For
                         agriculture, the project will adopt the new curricula designed by the government with VVOB
                         support. Curricula and training programs to support the construction and extractive industries will be
                         developed, following the competency-based approach and building on the successful experience of
                         VVOB. To ensure the incorporation of international best practices, the project will finance
                         international TA to support the national team. Design will focus on skills essential to employability,
                         the incorporation of skills associated with entrepreneurship, and the integration of practical
                         workplace experience. Crosscutting issues such as the promotion of gender equity and environmental
                         sustainability will be integrated into curricula design. Curricula and teacher handbooks will be
                         validated nationally, and the content, structure and duration of training programs harmonized across
                         the system. The project will also support the development and distribution of user-friendly and
                         practical handbooks for instructors with relevant content.

                         58.    Provision of block grants in support of TVET delivery to approximately 15 public TVET
                         secondary schools. The project will support the provision of block grants to the eligible schools to

                                                                      Page 6 of 13
                         finance the implementation of school development plans (SDP). SDPs are intended to encourage
                         schools to be more responsive to the local needs of their economic environment and to promote more
                         effective and transparent use resources. An output-based model for financing and mutual
Public Disclosure Copy




                         accountability for results between the ministry governing TVET and the schools will be promoted.

                         59.      The beneficiary schools will be required to develop an SDP proposal, presenting an in-depth
                         description of the school and its strategic direction, and objective and intended results for a four-year
                         support program, backed by a financing plan. The proposals will be reviewed by a committee
                         incorporating participation from the private sector. The committee will be supported by an
                         international expert to ensure the appropriateness of the selected SDP. SDPs will be weighed against
                         the following criteria: (i) the relevance of the proposal in the context of the local and national
                         economic environment and its potential contribution, (ii) the realism of the proposal, (iii) the quality
                         of the design, (iv) the quality of the governance measures embedded in the proposal, and (v)
                         commitment of the school teaching and administrative staff. Once a SDP is approved, international
                         technical assistance will be provided to assist the schools in detailing the proposal in terms of
                         technical fields, the flow of students, rehabilitation and equipment needs, training needs, the
                         estimating of investment and recurrent costs, and a financing plan detailing sources of funding.

                         60.       In accordance with the approved SDP, each selected school will sign a contract with the
                         ministry responsible for TVET, committing both parties to the contract which will include agreed
                         quantitative and qualitative outcomes (such as enrollment rates, internships, signed partnership
                         agreements, pass rates, girls’ participation, etc.) and the details of funding to be provided.

                         61.     Through the course of implementation, schools will be required to submit bi-annual reports
                         to the ministry, presenting quantitative, qualitative and financial results for the purpose of monitoring
                         progress in program implementation. Annual technical audits of each beneficiary school will also be
                         conducted. An operations manual detailing the process of school selection, contracting and
                         implementation will be developed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         62.      The selection of public TVET schools that will benefit from block grants will be made in line
                         with the following criteria: (i) decent school buildings with functioning water and electricity; (ii) the
                         presence of operational programs of study (filières) targeted by the project; and (iii) the location of
                         schools in an environment suitable to the development of a training model premised on public-
                         private partnership. The final list of selected schools must conform to the profile of the education
                         sector in the DRC: of selected schools, 30 percent will be state-run schools and 70 percent will be
                         faith-based schools.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Enhancing the quality and relevance of TVET at the tertiary education level

                         64.     The project will support: (i) the upgrading of skills of secondary TVET instructors, (ii) the
                         replacement of current undergraduate programs with three-year programs, aligned to the LMD
                         system; and (iii) the introduction of short institution-specific programs designed for particular
                         competencies.

                         65.     Upgrading knowledge and skills of secondary TVET instructors with the strengthening of
                         two institutes for technical teacher training, Institut Supérieurs Pédagogiques et Techniques (ISPTs).
                         ISTP training programs will require upgrading to align the training of secondary TVET instructors
                         with expected developments in TVET secondary education and reforms envisioned in the
                         development of academic programs by the institutions of higher education.

                                                                       Page 7 of 13
                         66.      The ISPTs supported by the project are: ISPT Kinshasa and ISPT Likasi (in the Katanga
                         province). The 2 ISPT will present their upgrading plan which will be assessed for feasibility and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         relevance. The project will support activities in the plan, which can include: (i) review of current
                         curricula and training programs to align them with recent or upcoming developments at the
                         secondary and tertiary levels; (ii) refresher courses for teachers; and (iii) the rehabilitation of
                         buildings and the provision of equipment to improve the teaching and learning environment at ISTPs.

                         67.      Development of the three year professional degrees in the priority sectors. The project will
                         support MESU in its efforts to reform higher education programs in accordance with the LMD
                         system, focusing on the development and implementation of new three year undergraduate
                         professional degrees. The objectives of the professional degrees will be defined in collaboration with
                         practicing professionals and employers. The structure of each program will incorporate credited
                         modules and courses in line with the LMD system, incorporate accredited work-place training, and a
                         significant portion of courses will taught by professionals active in their field. New programs will be
                         evaluated for quality by an independent agency and approved by MESU prior to implementation.

                         68.      Introduction of short institution-specific programs. The project will support the development
                         and introduction of institution-specific programs. These programs will be at the undergraduate level
                         and their duration will not exceed three years. These courses will not require accreditation or
                         approval from MESU and are intended to respond to specific needs in the labor market through
                         professional programs integrating significant practical work experience, designed and developed in
                         close collaboration with the private sector. Professionals from the private sector will be involved in
                         the teaching of the academic courses. Programs will be developed within the LMD system to ensure
                         that students have the option of moving to standard degree programs, should they wish. Examples of
                         envisioned programs could include training in accident prevention in the workplace, and pro grams
                         to prevent and mitigate damage to the environment in the extractive industries

                         69.     Performance-Based Contracts (PBC) willbe used to structure financial support for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of these new programs, and to concurrently address persistent challenges in the delivery
                         of undergraduate education: low internal efficiency, poor utilisation of ICT, lack of contacts with
                         employers. PBCs are results-oriented and payment will be tied to the achievement of specific,
                         measurable targets and indicators. PBCs will be entered between the MESU and selected institutions,
                         and be contractually binding to both parties.

                         70.       Each beneficiary institution will submit a formal proposal to MESU. This proposal will
                         include: (i) an in-depth description o f the institution and its strategic plan; (ii) the identification of
                         the academic units (faculties/departments) in charge of the development of the academic programs;
                         (iii) the strategic plans of these units; (iv) the proposed PBC of the institution including
                         commitments and targets for each unit; (v) the action plan of the institution and its units; and (vi) the
                         budget requested for each unit and for the coordination of the PBC. PBCs will be implemented over
                         the course of five years and will take into account indicators related to the new undergraduate short-
                         cycle programs, the use of ICT, partnership with the private sector, internal efficient, and quality of
                         teaching and learning. Each selected higher education institution (HEI) will be responsible and
                         accountable for the implementation of their PBC. It will prepare an annual strategic plan and semi-
                         annual PBC progress reports. These reports will be used in the annual review of the PBCs. Assessing
                         the achievement of PBC goals, and decisions pertaining to the continuation and/or termination of
                         PBCs will be informed by the contents of annual reports as well as regular inspection by independent
                         experts.

                                                                        Page 8 of 13
                         71.      Reinforcement of Quality Assurance (QA). The project will support measures to evolve the
                         development of the contemporary QA system, with the intention of establishing an independent QA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agency. The mission of this agency will be the evaluation of institutions and programs, and it will
                         form an integral component of an improved system for the regulation of higher education.
                         Procedures and standards developed by the QA agency will guide local quality assurance units within
                         institutions and help ensure quality for newly-developed programs.

                         Component 3. Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation

                         72.      The project will support activities aiming to ensure effective project coordination, and
                         monitoring and evaluation of project outcomes. Consultancy services will be provided to expand
                         knowledge on technically focused education and training subject matters, and to strengthen capacity
                         in planning and programming as well as evaluation. Technical knowledge sought will also endeavor
                         to strengthen the relevant technical departments within MEPS-INC, METP and MESU. The project
                         will support additional implementation-related activities including, but not limited to, communication
                         strategies and campaigns, data collection and monitoring, tracer surveys, and audit.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         There will be renovation/rehabilitation of science classrooms and the provision of equipment to
                         about 36 secondary schools and renovation/rehabilitation of workshops to about 15 technical schools.
                         Project interventions will be intervene in urban, peri-urban areas of 6 provinces (Kinshasa,
                         Bandundu, Equateur, Kasai Occidental, Province Oriental and Katanga).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)
                         Antoine V. Lema (GSU05)
                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental              Yes            An Environmental and Social Management Framework
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     (ESMF) has been prepared to cover the impacts of
                                                                    rehabilitation and renovation of secondary technical
                                                                    schools, including the provision of water and sanitation.
                                                                    This ESMF has been reviewed, consulted upon and
                                                                    disclosed in DRC on April 23, 2015 and at the Infoshop
                                                                    on April 23,2015.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes            The project will not undertake any investments in critical
                          4.04                                      natural habitats. The policy is triggered because of the
                                                                    presence of critical ecosystems in the project targeted
                                                                    areas. Due to this situation, particular attention may be
                                                                    paid to these particular ecosystems. Then, the conception
                                                                    of the sub-projects should take into account this issue.
                                                                    The ESMF will provide guidance on avoiding or
                                                                    mitigating impacts on natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No




                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                The project will not support the purchase of any pesticides
                                                                      or pest management programs.
                            Physical Cultural           Yes           DRC is considered as a country with a rich cultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                      heritage. That means the probability to undercover
                                                                      Physical Cultural resources is not negligible. In this
                                                                      regard, it is necessary to be prudent during the
                                                                      implementation of the project activities. But, no particular
                                                                      safeguard instrument is required. The ESMF includes a
                                                                      chapter to provide guidance and behavior that must be
                                                                      followed in case of such discovery. The project will not
                                                                      finance activities that affect or involve physical cultural
                                                                      resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes           The project will target 6 provinces, four of which are
                            BP 4.10                                   home to indigenous People. To ensure that these
                                                                      populations benefit from the project, an Indigenous
                                                                      Peoples Planning Framework have been prepared.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              Works under component 1.2, may induce land acquisition
                            OP/BP 4.12                                through rehabilitation of selected school infrastructure. To
                                                                      mitigate potential adverse impacts, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                      Framework (RPF) has been prepared.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project was classified as EA Category “B” as the potential adverse impacts associated with
                              projected activities are anticipated to be minor, site specific and limited to an acceptable level.
                              Taking into account the nature and scope of activities, three environmental safeguard policies were
                              triggered in addition to the two social policies mentioned above: OP/BP4.01 (Environmental
                              Assessment), OP/PB4.04 (Natural Habitats) and OP/BP4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources). An
                              Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to manage environmental impacts
                              that may arise. To mitigate potential issues related to Physical Cultural Resources and Natural
                              Habitats, specific chapters are included in the ESMF.
                              Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) was triggered as component 1.2, may induce land acquisition
                              through rehabilitation of selected school infrastructure. To mitigate potential adverse impacts, a
                              Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared. Indigenous People (OP 4.10), was
                              triggered as four of the project provinces, but Kinshasa, are home to indigenous people. To
                              mitigate potential adverse impacts on indigenous people, an Indigenous Peoples Planning
                              Framework (IPPF) has been prepared.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                                       Page 10 of 13
                           in the project area:
                           The potential adverse impacts associated with projected activities are anticipated to be minor, site
                           specific and limited to an acceptable level. The social safeguards impacts identified, are not
Public Disclosure Copy




                           expected to have long term or cumulative effects.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           As indicated above, the potential adverse impacts are minimal.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The government demonstrated its commitment to safeguards compliance, during the preparation
                           and implementation of the Sector Development Project and the Support to Basic Education
                           Project. An ESMF, a RPF and an IPPF were prepared by the client and disclosed prior to
                           appraisal. The DRC government’s capacity to monitor or implement safeguards polices is,
                           however, weak.
                           Within each of the safeguard instruments that were developed there are action plans to address the
                           safeguard issues. In addition, in the project implementation units, staff will be devoted part-time
                           to monitor safeguards compliance.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders are communities living in the project areas, particularly students, professors,
                           parents but also the industries targeted by the project and considered as priority economic sectors
                           for DRC growth. During the preparation of the safeguard instruments all these stakeholders have
                           been consulted and their comments and suggestions taken into consideration in the finalization of
                           the documents. These series of consultations have been organized through workshops and
                           communication campaigns. Once the elaboration of three documents completed,the frameworks
                           has been disclosed in country on the websites www.eduquepsp.cd and www.minesu.gouv.cd and
                           at the World Bank’s Infoshop.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        06-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     23-Apr-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                      23-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        06-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     23-Apr-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                      23-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework


                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Apr-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Congo, Democratic Republic of                                    23-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?




                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dung-Kim Pham
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                        Date: 28-Apr-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Meskerem Mulatu (PMGR)                         Date: 28-Feb-2017
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 13 of 13
