INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12280
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Armenia                     Project ID:  P149913
Project Name: Public Sector Modernization Project III (P149913)
Task Team       K. Migara 0. De Silva,Davit Melikyan
Leader(s):
Estimated        13-Jul-2015                Estimated    30-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGO15                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Central government administration (55%), Public administration- Information
and communications (45%)
Theme(s):       Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (50%), e-
Government (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      26.50             Total Bank Financing:    21.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      5.50
P            International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       21.00
Total                                                                        26.50
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective (PDO) is to improve quality of the public financial reporting and
to improve access to selected enhanced e-government services.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 5


﻿The Third Public Sector Modernization Project (PSMP-III) will be an IBRD-financed Specific
Investment Loan (SIL) with implementation over a five year period. It comprises four components:
Component 1: Public Financial Management Information Systems.
This component will help the Government to improve the efficiency, effectiveness and
comprehensiveness of its financial management and accounting through the development of a
Government Financial Management Information System (GFMIS).
Sub-Component 1.1 - Development of the GFMIS: Support improvements in the budget process
through setting up the state budget plan based on programs; strengthened internal controls;
refinements in financial and accounting standards and improvements in the coverage of financial
reporting, particularly as regards government assets and liabilities; and improvements in payment
and procurement procedures.
Sub-Component 1.2 - Support for PFM Reforms: Technical assistance and advisory services to the
Ministry of Finance in implementing reforms.
Component 2: e-Governance Solutions for Improved Service Delivery
This component will support the implementation of select government priorities as identified in the
Government of Armenia's e-Governance Strategy.
Sub-Component 2.1 - e-Governance Policy, Institutions, and Capacity: This sub-component seeks to
put in place the policy environment necessary for introduction of a deeper e-governance reforms and
create an institutional capacity within the government needed to undertake introduction of electronic
service delivery mechanisms.
Sub-Component 2.2 - e-Governance Platforms and Service Enhancements: This sub-component
seeks to introduce basic platforms (including interoperability platform) and infrastructure to support
the e-governance agenda, enhance existing e-services and automate services that have back end
O
C.       infrastructure in place.
Sub-component 2.3 - Citizen-Government Interface for Accountability: This sub component
supports the establishment of feedback mechanisms to facilitate citizen and business access to
government services, address grievances, and monitor client satisfaction. The feedback mechanisms
will be developed based on the design of service quality indicators and performance indicators
developed as part of the public sector reforms process. Particular attention will be given to the needs
of vulnerable users - including the poor, women, youth and the elderly - to ensure that the
accountability and participatory mechanisms developed are sensitive to their needs and preferences.
Component 3: Capacity Building and Small Capacity Building Interventions:
This component will support the broader public sector modernization and governance reform agenda
through two sub-components: capacity building and smaller capacity building interventions.
Sub-Component 3.1 - Capacity Building: This sub-component seeks to strengthen the capacity of the
Civil Service Council (CSC) and Armenian Academy of Public Administration (AAPA) to
modernize the training system for public servants and raise the quality of training to international
standards.
Page 2 of 5


﻿Sub-Component 3.2 - Small Capacity Building Interventions: This sub-component will support the
Public Sector Reform Commission (PSRC) in its coordination and implementation of the public
sector modernization and governance reforms.
O
U         Component 4: Project Management
This Component covers the cost of specific project management arrangements. These include the
costs of the Foreign Financing Project Management Centre (FFPMC), the Project Manager (PM) and
the Project Management Group (PMG) who will report to the Project Director (Chief of Staff of the
Prime Minister's Office and the Head of PSRC). PMG will provide technical and administrative
support to project implementation, monitoring and reporting, development of the technical
requirements/specifications part for procurement documents and monitoring of the procurement
process, and advisory services to agencies which implement project activities. This component also
includes the activities related with trainings, financial audit, monitoring and evaluation (M&E),
possible public awareness campaigns, and gender-related consultations with citizens and civil
society.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in the public institutions of Armenia, predominantly in the capital
city of Yerevan with possible interventions in some provincial administrative centers.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
Sarah G. Michael (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No          The project is to provide technical assistance to the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Government of Armenia. This technical assistance does
not include support for design or preparation of any
physical investment that will trigger safeguard policies.
The only type of physical activity that may be performed
under the project is the installation of IT equipment,
which carries no environmental risks. Workers' safety
shall be ensured through the deployment of personnel
qualified for working with electric devices. Installation
and operation instructions for IT equipment should also
be strictly observed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Page 3 of 5


﻿Involuntary Resettlement No         No civil works or land use/acquisition will be undertaken
OP/BP 4.12                          under the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No
O
0         4.37
Projects on International  No
O
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project does not finance physical works and does not provide technical assistance with
expected indirect significant environmental impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
U           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements
o        If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 4 of 5


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ No        NA [ X
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ No     NA   X
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [   No[       NA[X]
0          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [   No[      NA[X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: K. Migara 0. De Silva,Davit Melikyan
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)                Date: 16-Jul-2015
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


