The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                    Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Nov-2016| Report No: ISDSR20556




                        Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                               Country Director:    Rachid Benmessaoud
                 Senior Global Practice Director:   Timothy Grant Evans
                    Practice Manager/Manager:       Trina S. Haque
                             Task Team Leader:      Shunsuke Mabuchi, Ibrahim Magazi, Shiyong
                                                    Wang
        The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                    Project Name
P152359                                                       Ebola Emergency Response Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                           Country
Shunsuke Mabuchi, Ibrahim Magazi, Shiyong Wang                Western Africa
Approval Date                                                 Environmental Category
16-Sep-2014                                                   Partial Assessment (B)
Managing Unit                                                 Is this a Repeater project?
GHN13


PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                            Total Bank Financing
105000000.00                                                  0
Financing Gap
0

Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
Total                                                                                                        0.00


2. PROJECT INFORMATION

 Current Project Development Objective
 The Project Development Objective is to contribute in the short term to the control of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD)
 outbreak and the availability of selected essential health services, and mitigate the socio-economic impact of EVD in
 Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.



 Proposed New PDO
 To contribute to the control of the Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) outbreaks and the recovery of selected essential health
 services in Guinea, Liberia, and Sierra Leone.

3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
        The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



Component 1: Support to the EVD Outbreak Response Plans and Strengthening of Essential Health Services and
Disease Preparedness – Original (original grant and AF combined): US$174million. After restructuring: US$224 million,
including US$70.2 million (Guinea US$15 million, Liberia US$37 million, Sierra Leone US$18.2 million) for proposed new
activities

1.       This Component financed intensified Ebola responses including case management at Ebola Treatment Units
(ETU) and Community Care Centers (CCCs), procurement and distribution of personal protective equipment (PPEs) in
ETUs, CCCs, and other health facilities, community engagement, surveillance, contact tracing, and safe burials which are
all intensified interventions to curb the Ebola outbreak. Through the proposed restructuring, following new sub-
components will be added to continue to control Ebola cases in case another outbreaks occur, and support recovery of
essential health services.

1.1 Service Delivery Recovery
2.      This sub-component will assist the urgent recovery of key functions of essential health services based on the
countries’ needs. During the previous Ebola outbreak, health facilities were hit by death and exit of health workers and
disruption of drugs supply chain due to the shift of priority from regular drugs to Ebola related supplies. To address
them, activities will include comprehensive support to health facilities on staffing, drugs and other essential supplies,
and transport and logistics including emergency medical services (EMS) and fleet management.

1.2 Preparedness for potential future Ebola outbreaks
3.        During the previous Ebola outbreak, health facilities became a major source of EVD infections, due to lack of
sufficient and clean space to keep Ebola patient from other patients, and poor infection prevention and control (IPC)
practices by health workers. This increased Ebola and non-Ebola deaths by: (i) Ebola patients not coming to health
facilities in fear of deaths; and (ii) pregnant women and patients of other curable diseases (e.g., Malaria) not coming to
health facilities or refused assisted delivery or treatment by health workers in fear of Ebola infections. In particular,
Redemption Hospital in Liberia located in the slum area of the capital became a main source of infection of the Ebola
virus in the capital area, given its poor infrastructure and very limited space for patients. This sub-component aims to
draw lessons from the Ebola outbreak and turn these key health facilities into front-line centers for infection control.
The activities will range from rehabilitation of health facilities with new triage and isolation units to improvement of
WASH, upgrade (new construction) of Redemption Hospital in Liberia to an IPC-compliant regional hospital, diagnostic
center to examine Ebola survivors, training of health workforce on IPC practices and case management, strengthening of
event-based surveillance capacity and disease reporting, and environmental health and sanitation activities.

1.3 Management and coordination
4.       The proposed restructuring will support the strengthening of project management and coordination functions at
the Ministries of Health (MoH) and counties/provinces, through staffing, office supplies, and logistics. The restructuring
will also help strengthen the MoH’s capacity to coordinate development partners on its urgent recovery and disease
control support.


Component 2: Human Resources Scale Up for Outbreak Response and Essential Health Services – Original (original
grant and AF combined): US$159 million. After restructuring: US$109 million, including US$29.8 million (Liberia: US$25
million, Sierra Leone: US$4.8 million) for new activities.

5. This Component financed human resources for the Ebola response including the deployment of foreign medical
   teams and payment of hazard pay to Ebola response workers and health workers. Through the proposed
        The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



    restructuring, following new sub-components will be added to leverage community and community health workers
    for urgent health services recovery and disease surveillance and IPC education, and to recover lost health workers
    and strengthen their IPC practices to prevent in-health facility infections.

2.1 Community-led recovery and preparedness
6.      An important lesson from the previous Ebola outbreak include the importance of the capacity to detect, isolate
and report suspect cases, and communicate proper IPC and sanitary practices at the community level. Also, the
community and community health workers (CHWs) strengthened through the Ebola response should be leveraged for
re-gaining community trust and recovering essential health services. This sub-component will build on these lessons and
help the countries urgently implement the CHW programs. Under the program, trained and supported CHWs and other
community-level stakeholders will be responsible for providing a comprehensive package of preventive, promotive, and
curative services at the household level, including household visits, referral of cases to health facilities, community death
recording, community disease surveillance and control, home-based family planning, antenatal care, postnatal care,
neonatal care, vaccination drop-out tracing, and integrated community case management (iCCM). The program will also
support community-led activities including detection, referral, and reporting of suspected diseases of epidemic
potential, IPC and community-led total sanitation, and participation in planning, implementing, monitoring, and
feedback through community health committees. This sub-component will cover urgent recovery phase only, and will be
taken over by country-specific projects for longer-term implementation and scale-up.

2.2 Health worker recovery and preparedness
7.       One of the largest impact of the Ebola outbreak on the countries’ health system is loss of all cadres of health
workers through their deaths and exit from health facilities in fear of infections. Recovery of human resources for health
services requires urgent support as it takes time to produce health workers through proper training. Also, the Ebola
outbreak suggests the importance of thorough training of all cadre of health workers in IPC practices to prevent in-
health facility infections. This sub-component aims to strengthen physician and specialist training program and selected
midwifery, nursing, and clinical health officers/physician assistants training institutions to recover the loss of health
workers and strengthen their IPC practices. The support includes deployment of faculty, rehabilitation of learning
infrastructure, distribution of medical equipment and supplies for training institutions, and other operational cost of the
training programs.


4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The parent project is being undertaken in Guinea, Liberia and Sierra Leone (three of the Mano River Union-MRU
States), hardest hit by Ebola Virus Disease (EVD) within the West African Region. Most reported cases within the three
hardest hit countries are within rural areas which are not easily accessible and also within densely populated cities
with weak and overburdened health care systems and clinical staff.

The proposed level-1 restructuring will not result in a geographical upscale of interventions outside the boundaries of
the three most affected and hardest hit countries within the West African Region, therefore the physical characteristics
and salient safeguard analysis of the restructuring remains the same to the parent project.
        The World Bank                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM


 Name                                                 Unit
 Sekou Abou Kamara                                    GEN01
 Demba Balde                                          GSU01


6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

Safeguard Policies                        Triggered   Explanation

                                                      The infrastructure support component of the project
                                                      will involve civil works in all three implementing
                                                      countries. Each implementing country has developed
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP
                                          Yes         ESMF that has been disclosed in country and on Info
4.01)
                                                      Shop. Site-specific ESMPs will be developed during
                                                      implementation to ensure that potential impacts are
                                                      mitigated.

Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)           No



Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                    No



Pest Management (OP 4.09)                 No


Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP
                                          No
4.11)


Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No

                                                      There are no resettlement issues with regards to the
                                                      civil works in Guinea and Sierra Leone. However, in
                                                      Liberia, construction of the New Redemption Hospital
                                                      will require acquisition of land. Section of the land
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes
                                                      where the new hospital is supposed to be built is
                                                      occupied. An ARAP was cleared by the Bank on
                                                      November 17, 2016, and will be implemented before
                                                      construction on the site can begin.
        The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)




Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No


Projects on International Waterways
                                            No
(OP) (BP 7.50)


Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60) No




 II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES

 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

   Construction of the Redemption Hospital: The proposed construction of the Redemption Hospital in Liberia raised a
   number of environmental and social safeguard issues. The ownership of a portion of the land - approximately 21 out
   of the 35 acres – is being contested by the Tarr Land owning family. Therefore, fourteen out of the 35 acres are free of
   any dispute and there is consensus in the community that this portion of the land belongs to the Government. The
   portion of the land being contested has been divided into plots and sold to members of the public who have
   developed business and residential buildings (some buildings are completed and occupied and others are at different
   stages of completion). There is a cemetery located on the boundary of the site, which should be avoided by the
   project. The proposed site for the construction of the new Redemption Hospital is already a disturbed area. Concern
   about natural habitat disturbance or biodiversity loss does not apply. However, during the construction phase,
   concerns e related to construction wastes management, and worker and public health and safety issues will need to
   be addressed. Management of medical and other healthcare wastes should be incorporated in the facility design to
   ensure that wastes generated during operation of the facility are properly managed and disposed of in
   environmentally friendly ways. Given the characteristics of the site and with proper environmental, health and safety
   measures in place, all potential impacts and risks associated with the construction can be mitigated.

   Other Civil Works Activities: The new construction for the EMS in Sierra Leone will be carried out in the former ETU.
   This requires safe demolishing of the ETU. All other civil works activities described above (both rehabilitation and new
   construction) are within the premise of the health facilities or academic institutions. There will be no resettlement
   issues in these sites. Potential environmental impacts include: clearance of trees and grass on sites, dust emissions,
   noise nuisance, and clearance of some trees on sites, increase in discharge of surface runoff and soil erosion, increase
   on solid and liquid wastes on premises among others. Some social impacts will include disruption of healthcare
   services; safety of workers and access of patients and community to services etc. Environmental aspects associated
   with location and operations of incinerators will also be applicable in the project.

   The use of asbestos / slate as a building material, primarily in roofing or fencing or auxiliary buildings is common in
   older buildings and facilities. The handling and disposal of asbestos during the dismantling and refurbishment could
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



  expose workers, facility staff and neighboring population to potential health hazards. ESMF provides well-defined
  mitigation measures which need to be undertaken during project implementation.

  Healthcare Waste Management: The management of healthcare waste (medical waste, excreta and body
  secretions/fluids) could continue to be a significant issue at the primary healthcare level, particularly in terms of final
  disposal as well as part of the delivery of services at primary health care and Redemption Hospital, once completed.
  The parent project supported the updating of existing national guidelines on Healthcare Waste Management in line
  with WHO standards, along with training for health care workers to manage medical waste following these guidelines.
  In addition to this, healthcare wastes management and disposal arrangements will need to be incorporated in the
  design of the facility to ensure that healthcare wastes generated during the operation of the facility are properly
  managed and disposed of in ways that do not pose risks to human health as well as the environment.




2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  None of the planned proposed interventions under these emergency arrangements will have an indirect and/or long
  term impacts. The risks associated to involuntary resettlement impact are expected to be mitigated by the
  implementation of the ARAP approved by the Bank which fully detailed the operational process of enacting any
  resettlement and displacement of PAPs.

3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Infection Prevention and Control remains an important element of project planning and response, along with the
  World Health Organization. The infection prevention plan will significantly contribute to minimizing the adverse
  environment and social impacts.

  As part of the 1-level restructuring, an ARAP was developed and cleared by the Bank on November 17, 2016 to address
  involuntary resettlement based on OP 4.12 due to the construction of the Redemption Hospital. Alternatives including
  the use of unoccupied areas and rehabilitation of existing facility were looked at for the construction site but no
  option was found viable. The facility housing the current Redemption Hospital was not built to be used as a hospital.
  The population it serves has grown over time, and this was particularly evident during the Ebola Crisis. This has
  necessitated the relocation and construction of a new hospital to better serve the need of the targeted population.
  Therefore, relocation of the hospital outside the reach of the targeted population could not be a viable option, as it
  would not serve the intended purpose of the construction. The hospital is located in a densely populated suburb of
  Monrovia. Therefore, expansion of the existing facility would be prohibitively costly due the large number of people
  that would have to be compensated and or resettled.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The environmental categorization (Category B: Partial Assessment) for the Project remains unchanged for the 1-level
  restructuring. The parent project triggered the Environmental Assessment policy (OP4.01) due to potential
  environmental health impacts and risks associated with the emergency assistance works to help combat the EVD
  within the three hardest hit Countries in the West African Region. The additional activities to be financed under the 1-
  level restructuring will not change the environmental categorization.
     The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
     Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



An ESMF (Environment and Social Management Framework) and Medical Waste Management Plan have been
developed and publicly disclosed in October 2015 in all three countries to help screen potential environmental/social
impacts and risk from subproject works and provide appropriate mitigation measures.

For the 1-level restructuring related to the construction of the Redemption Hospital and its impact on involuntary
resettlement, the borrower will undertake the following:
i.   Secure the unoccupied 14 acres of land to prevent encroachment.
ii. Ensure that any government action regarding involuntary resettlement (including any displacement) is
conducted in a manner that is consistent with OP 4.12 and national law, including respect for due process, adequate
notice, avoidance of undue force and provision of required assistance prior to displacement to avoid negative impacts
on PAPs and reduce reputational risks for the Project.
iii. Prepare, consult upon, disclose and implement an ARAP before the commencement of civil works.
iv. Ensure that the project footprint avoids affecting the cemetery
v. Ensure that there are funds for resettlement in order to avoid any delays regarding compensation payments; and,
vi. Recruit a safeguards specialist who will be responsible for leading, coordinating and ensuring the implementation
of safeguards activities in the PIU

Based on the 1-level restructuring, the capacity for the implementation of the project safeguard arrangements within
the three affected countries continues to be satisfactory for environmental safeguards. For social safeguards related
to dealing with involuntary resettlement in terms of preparing the ARAP and compensating those affected, the
capacity is limited. The ARAP is requested to be deferred to after the Board approval of the level-1 restructuring as
per guidance from the “Instructions: Preparation for Investment Project Financing – Situation of Urgent Need of
Assistance or Capacity Constraints (July 1, 2016)?. The deferral will allow Liberia adequate time to address its
limitation in capacity to finalize compensation as well as the documentations necessary for the design and
construction of the facility.

The capacity assessment for environmental safeguards could be summarized as follows:

Sierra Leone
At the National level, the MoHS will lead the implementation of the proposed new activities. The MoHS established
and fully staffed Integrated Health Project Administration Unit (IHPAU) to ensure the rapid delivery of services. The
MoHS has been engaged in various Bank investments projects and as such, it has Project coordinating units which are
familiar with Bank Safeguard policies and procedures. The responsibility for screening of the intervention actions and
implementation of any designed mitigation is with the MoHS. Additionally, the Sierra Leone Environmental Protection
Agency has national environmental legislative requirements and screening procedures which are consistent with those
of the E&S policy requirements of the Bank.

Healthcare Waste Management Plan (HWMP): A comprehensive national medical waste management plan was
developed as part of the Sierra Leone HIV/AIDS Response (SHARP) and Health Sector Reconstruction and Development
(HSRDP) projects in 2002 with the MoHS as the implementing ministry. This HWMP was updated to reflect the current
WHO protocols for handling medical waste from the treatment of the EVD. The updated HWMP was publicly disclosed
in-country with an accompanying information campaign and on World Bank Infoshop to comply with Bank
consultation and disclosure policies.

Liberia
The Ministry of Health (MoH) will lead the implementation of the proposed new activities. The MoH has experience of
         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



    Bank E&S requirements and due diligence procedures through years of overseeing many Bank financed projects in the
    Country. A safeguards specialist was recently recruited to further strengthen the project implementation team in
    terms of safeguards. The safeguards specialist is responsible for screening of the intervention actions and
    implementation of any designed mitigation on behalf the MoH and NTT. Additionally, the Liberia Environmental
    Protection Agency has environmental legislative requirements and screening procedures which are consistent with
    those of the E&S policy requirements of the Bank.

    Healthcare Waste Management Plan (HWMP): A comprehensive national medical waste management was updated
    reflecting the current WHO protocols for handling medical waste from the treatment of the EVD. The updated HWMP
    was disclosed publicly in-country with an accompanying information campaign and World Bank Infoshop to comply
    with Bank consultation and disclosure policy.

    Guinea
    Implementation of the proposed new activities will be led by the Ministry of Health (MoH) and part of the work will be
    contracted to relevant technical agencies (e.g., UNICEF). The MoH has experience of Bank E&S requirements and due
    diligence procedures through years of overseeing many Bank financed projects in the Country. The responsibility for
    screening of the intervention actions and implementation of any designed mitigation is with the MoH. Additionally,
    the Guinea Environmental Protection Agency has environmental legislative requirements and screening procedures
    which are consistent with those of the E&S policy requirements of the Bank.

    Healthcare Waste Management Plan (HWMP): A comprehensive national medical waste management plan was
    updated to reflect the current WHO protocols for handling medical waste from the treatment of the EVD. The updated
    HWMP was publicly disclosed in-country with an accompanying information campaign and on World Bank Infoshop to
    comply with Bank consultation and disclosure policies. The MoH will take lead role to update the HWMP in
    coordination with the National Health Crisis Committee.


  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
    an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    Stakeholders:
    The key stakeholders include individuals suffering from EVD, affected communities, healthcare workers, the donor
    community, WHO, WFP, UNICEF, UNFPA, FAO, UNDP, the implementing Ministries and related government agencies
    specially set up to help implement the joint EVD Outbreak Response Plan within the three hardest hit countries.
    Consultations and Disclosure:
    The ESMF was consulted on and publicly disclosed in-country (and globally through the World Bank InfoShop) in a
    form and language appropriate for public comprehension. All comments provided during these consultations were
    recorded, and included in the final ESMF and any subsequent safeguard instruments which will be developed as
    required. Communication and dissemination campaigns form an integral part of activities promoted under this project.


 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS


Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission to Infoshop
         The World Bank                                                                              RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)



25-Aug-2014                                                    29-Aug-2014
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


“In country? Disclosure




C. COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL


OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                        No




The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                      Yes
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local                    Yes
NGOs?


All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
                                                                                                        Yes
for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                      Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
                                                                                                        Yes
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and
                                                                                                        Yes
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?
       The World Bank                                   RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Ebola Emergency Response Project (P152359)




III. APPROVALS


                                     Shunsuke Mabuchi
Task Team Leader(s)                  Ibrahim Magazi
                                     Shiyong Wang


 Approved By

 Safeguards Advisor

 Practice Manager/Manager
