INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSAl 128
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Sri Lanka                   Project ID:  P152623
Parent        P113036
Project ID:
Project Name: North East Local Services Improvement Project - Addditional Financing
(P152623)
Parent Project North East Local Services Improvement Project (NELSIP) (P113036)
Name:
Task Team       Seenithamby Manoharan,Abdu Muwonge
Leader(s):
Estimated        13-May-2015                Estimated    24-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General public administration sector (25%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
Highways (25%), Water supply (25%), Irrigation and drain age (24%), Sub-
national government administration (1%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (25%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
Delivery (25%), Municipal governance and institution b uilding (25%), Natural
disaster management (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      20.00             Total Bank Financing:    20.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  20.00
Total                                                                        20.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 13


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The primary development objective of the project is to improve the delivery of local infrastructure
services by local authorities in the Northern and Eastern Provinces of Sri Lanka in an accountable
and responsive manner.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
Project Description
The parent project was initially financed with IDA resources. A co-financing grant was received
from the Australian Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) and World Bank partnership
for South Asia to continue the activities supported by the project. The project activities eligible for
financing will remain as it is for the DFAT funds and the previous additional financing in 2013.
The proposed additional financing which is being processed in May 2015 is to provide an additional
of credit 20 million would close a financing gap caused by a shortfall in the Governments original
counterpart financing and to deepen overall the project impact. The AF will be used to finance
activities that were already planned, detailed and budgeted for under the original project. No new
activities are proposed under this AF and hence no new safeguard policies will be triggered.
There are five components in the project:
Current Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support local authorities in the Northern and
Eastern Provinces and Adjoining Provinces to deliver services and local infrastructure in a
responsive and accountable manner.
Revised Project Development Objective (PDO): NIL
The project components and implementation arrangements remain unchanged.
Component 1: Infrastructure Service Delivery: The objective of this component is to improve the
quantity and quality of public goods delivered and maintained by Local Authorities (LAs). These
may include rural roads, drains, culverts and bridges, public buildings, markets and fairs, waste
disposal, rural water supply, parks, recreation facilities and libraries, nursery schools, playgrounds
and dispensaries.
Component 2: Institutionalizing Accountabilities: This component aims at ensuring that LAs
undertake public expenditures and deliver local services in a transparent and accountable manner. It
will strengthen upward and downward accountability systems at the LAs and will support: (a)
transparent and independent annual financial audits of LAs to ensure their financial accountability;
Page 2 of 13


﻿(b) social and technical audits of public expenditures undertaken by LAs to ensure effective use of
funds in line with citizen expectations; and (c) systems and processes to bring greater transparency in
LA affairs and strengthen citizen voice in planning, budgeting and monitoring. This component will
also support an Information Education & Communication (IEC) campaign aimed at disseminating
project related information to different stakeholders at all levels.
Component 3: Building Capacities: This component aims at strengthening the service delivery
systems and capacities of the LAs to deliver their mandated services as well as strengthening the
monitoring capacities of the provincial and national level institutions. It will support (a) improving
the efficiency of current systems and procedures relating to planning, budgeting, financial
management, revenue management and procurement at the LA level, (b) improving the efficiency,
timeliness and follow up of the internal and external audits of LAs, (c) training elected
representatives and staff of LAs on financial management, procurement and project management, (d)
providing effective hand holding support to LAs on day to day basis, and (e) developing a long term
capacity building strategy for LAs. It will also support the strengthening of the capacities of the
national and provincial level institutions that play a critical role in the support and oversight of local
government functions.
Component 4: Assessments and Evaluation: This component will finance: (i) activities pertaining to
establishing a comprehensive monitoring system, including baseline assessment, repeater surveys of
social assessments, social accountability assessment, gender assessment, and capacity assessments;
(ii) evaluating technical and social audits and preparation of citizens score cards; and (iii) other
needed analysis as and when they are needed.
Component 5: Project Management: This component will support the key agencies at the central,
provincial and local levels that are involved in the day to day management of the project to procure
necessary consultancies, equip ment and operational support for the smooth implementation of the
project.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if known)
Project will be located in the Northern, Eastern, North Central, North Western and Uva Provinces of
Sri Lanka. These provinces are located in the low country dry zone in Sri Lanka.
Northern Province: Northern Province has an area of 8,884 square kilometers. The province is
surrounded by the Gulf of Mannar and Palk Bay to the west, Palk Strait to the north, the Bay of
Bengal to the east and the Eastern, North Central and North Western provinces to the south.
The province is divided into two distinct geographic areas: Jaffna peninsula and the Vanni. Jaffna
peninsula is irrigated by underground aquifers fed by wells whereas the Vanni has irrigation tanks
fed by perennial rivers. Major rivers include: Akkarayan Aru, Aruvi Aru, Kanakarayan Aru,
Kodalikkallu Aru, Mandekal Aru, Nay Aru, Netheli Aru, Pali Aru, Pallavarayankaddu Aru, Parangi
Aru, Per Aru, Piramenthal Aru, Theravil Aru. The province has a number of lagoons, the largest
being Jaffna Lagoon, Nanthi Kadal, Chundikkulam Lagoon, Vadamarachchi Lagoon, Uppu Aru
Lagoon, Kokkilai lagoon, Nai Aru Lagoon and Chalai Lagoon. Most of the islands around Sri Lanka
are to be found to the west of the Northern Province. The largest islands are: Mannar island, Kayts,
Neduntivu, Karaitivu, Pungudutivu and Mandativu.
Page 3 of 13


﻿The Northern Province tends to be hot and dry in the dry season (February to September), and
moderately cool and wet in the wet season (October to January) when the North-east monsoons takes
place. Province's climate is tropical and therefore during monsoons there is always the chance of a
deluge. In the lowlands the climate is typically tropical with the average temperature is around 280 to
300 for the year. Relative Humidity varies from 70% during the day to 90% at night. Annual rainfall
is less than 1250 mm in the north west and south east of the Inland.
Majority of the people earn their livelihood as farmers, fishers and professionals in the civil and
business sectors. Agriculture is the prominent source of livelihood for vast majority of the people.
Jaffna peninsula is irrigated by underground aquifers fed by wells whereas the Vanni has irrigation
tanks fed by perennial rivers. Agricultural is the prominent source of income for the people of the
province. The Major agricultural crops produced in this province are Paddy, Chilli, Red Onion, Black
gram, Green gram, Cowpea, Groundnut, Bombay Onion. Other agricultural productions are Fruits
such as Banana, Mango, Papaya, Lime, Orange, Guava. Major vegetables grown in this province are
Beans, Capsicum, Tomato, Cabbage, Beet root, Carrot, Vendakkai, Snakeguard, Bitterguard, Brinjal,
Ashplantain, Long beans, Manioc and sweet potatoes.
The Province has a wide range of flora and fauna, although there are hardly much information of
their status. The Province has wide range of ecosystems spanning from deep jungles in the interior
lands, scrub forest, thorn forest, dry lands, wetlands and as well as beaches, estuaries, salt marshes,
mangroves, and to coral reefs of the Bay of Bengal and Gulf of Mannar providing habitat to diverse
array of fauna and flora.
Eastern Province: Eastern province has an area of 9,996 square kilometers. The province is
surrounded by the Northern Province to the north, the Bay of Bengal to the east, the Southern
Province to the south, and the Uva, Central and North Central provinces to the west. The province's
coast is dominated by lagoons, the largest being Batticaloa Lagoon, Kokkilai lagoon, Upaar Lagoon
and Ullackalie Lagoon.
The climatic conditions of the Eastern Province are similar to Northern Province with similar wet
and dry periods. Eastern Province has long coastline. The average temperature is around 240 to 32o
for the year. Relative Humidity varies from 40% during the day to 100% at night. Average rainfall is
from 70 mm in January and 396 mm in October.
The mains economic activities of people in North and Eastern provinces are paddy cultivation and
fishery. Paddy is the main economic activity of adjoining provinces and accounts for the highest
proportion of the countries rice production.
The ecosystems of North Central, North Western and Uva provinces are similar to the Northern and
Eastern Provinces and very little is known of their biodiversity.
Under the DFAT Additional Financing approved in early 2014, project covered three additional
provinces; North Central, North Western and Uva which included the districts of Anuradhapura,
Polonnaruwa, Puttalam and Monaragala. Anuradhapura and Polonnaruwa belong to the North
Central province that borders the Eastern and Northern Province. Puttalam belongs to the North
western province and borders the Northern Province while Monaragala belongs to the Uva province
and borders the Eastern province. These areas have dry climatic conditions similar to that of the
Northern and Eastern province as they too belong to the dry zone. Anuradhapura and Pollonaruwa
are both sites of historic significance, where the main city areas have been built around the remains
Page 4 of 13


﻿of the archaeological remains of two historical cities of the same names. The area around the main
cities, where the project has been active are located well away from these main city areas and are
mostly Paddy and Chena land and settlements and populations are fairly dispersed.The above
adjoining districts consist by population belong to all three main ethnic groups with large majority of
Sinhala community. No identifiable indigenous groups live in these districts.
Under the current additional financing, there will be no new project locations, the project will cover
the same areas as described above.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mohamed Ghani Razaak (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project has a fully fledged ESMF developed by the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                GoSL which has been in implementation successfully
cover the course of the parent project and will be
applicable for the additional financing as well. All the
safeguard procedures that apply to the parent project will
apply to the AF. Based on the project experience thus far
there have not been any major environmental impacts
from the physical intervention funded by the project and it
is not envisioned that any further interventions of the
same nature will not pose major, irreversible
environmental impacts due to their nature and scale. In
order to mitigate potential impacts that may be caused
predominantly during the construction phase as well as to
ensure that all such activities undertaken are conducted in
an environmentally sound manner the EMF includes
environmental assessment and preliminary analysis
guidelines, environmental codes of practice, has identified
preliminary impacts and outlines a generic Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) which will be used as guidance
to prepare site specific EMP for all subprojects,
environmental safety guidelines, monitoring mechanisms
etc. that are in line with bank safeguard requirements
whilst maximizing the use of country systems
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          OP/BP 4.04 is triggered more on a precautionary basis
4.04                                 and measures to ensure any possible impacts to natural
habitats or sensitive environments are avoided/mitigated
have been coved in the ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           No activities in forests or in close proximity to forest
areas are expected
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           Not Applicable as no project interventions are made
where significant use of pesticides and other such
substances are utilized.
Physical Cultural       Yes          OP/BP 4.11 is triggered more on a precautionary basis as
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 project interventions are not envisioned to be conducted
Page 5 of 13


﻿in areas close to sites of cultural importance. Renovation,
rehabilitation and improvements will be made to buildings
built over the last few decades and not deemed socially or
culturally important.Measures to safeguard chance finds
have been included as part of the measures taken under
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered because the national
BP 4.10                              population census does not show presence of IP
population in the areas covered under the AF.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Project interventions will be confined to the Government
OP/BP 4.12                           lands or lands owned by Local Authorities. OP/BP4.12 is
triggered as a precautionary measure in case there are
illegal occupants/encroachers in the Government lands
that will be used for project purposes. Social impact
mitigation measures outlined under the parent project to
guide in managing potential social issues related to lands
and assets will be applicable to the present ( AF) project
as well.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Not applicable as the project does not involve new
4.37                                 construction/rehabilitation of any Dams
Projects on International            Not Applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed                 Not Applicable
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
With the reconstruction and resettlement activities that have already started and will be taking
place in the near future, there is a high potential of negative environmental impacts taking place,
unless appropriate measures are taken during the planning processes to mainstream environmental
concerns into these development efforts. Currently, the following environmental issues can be
identified in these areas: (1) loss and change of natural habitats due to human settlements,
agriculture activities and infrastructure expansion, (2) destruction of forests and mangroves for
military purposes, collection of fire wood, construction of houses and fishing crafts, (3) pollution
due to inadequate sewage systems and solid waste management, (4) promotion of destructive
fishing in the coastal areas, (5) contamination of groundwater due to agriculture intensification and
poor drainage systems within human settlements impacting water quality, (6) flooding due to poor
drainage, (7) poor sanitation among settlements, (8) unplanned natural resource extraction for
development activities, and (9) contributing to the human-elephant conflict. The project is
expected to ensure that these issues are addressed as part of the PS service delivery activities.
Nevertheless, the proposed activities of the PSs have a potential to be negatively impacting on the
environment and will need to take necessary actions to ensure that impacts are avoided or
minimized through suitable mitigation measures.
Page 6 of 13


﻿PSs have been conducting their planning process and prioritization of activities that will be funded
through this project. Based on the preliminary list of potential activities that will be carried out by
the PSs, the following overall environmental impacts have been identified, which will need to be
taken into consideration and will require mitigation measures when planning and implementation
of these activities.
Impacts due to raw material extraction: Most of the proposed sub-project activities will require
number of natural resources such as sand, timber, metal, clay, etc. in order to implement the
activities thereby increasing the demand for these materials. This increased demand for raw
material will invariably intensify mining and extraction from the environment. In addition, due to
lack of consolidated planning for sustainable extraction of required quantities, it is difficult to
assess the resultant environmental damage and their long-term implications. Therefore, it is
important to consider the cumulative impacts of natural resource extraction and follow the
guidelines for extraction and management of the resources. All World Bank funded projects
should not extract resources or carry out any activities within protected areas gazetted under the
Flora and Fauna Protection Ordinance and forest reserves under the Forest Ordinance.
Impacts on environmentally sensitive sites: The locations of sub-projects are crucial in
determining the nature and magnitude of human-environment interaction. While reconstruction
activities may have less potential to create negative impacts on sensitive areas, new construction
activities will have high potential for negative impacts. Site selection continues annually as part of
the local authority planning exercises and during site selection for activities, the safeguard process
ensures that encroachment on environmentally sensitive areas such as forests, mangroves, lagoon,
marshes, archaeological reserves, river/stream/tank reservations, etc. have not taken place.
Overall, the project is expected to have general positive and little or no negative social impacts.
The expected positive impact is improved delivery of public goods and services from LAs along
with effective community involvement in the decision making process in managing resources. The
potential adverse social safeguard related impacts, as anticipated at this stage, would largely result
from obtaining public lands and physical/economic displacement of encroaches/squatters which
may be required in connection with the PS investments in rural infrastructure such as rural access,
rural water, sanitation, street lighting, rural markets, and intra & inter village infrastructure.
Most communities of Indigenous Peoples in Sri Lanka live scattered in remote locations.
However there are no official census data or statistics to indicate presence of IP community in Sri
Lanka. Additional financing will not cover areas where the scattered IP population are reside.
However, measures to safeguard chance finds have been included as part of the measures to cover
OP 4.10 requirements.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The above mentioned direct impacts will also have a potential to cause indirect and long term
impacts to the environment and natural resources. Resource extraction has the possibility of
degrading the land, reducing the watershed and hence the quality and quantity of water available
for natural ecosystems, people and their economic activities unless it is sustainable. Also if the
investments are provided for activities to take place even closer to sensitive ecosystems, through
time there is a high potential for communities to encroach into these areas. Therefore, it is
essential to conduct sub-project specific environmental assessments once the types and localities
are identified incorporating mitigation measures taking direct, indirect, short-term and long-term
Page 7 of 13


﻿impacts into considerations.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A comprehensive policy and regulatory framework for the conservation of natural resources and
environmental management in in existence Sri Lanka. The Central Environmental Authority
(CEA) is the key regulatory body that is mandated by the National Environmental Act (NEA) to
implement all regulatory provisions outlined in its statutes. All development projects, that fall in to
a set of prescribed categories are required to conduct a comprehensive environmental screening
and mitigation planning process (EIA or IEE). These processes are largely consistent with the
Bank's safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment. With over three decades of experience the
CEA demonstrates the technical expertise in evaluating environmental impacts of development
projects. However even with an enabling legal environment and abled CEA, field level
enforcement of legal instruments and subsequent monitoring of environmental management
activities has been very low.
Specifically for the project, the borrower has developed an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to ensure compliance with the World Bank's environmental and social
safeguard policies and the relevant provisions under the National Environmental Act (NEA), the
Land Acquisition Act and the National Involuntary Resettlement Policy (NIRP) and associated
regulations. ESMF has been prepared in lieu of a project specific EA, as the specific sites of
interventions within proposed districts are not known at this point of time. The ESMF provides
the necessary background for environmental and social dimensions to be built into the design of
the project in order to ensure that project implementation will take place in an environmentally and
socially sustainable manner. To aid this process, the ESMF sets a framework of guidelines and
procedures, which is intended to direct the process of planning and managing environmental and
social concerns of project activities. The ESMF will serve as a template document, identifying
potential risks and based on which specific social and environmental impact assessments will be
conducted for specific project components or sub-components later in the project cycle.
The ESMF has been prepared taking the following Bank safeguards policies into consideration:
OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment
OP/BP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples
OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources
OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement
Certain types of activities that the PSs generally carry out as part of their service delivery such as
waste management has been dropped off from this project, as there possibilities of opening up for
adverse environmental and social issues due to land issues. The ESMF has identified a negative
list of activities that will not be supported in addition to the negative list of the NEA.
All infrastructure sub projects are planned to be assessed for environmental and social
safeguards. The economic returns of sub projects should not be compensated for the negative
environmental and social impacts they will have on the project sites and the immediate
environment, as well as the wider environment. Once planning process of the PSs have been
completed and sub-projects and technologies have been identified, the project should prepare a set
Page 8 of 13


﻿of guidelines to prepare activity and technology specific EMPs to be incorporated as part of an
Environmental Manual.
It is expected that each sub-project and site will be subjected to a separate environmental
analysis. The PSOM will provide the institutional input that is required to manage and clear the
environmental assessments and Environmental Manual will provide technical guidelines for s
pecific activities and sites.
According to GOSL regulations, reconstruction and rehabilitation activities will not require an
environmental assessment. Similarly new constructions will require an environmental assessment
only if it falls into one of the prescribed categories. Since the sites are not yet known as yet, it is
too early to review on the level of analysis that the PAA will recommend. However, as per the
World Bank safeguard policies, the burrower and CEA have agreed that all sub-projects and sites
will be subjected to an environmental assessment and be cleared before fund disbursement takes
place. The ESMF Coordinator at the national level and Environmental and Social Safeguards
Officers at the provincial level will be directly responsible for all environment related work and
will take the lead role in initiating the processes described above and for obtaining GOSL and IDA
concurrence for each EA, as relevant. The Environmental Committee at the PS level will be
responsible to assess the proposals initially ensuring all necessary safeguards documents are in
place and also contribute to the monitoring process once the implementation commence. In
addition, the implementing agency is planning to conduct an independent audit once in every two
years from the date of project effectiveness to review environmental safeguards compliance.
Each sub-project and site will also be subject to a social screening to determine whether land
acquisition will be required or any indigenous communities will be affected by the planned
investment. The Local Authority Operations Manual will provide the institutional input that is
required to conduct the social screening and will provide technical guidelines for land acquisition
process, Indigenous People's Plan and Chance Find Procedures. The PSOM also provides the
process to be followed for both environmental and social safeguard requirements.
OP/BP 4.01: All proposed and potential PS service deliver activities that require infrastructure
development will be subjected to the sub-project specific EAs. The composite GOSL
environmental clearance process, in principle, is consistent with World Bank environmental
assessment and public disclosure requirements. The exception being the screening criteria adopted
in the GOSL process under the NEA, where project thresholds are used to determine the type of
clearance required and the content of public consultation. However, under the CEA the PAA can
take a decision based on anticipated impacts even if the project does not fall into the listed
categories and under the CCA and the FFPO the director has the discretion to request for an EA.
However, all activities under the proposed project will be subjected to the EA process regardless
of the project threshold, prior to disbursement of funds.
OP/BP 4.12: The AF will support interventions that utilize Government lands or lands be owned
by Local Authorities. However, since the exact location of project interventions are not know at
appraisal, and will be determined on a continuous basis according to the annual grants received by
the PS, the GOSL has prepared a Framework for Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement,
consistent with the requirements of the NIRP and OP/BP 4.12. In the event that land acquisition is
unavoidable, the land acquisition process, consultation and compensation procedures and
principles will be as per Sri Lankan Governmental Laws, policies and compliant with OP 4.12.
Page 9 of 13


﻿OP/BP 4.11: The proposed operations pose limited risks of damaging physical cultural resources
since subprojects will largely consist of small investments in community infrastructure and minor
public works situated in settlements well away from historic and archeologically sensitive areas.
Further, the ESMF comprises a list of negative subproject attributes, which would make a
subproject ineligible for support, including any activity that would adversely impact cultural
property. The stipulated procedures for identification, protection from theft, and treatment of
discovered artifacts as chance finds has been included in the ESMF as a request to be included in
standard bidding documents.
OP/BP 4. 10: There are no statistical information or official data on the presence of any IP
communities in the areas covered by the project. If it seems likely that any of these communities
are to be directly impacted by any NELSIP sub-project, a diagnostic consultation will be
undertaken at that point with the communities in question to minimize the possibility that
interventions by the program and/or its contractors inadvertently create adverse effects within the
communities. Based on the consultation report, NELSIP will prepare IPPs and decide the specific
implementation modalities vis-d-vis these communities.
Borrower's capacity to implement safeguards measures: The proposed implementation agencies
of this project currently do not have dedicated staff to implement safeguards measures. However,
at the PS level as per the PS Act, there is provision for Social Audit Committee and Environmental
Committee with responsibilities to ensure that social and environmental issues are taken care of in
their activities. In addition to that, the project proposed to include an Environmental and Social
Coordinator and an Environmental and Social Officer at the provincial level.
Overall, the experience with the parent project and DFAT additional financing, has been the sites
selected for various activities were existing sites to be rehabilitated such as roads, markets, and
drainage connected to roads. The initial assessments after project implementation also indicated
these sites are generally are not selected within sensitive areas. No impacts (direct or indirect)
towards physical cultural resources have been observed. It was also witnessed that impacts were
often low in scale, as the sub-projects supported have been small in scale. Hence the project has
focused mainly on preparing site-specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs). Since the
design of the project was to improve internal capacity to manage small works as part of the Local
Authority mandate, an attempt is being made to internalize the preparation of site-specific EMPs
through the support from Provincial Council to the relevant Local Authority. Since the budget
allocations have to be managed by the respective local authority to ensure maximum benefit
towards community is achieved, the EMPs were simplified focusing more on site-specific issues
with more detailed specification on environment, health and safety included in the bid document.
The project has provided initial training to prepare EMPs and compliance monitoring. Project has
been preparing bi-annual progress reports on the implementation of EMPs and identifying
practical challenges during implementation. It is proposed that continuous training should be
provided to the Technical Officers of the Local Authorities on integrating safeguards into the local
authority activities.
Implementation support missions have reviewed the documentation process and implementation of
safeguard requirements at the site-level and found to be improving since the commencement of the
project, but have space for further improvements. Documentation has been generally prepared in
local languages and has been made available at the PCs, offices of CLGs, ACLG and PSs. An
environmental audit was due to be conducted in 2014 by the project, which has been pushed back
due delays in line with elections being held in Sri Lanka and a sudden change in government. A
Page 10 of 13


﻿TOR for the audit was cleared by the Bank and finalized as at September 2014 and it will be
undertaken as part of the current additional Financing.
Districts like Moneragala, Polonnaruwa, Anuradhapura and Puttalam in the adjoining provinces
were affected during the conflict which resulted in a severe strain on their already thin stretched
infrastructure and service delivery systems. Hence the Government of Sri Lanka was desirous of
extending the scope of NELSIP to selected LAs in the adjoining provinces that were significantly
impacted during the conflict. The same safeguard mechanisms and activities implemented in the
Northern and Eastern Province will were duplicated in to the adjoining Districts as well.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
ESMF was shared with the Provincial Council (PC) staff, Commissionaires of Local Government
(CLG, Assistant Commissionaires of Local Government (ACLG) and Pradeshiya Sabha (PS) staff
of North and East Provinces for their review and comments during the parent project. Overall
consultation with this group was held on August 31, 2009 and their inputs and suggestions were
incorporated into the ESMF at the project's initial stages. Consultation with affected people and
other stakeholders in preparing the EMPs will be an integral part of the project and will be held
prior to the finalization of sub-project proposals. All documents will be made available all times to
public throughout the project period at the PCs, offices of CLGs, ACLG and PSs.
The project has continued to hold consultations with affected people and stakeholders as activities
are selected for financing. The ESMF of the parent project was updated to reflect the co-financing
received by the DFAT and has been re-disclosed prior to commencing the additional financing and
consultations were held with stakeholders in the additional four districts accordingly.
The same ESMF will be applicable for this additional financing meant to cover the funding gap of
US$ 20 million as there are no changes to the project locations or interventions. The updated
ESMF has been disclosed since 2/28/2014 in country as well as in the World Bank's InfoShop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                28-Feb-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Feb-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Sri Lanka                                                 28-Feb-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                27-Feb-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Feb-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Sri Lanka                                                 28-Feb-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 11 of 13


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [ X ]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [X] No [   ]   NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
OP 7.60 - Projects in Disputed Areas
Has the memo conveying all pertinent information on the  Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [   ]
international aspects of the project, including the procedures to
be followed, and the recommendations for dealing with the
issue, been prepared
Does the PAD/MOP include the standard disclaimer referred to Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [
in the OP?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 12 of 13


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Seenithamby Manoharan,Abdu Muwonge
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                   Date: 21-May-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Ming Zhang (PMGR)                    Date: 21-May-2015
Manager:
Page 13 of 13


