INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSC12367
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Sierra Leone              Project ID:   P154904
Project Name:     Labor-intensive Public Works to Mitigate Ebola Impacts Project
Team Leader(s): Nina Rosas Raffo
Estimated Date    24-Jun-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GSPDR                     Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (15%), Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social
Care Services (65%), Social Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (20%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  2.95                  Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:       0
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Ebola Recovery and Reconstruction MPF                                         2.95
-       Environment       B - Partial Assessment
Category:
0
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to help mitigate the socioeconomic impact of the Ebola
outbreak in Sierra Leone by providing temporary employment to youth in poor households.
C. Project Description
The proposed project would contribute to the scale up of the national labor-intensive public works
program, to help mitigate both immediate and longer term socioeconomic impacts. The labor-
intensive public works (LIPW) program was previously financed through a US$10 million
component of the YESP; however, these activities closed in January 2015. Similar to the
arrangements under the previous project, this project will be implemented by the National
Commission for Social Action (NaCSA). The Project will target 12,000 youth in poor households in
approximately 150 communities within the four districts with the highest extreme poverty incidence
in the country, Bombali, Kono, Moyamba, and Western Rural, which are also among the districts
which faced the highest Ebola caseloads during the outbreak.
LIPW is uniquely placed to support the recovery process through multiple channels: (i) providing an


﻿alternative source of livelihoods to youth in poor households that have suffered job losses or loss of
an income earner; (ii) helping maintain or create community assets that might not otherwise be
invested in due to lack of funds or over-stretched capacity at both central and decentralized levels;
(iii) stimulating other small-scale income generating activities both by reducing household risk and
U       providing access to capital. Indeed, evidence from a recent randomized impact evaluation of the
ongoing LIPW program shows that it not only increases household consumption, but also promotes
asset accumulation and creation of household enterprises, and increases access to health services,
among other positive impacts. Together with cash transfers, LIPW has been at the core of recent
Government efforts to build SP systems and has reached nearly 40,000 beneficiaries.
The project will therefore finance: grants to targeted communities for the implementation of LIPW
sub-projects, including for the procurement of materials (e.g., small equipment and tools); cash
transfers to youth in targeted households in exchange for their participation in the LIPW sub-project
implementation; and program management and capacity building for efficient project implementation
and monitoring.
On March 9, 2015, the Acting Country Director, approved the request to process this project under
paragraph 12 of OP 10 and to apply the condensed procedures for project preparation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This project is characterized by the implementation of many small scale sub-projects, which are
geographically spread and often located in remote rural communities. Road networks and
communications are generally poor, which poses a great challenge for monitoring safeguards
implementation. However, safeguards implementation is facilitated by the project implementation
arrangements in which Community Oversight Committees are responsible for the physical
implementation of the sub-projects, with support and monitoring by NaCSA District Coordinators.
NaCSA has developed an Environmental and Social screening list for sub-projects with crucial issues
of concern to be applied to each sub-project for improved social and environmental sustainability.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
NaCSA has experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects since 2003. NaCSA has been
O
the main implementing agency for the LIPW component of the ongoing YESP. The project is
scheduled to close on June 30, 2015 and all LIPW activities have been completed. Implementation of
this grant builds on and will use the existing safeguard frameworks that have been used under the
YES LIPW. NaCSA have staff at the national and regional levels who are experienced on screening
subprojects activities for potential environmental and social impacts per the guidelines within the
adopted ESMF and RPF and have received training over the years to strengthen the capacity.
Additionally, during the June, 2014 mission the Bank safeguards team identified a need to further
strengthen safeguards capacity in the project implementation arrangement. As a result, two NaCSA
staff at the regional level were designated and trained to manage safeguards implementation and
NaCSA developed forms, guidance, and checklists to apply to each subproject at the sub-project
identification stage. To further strengthen safeguards implementation, the project will also ensure
capacity building for designated NaCSA staff responsible for safeguards implementation as well as
for the COCs who will be managing the day-to-day implementation of the sub-projects.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Felix Nii Tettey Oku (GENDR)
Gloria Malia Mahama (GSURR)


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes           The project triggers OP4.01 due to the proposed
BP 4.01                                      beneficiary activities under Component 1:
Labor-intensive Public Works (US$1.15
million; Recipient Executed). Sub-projects are
expected to involve creation or improvement of
priority community infrastructure including
feeder road rehabilitation and maintenance,
community agricultural projects; and
environmental management. The subcomponent
activities will upscale the ongoing LIPW
component under the YESP Project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes           Natural habitats are not expected to be
significantly impacted by the project, as
subproject screening checklist will identify any
potential significant natural area for further
assessment as part of the subproject preparation
process.
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No            Forests are not expected to be significantly
impacted by the project; all subprojects that
might trigger OP4.36 are eliminated at the
screening stage.
Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes           Pest management is triggered because the
project aims to support some agricultural
initiatives and inputs to agriculture such as
seeds and pesticides, may be supported. A pest
management plan has been developed to support
the agriculture based subproject activities under
the YESP.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No          The works to be undertaken under this project
BP 4.11                                      are not expected to trigger this safeguard. All
subprojects activities that might trigger OP4. 11
will be screened and chance find procedures
will be included in the subsequent ESMPs/
ESIAs as the case may be to mitigate any
potential impacts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No            There are no indigenous peoples expected to be
present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  Yes          Some sub-project activities under LIPW include
4.12                                         community level farm production and road
rehabilitation. These activities are likely to
result in land acquisition and loss of livelihoods.
The challenge is that the location and type of
sub-project to be selected by the local


﻿communities is not known during this
preparation phase. An RPF is therefore prepared
as a safeguards guidance measure. Emphasis
however will be placed on sub-project screening
during project implementation and where
needed, appropriate action plans will then be
developed for sub-projects that have been
identified to have adverse social impacts related
to involuntary resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No
Projects on International        No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):         Name: Nina Rosas Raffo
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                   Date: 15-May-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Stefano Paternostro (PMGR)                 Date: 15-May-2015
Manager:
O
.)       1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


