                                  The World Bank
                                  Philippines Health Financing Strengthening




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Feb-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23003




                         Feb 14, 2018                                                                                             Page 1 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Philippines Health Financing Strengthening



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                      Project Name                 Environmental Category      Country
                                                           Philippines Health
                           P164949                                                      C - Not Required            Philippines
                                                           Financing Strengthening
                           Team Leader(s)                  Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit               Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                    Investment Project
                           Karima Saleh                                                 GHN02
                                                                                                                    Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY             -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                    0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                       0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00


                           DETAILS  -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen Philippines Health Insurance Corporation capacity for strategic purchasing with special focus on
                           performance monitoring and payment methods.

                           C. Project Description
                           As the Bank team has been able to mobilize the PHRD Bank Executed Trust Fund (BETF), and now
                           seeking PHRD recipient executed trust fund (RETF) to finance this small grant RETF project, the two funds can
                           provide complimentary support to the government in moving this agenda forward. The BETF will concentrate
                           in providing policy and technical engagement and global know how. While the RETF will conduct diagnostics,
                           implementation support and capacity building.

                           The government of the Philippines is considering provider payment reform. It has introduced a capitation
                           program for primary health care, and have requested assistance of others (other than WB) to provide
                           technical assistance. The government of the Philippines has requested the assistance of the WB on a very
                           specific area of provider payment mechanism (PPM) for hospitals. The RETF will concentrate on the payment
                           reform side, and will consider PPM that would have implications on the following: (i) integrated care


                         Feb 14, 2018                                                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Philippines Health Financing Strengthening




                           (between PHC and hospitals), (ii) cost containment, (iii) transparency, (iv) efficient allocations, (v) quality of
                           care, and (vi) financial protection.

                           The World Bank (grant) project focuses especially on strengthening capacity and systems for strategic
                           purchasing. This World Bank (grant) project has three components: (i) strengthening key performance
                           indicators and analytics, (ii) improving process, systems, and quality assurance mechanisms on e-claims, and
                           (iii) supporting the hospital provider payment system reform.

                           Component 1: Strengthening key performance indicators and analytics

                           The component will aim to support the development of the key performance indicators (KPI) as it relates to
                           provider and PhilHealth performance and supports the Philippines Health Agenda (PHA) at the national, local
                           government unit (LGUs) levels, and at the Philippines Health Insurance Corporation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Outputs for 1

                                   Methodological guidelines for KPI data collection and validation are developed and included in the
                                    official health sector monitoring guidelines
                                   Baseline data of monitoring tools uploaded and available for users, including in websites of DOH,
                                    PhilHealth, and Department of Interior Local Government (DILG) has applicable
                                   Management report using information from dashboard (or any analytic tool that will be developed)
                                   First round of compliance assessment visits conducted by one regional office and reports and analysis
                                    produced with specific set of action recommendations

                           Component 2: Improving process, systems, and quality assurance mechanisms on electronic-claims

                           This component will aim to improve quality of minimum data that is collected by PhilHealth through the
                           claims managements system. Attention is required in the accurate and timely completion rate of the hospital
                           claims forms, and in particular accurate filling of the ICD-10 codes.

                           Outputs for 2

                                   Formal definition of the PhilHealth dataset and its revision procedure is developed; (a) Official library
                                    of ICD 10 with ICD-10 (Philippines modification) and surgical procedures classifications developed
                                   Coding standards for laboratory procedures and diagnostics, drugs and medicines, etc. to be reviewed
                                    and recommended to National eHealth Standards
                                   Key datasets defined and approved by the National eHealth Standards;
                                   Coding standards and procedures included in the standards catalogue of eHealth Standards and
                                    piloted in selected health care providers;
                                   Capacity/capability of PhilHealth and hospitals relevant staff have been enhanced in data standards
                                    and data management;
                                   The above outputs presented to the national eHealth Standardization Framework.


                         Feb 14, 2018                                                                                                  Page 3 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Philippines Health Financing Strengthening




                           Component 3: Supporting the hospital provider payment system reform

                           The PhilHealth hospital payment reform is considering to improve transparency, efficiency and quality of
                           hospital care, among others, to move to a diagnosis related grouping (DRG) based payment system, and
                           when selecting the groupers, there is need to evaluate some possible groupers from other countries that
                           may be relevant for the Philippines.

                           Outputs for 3

                                   Report and policy recommendation on the outcome/analysis of validation process on DRGs using
                                    selection criteria, and the results of simulation activity;

                                   Updated tariff per group and expansion of existing groups;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   Business requirements for DRG implementation identified and implemented, and Implementation
                                    strategy and design for DRG implementation developed;

                                   Functional and technical specifications for the DRG Grouper software tool identified

                           Component 4 – Project coordination and management

                           The component will aim to support the management and regular reporting of the outputs of the project
                           related activities. It will also include the technical and financial audits, procurement of goods and services, as
                           per the small grant project governance requirement. It will include one technical lead recruited as individual
                           consultant. Most other component consultants will be recruited through a firm. Both RETF and PhilHealth
                           own resources will support this component.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          Outputs of the grant will have nation-wide application, which includes indigenous communities. PhilHealth
                          have existing program (i.e, The Indigent Program) that are specifically designed for vulnerable/marginalized
                          groups such as IPs. Further, their membership profile includes data that allows them to identify and analyze
                          vulnerable groups such as IP, women, poor and other marginalized groups. The PhilHealth also uses the
                          results of the National Household Targeting for Poverty Reduction (NHTS-PR) of the Dept. of Social Welfare


                         Feb 14, 2018                                                                                                Page 4 of 6
                                  The World Bank
                                  Philippines Health Financing Strengthening




                          and Development which is the existing national targeting system for social protection, In the course of
                          implementing the grant, Philhealth will ensure that the design and TORs for strengthening the databases and
                          formulating the policies will be culturally- responsive to IPs, women and other marginalized groups.
                          Moreover, they will also include special analytics on marginalized groups (including IPs) to find out how
                          services could be improved for this sector, particularly in terms of reducing out-of-pocket cost. Lastly, the
                          grant will ensure that representatives of IP groups will be included in all its consultations and policy dialogues
                          from the start to completion.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          PhilHealth has existing policies, programs and staff/units that purposely focuses on marginalized groups,
                          including indigenous peoples, which were found adequate as platform for ensuring social safeguards related
Public Disclosure Copy




                          to IPs. This will be described in detail in the project document and PhilHealth has agreed to prepare a short
                          framework/guidance note to ensure that IPs and other marginalized group are consulted and that their
                          welfare will be of major consideration in preparing the design/TORs of the grant implementation.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Maria Loreto Padua, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Maria Ayn Jella Villanueva Roxas, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                Triggered?              Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                  No civil works will be undertaken. This
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  No                 policy is not triggered as impacts to
                                                                                                  environment are highly unlikely.
                                                                                                  This policy is not triggered as the grant will
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                          No
                                                                                                  not impact natural habitats.
                                                                                                  This policy is not triggered given that the
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                   No                 grant will not finance activities that affect
                                                                                                  forests.
                                                                                                  This policy is not triggered given that the
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                              No                 grant will not finance the purchase or use
                                                                                                  of pesticides.
                                                                                                  This policy is not triggered given that there
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11               No                 will be no expected impacts on physical
                                                                                                  cultural resources.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                        Yes                Proposed grant will involve improving
                                                                                                  databases that will likely cover PhilHealth
                                                                                                  members from indigenous

                         Feb 14, 2018                                                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                                   The World Bank
                                   Philippines Health Financing Strengthening



                                                                                                                      communities/groups. However, the
                                                                                                                      expected impact of the grant on indigenous
                                                                                                                      groups is positive in terms of improving the
                                                                                                                      appropriateness of services and increasing
                                                                                                                      health service utilization among
                                                                                                                      marginalized groups, including IPs.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                           No                            No civil works will be undertaken.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                                                      grant will not support the construction or
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No                            rehabilitation of dams nor will support
                                                                                                                      other investments which rely on the
                                                                                                                      services of existing dams.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given that the
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No                            grant will not affect international
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                      waterways as defined under the policy.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given that the
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No                            grant will not affect disputed areas as
                                                                                                                      defined under the policy.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Karima Saleh

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Peter Leonard                                     21-Dec-2017

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       David Wilson                                      21-Dec-2017


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Feb 14, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 6 of 6
