                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA13527
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Madagascar                         Project ID:   P154440
                            Project Name:      MG ethanol clean cooking climate finance program (P154440)
                            Task Team          Giovanni Ruta,Nuyi Tao
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          31-Mar-2016
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEN07

                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (50%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (60%), Other rural development (20%), Pollution management
                                              and environmental health (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      28.20           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    16.34
                              Carbon Fund                                                                                 11.86
                              Total                                                                                       28.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Madagascar Ethanol Clean Cooking Climate Finance Program is to increase
                           household use of ethanol, demonstrate good practice of distillery design and operations, and establish
                           an ethanol production safeguard system for future scale-up in Madagascar.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 12
                         The proposed program will support the distribution of ethanol cookstoves in selected areas by
                         making result-based climate finance payments against the certified emission reductions (CERs) that
                         are achieved as households switch from traditional biomass cookstoves (mainly charcoal) to clean
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ethanol cooking solutions. The program will receive results-based payment from the Carbon
                         Initiative for Development (Ci-Dev), a Bank-managed international carbon asset fund to promote
                         energy access in the world’s poorest countries in Africa and South Asia by piloting innovative
                         business models, building capacity, and developing tools and methodologies for carbon crediting.

                         The project will be a results-based payment totaling about US$11.61 million and a Bank-executed
                         TA grant of US$0.25 million. The total payment is based on the delivery of contracted CERs and the
                         program needs for carbon finance support that are justified based on the following components.

                         Component 1. Results-based Climate Finance Payment
                         The program will make results-based climate finance payments against the contract CERs that are to
                         be generated from the 100,000 households adopting ethanol cooking solutions during the first five
                         years of the program implementation period. The Ci-Dev also plans to offer an optional purchase
                         from this program with payment value of US$4 million. Each household participating in this
                         program is expected to consume 220 liters of ethanol, which replaces two tons of charcoal
                         consumption and eliminates five tons of GHG emissions. Green Development AS (GD), a
                         Norwegian company acting as the Coordinating and Managing Entity (CME), will implement this
                         program in partnership with Local Implementation Partners (LIPs). Each LIP will sell qualified
                         ethanol stoves in a competitive environment to Malagasy consumers mainly in the country’s urban
                         and peri-urban areas. Each LIP will have equal access to the carbon incentive administered by GD.

                         Subcomponent 1A: Incentive payments to the LIPs to bring down ethanol cookstove costs. To
                         address the affordability of ethanol cookstoves, the program will provide a carbon incentive to the
                         LIPs responsible for distributing the ethanol cookstoves through their local networks. A carbon
                         incentive per qualified stove will be paid to the LIPs annually over a period of four years after the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sales of the stove. With the expected carbon incentive, the distributors are expected to sell the stoves
                         at a discount. As a result, the affordability of ethanol stoves is significantly enhanced by the carbon
                         incentive.

                         Subcomponent 1B: Program management and carbon asset delivery. This component will support
                         overall program management and implementation by providing funding to the following activities:
                         •        Monitoring, reporting, and verification (MRV) for ERs based on approved methodology by
                         the UNFCCC
                         •        Hiring of one general manager and eight staff to deliver the program’s general administrative
                         tasks as well as specific TA, training, and monitoring tasks related to other subcomponents

                         Subcomponent 1C: Market development of ethanol cookstoves and promotion of good practice of
                         distillery design and production. The subcomponent will support the market development of ethanol
                         cookstoves and strengthen the reliable and affordable supply of ethanol fuel by:
                         •        Administering stove qualification by organizing stove testing and publishing stove
                         performance testing results;
                         •        Conducting an awareness campaign and promotion to raise consumer awareness;
                         •        Setting up two pilot Ethanol Micro Distilleries (EMD) by GD. GD will set up two
                         demonstration EMDs to build experience in EMD design, equipment procurement, construction, and
                         operation. The first EMD will serve as a training and service center and spare parts warehouse for


                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         serving future EMDs. The second will be built near the buffer zone of a protected area to
                         demonstrate the potential for ethanol to provide an income generating activity that relies on the
                         sustainable management of land for which use rights have been transferred to the forest dependent
Public Disclosure Copy




                         community.
                         •       Providing training and capacity building to the LIPs on setting up a distribution network for
                         cookstoves and ethanol as well as enhancing after-sales services.

                         Subcomponent 1D: Establishment of a sound ethanol production safeguard system. The
                         subcomponent will support the capacity building of sugarcane growers and distillery operators and
                         monitor and verify distillery operators’ compliance with the environment and social safeguard
                         instruments prepared for the project—the Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
                         Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and Integrated Pest Management Framework (IPMF). The
                         subcomponent will also support ethanol distribution control to prevent ethanol from leaking into the
                         illegal drinking market. GD prepared an Operations Manual that establishes staffing requirements, an
                         annual work program, and operational processes to train, monitor and audit EMD compliance of
                         safeguard requirement. This component also provides institutional support and capacity building to
                         Angovo Men’ Eva, the industry trade association set up to facilitate the dialog between GD and the
                         LIPs.

                         Subcomponent 1E: Capacity building for the government. This component will (a) support
                         government policy coordination among relevant ministries to harmonize the government’s tax policy
                         and technical standard for ethanol stoves and (b) develop the government’s capacity to support
                         domestic ethanol production (and the potential role of ethanol imports) to ensure the ethanol supply
                         during the first few years of the program. A stable ethanol supply is key to build consumers’
                         confidence in the use of ethanol as a cooking fuel.

                         Subcomponent 1F: Adequate return to GD. This component will reward GD for the up-front
                         financing and program expenses it incurs to deliver the carbon assets, as well as the activities for
                         market development, capacity building, and safeguard compliance. The return was calculated based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on the required return on equity GD invests in this program and justified by the country and program
                         risks.

                         Component 2. Technical Assistance to the GoM and GD through a readiness grant
                         This component will be a Bank-executed grant that provides TA to support the implementation of the
                         program, particularly on government capacity building and GD’s demonstrative distillery setup. It
                         will finance assistance to harmonize the policy and regulations and technical standards for ethanol
                         cookstoves and ethanol production. The Ci-Dev will provide TA to GD to assist with the design,
                         construction, and operation of the two pilot EMDs for future replication.

                         Subcomponent 2A: TA to the GoM. The TA grant will be used to support the GoM (a) to carry out a
                         study, consultation workshop, and field missions to supervise ethanol stove quality, ethanol
                         production, and marketing; and (b) to participate in study tours and south-south knowledge
                         exchanges to share Madagascar’s ethanol cooking experience with other Least Developed Countries
                         (LDC]. The Ci-Dev also plans to finance the TA component through a part of the carbon finance
                         payment as outlined in Subcomponent 1E. The details will be finalized through the ERPA
                         negotiation.

                         Subcomponent 2B: TA to GD. This subcomponent will include (a) feedstock planning and setting-up
                         of the first demonstration EMD; (b) establishment of an ethanol control system; and (c) capacity

                                                                     Page 3 of 12
                         building for EMD design, procurement, and operation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project has a country-wide perspective although the ethanol stove distribution would primarily
                         be implemented in selected urban and peri urban areas while the ethanol micro distilleries and
                         sugarcane plantation will be mainly implemented in the rural area where the feedstock production
                         cost is the lowest. A bioresources mapping study was commissioned to map out the low risk and
                         medium risk production zone which will guide the selection of micro distillery site and sugarcane
                         plantation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Demba Balde (GSU01)
                         Paul-Jean Feno (GEN07)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes           The proposed activities under the component A may
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    likely lead to some social and environmental impacts that
                                                                   would require the establishment of appropriate mitigation
                                                                   measures to set up the way forward. In fact, the micro
                                                                   distillery sites and sugarcane companies could involve
                                                                   risks and impacts on: (i) the water quality, soil pollutions
                                                                   and waste management; and (ii) transportation and storage
                                                                   sites of ethanol. The main foreseen environmental and
                                                                   social adverse risks and effects are related to: (i) potential
                                                                   under groundwater pollution; (ii) liquid waste from the
                                                                   micro distillery; (iii) use of potentially harmful pesticides
                                                                   and other biocide products; (iv) the extension of
                                                                   agriculture parcels into the forest zones (v) permanent or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   temporary resettlement to expend agriculture zones or to
                                                                   install micro distillery, …etc.
                                                                   Considering the nature and magnitude of potential
                                                                   environmental and social impacts from relatively limited
                                                                   scale of distillery units, in addition, activities supported
                                                                   by the proposed operation are expected to have some site
                                                                   specific adverse environmental and social impacts, an
                                                                   ESMF has been prepared. The ESMF document has been
                                                                   publicly disclosed both in – country, on 18 March 2016,
                                                                   and at the World Bank Infoshop on.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No            Potential sub-projects which could affect the conservation
                          4.04                                     of critical natural habitats will not be eligible for project
                                                                   financing.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         Yes           There are numerous forests and forest areas in the project
                                                                   areas. Project-related activities have the potential to affect
                                                                   the health and quality of these forests and the rights and
                                                                   welfare of local residents dependent on forest resources.
                                                                   The project could propose reforestation activities. The
                                                                   screening form and E&S guidelines developed as part of


                                                                     Page 4 of 12
                                                          the ESMF seek to avoid impacts to critical forest areas
                                                          and provide mitigation measures to identify and offset
                                                          impacts to other non-critical forest areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes      The sugarcane companies in the Country including local
                                                          sugarcane producers are expected to extensive use some
                                                          pesticides and fertilizers in their respective parcels to
                                                          boost agriculture productivity and harvesting. To ensure
                                                          safe pest and pesticides management, the project has
                                                          prepared an integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) for
                                                          Sub-project, building on experience gained under the
                                                          current agriculture project. The IPMP includes: (i) a
                                                          relevant survey on the local bio- pesticides and agronomic
                                                          technical practices to reduce the impacts of pests on the
                                                          sugarcane producers parcels; (ii) a number of relevant
                                                          actions to reduce the exposure of farmer groups to
                                                          pesticides used in agricultural production systems; and
                                                          (iii) guidelines to be adopted on the possibility of
                                                          agrochemical application and disposal; training sessions
                                                          to strengthen the capacity of different actors (farmers,
                                                          local vendors, regional agricultural agents, etc.) on the
                                                          use, storage and disposal of agrochemical products with a
                                                          coherent budget available in the project financing.
                         Physical Cultural           No   As the project will work with existing sugarcane
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11             producers, there are no Physical Cultural Resources in the
                                                          project area.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No      There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                         BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes     Component 1 activities (i.e. construction of distilleries
                         OP/BP 4.12                       and sugarcane production) are expected to require land
                                                          that could lead to loss of asset and source of livelihood,
                                                          resulting in possible physical resettlement of beneficiary
                                                          rural communities. Since Details of the proposed project
                                                          are still unknown, the policy is triggered and Green
                                                          Development AS has prepared a Resettlement Policy
                                                          framework to set forth the basic principles and
                                                          prerogatives to be followed once the details of the project
                                                          intervention area are known. The RPF has been disclosed
                                                          publicly both in-country, on March 18 2016, and at the
                                                          Infoshop.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No   The Project will not finance any construction of new dams
                         4.37                             or activities downstream of large dams or reservoirs.
                         Projects on International   No   The project does not involve international waterways.
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed        No   N/A
                         Areas OP/BP 7.60




                                                           Page 5 of 12
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project is classified as category B in the World Bank’s Environmental Assessment
                              classification due to the small size and site specific nature of its foreseen social and environmental
                              risks and impacts. The environmental and social Safeguard Policies triggered by this operation are:
                              OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.36 (Forest), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), and OP/
                              BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

                              There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts expected to arise from
                              this project. The ESMF indicates, the proposed Project could potentially induce adverse
                              environmental and social impacts, including the risk of disruption of agricultural parcels, the water
                              quality, soil pollutions and waste management; transportation and storage sites of ethanol, accident
                              risks, land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; health and safety risks; use of potentially
                              harmful pesticides and other biocide products; and the extension of agriculture parcels into the
                              forests areas. These impacts are, however, expected to be site specific with no large scale impacts.
                              Potential investments that might induce the above adverse impacts include: rehabilitation/
                              construction of micro distillery, the transportation/distribution with storage of ethanol and
                              promotion of sugarcane productions. However, the environmental and social impacts of
                              anticipated activities are expected to be moderate, site-specific, and manageable to an acceptable
                              level, and the proposed project requires no exceptions to the World Bank’s policies on
                              environmental and social safeguards.

                              Selection criteria for investors including the above mentioned issues will be established. These
                              planning activities will need to take into account the environmental, social, and gender aspects and
                              mitigate health and safety impacts. Part of the project capacity building efforts will focus on
Public Disclosure Copy




                              environmental, social, health and safety management capacity building, including gender aspects.
                              All of these activities will have low local environmental and social impacts in areas which are easy
                              to mitigate and should be conducted outside of sensitive natural habitats or forest areas.

                              A bioresources mapping study was commissioned to analyze agro-ecological conditions (e.g., soil,
                              climate, geology, and topography), recent land-use changes (including current information on
                              agricultural land use), national and regional land-use planning, socioeconomic data, protected area
                              network definition, and other relevant information, as well as map out the zones suitable for
                              sustainable feedstock production. The study recommended a control system that annually updates
                              the study’s zoning result based on newly available information on agro-ecological factors,
                              planning, and the most recent land-use changes. The zoning study will be recommended to
                              relevant ministries and distillery investors for their consideration to adopt it as the EMD planning
                              and approval tool.

                              The proposed project could potentially also cause directly or indirectly impacts by activities at the
                              main work sites, including the agriculture activities under the sugarcane productions; and
                              promotion of ethanol micro distillery with transportation, storage of ethanol distribution. The
                              project’s impacts on the environment are generally modest, with the most significant relating to
                              land use. In fact, the potential sugarcane producers are the existing farmer groups which will
                              benefit project technical supports and guidance. The micro-distillery plant will benefit from the


                                                                         Page 6 of 12
                           project of technical assistances and training. Moreover, project activities may expose populations
                           living in the project areas to significant risks to HIV/AIDS and damage to social environments due
                           to the migration resulting from poorly-controlled land development.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Since the sub-projects (mainly the sugarcane producers groups and micro distillery plant) to be
                           financed by the project will not yet be defined before appraisal, Green Development AS has
                           prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an Integrated Pest and
                           Pestic ide Management Plan (IPPMP), and a Resettlement Policy Framework as instruments for
                           mitigating or minimizing the potential adverse impacts which could arise as a result of
                           implementing the proposed project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No long term risks or impacts are anticipated as a result of potential future project activities.
                           Overall project impacts are considered modest and will be site specific. Potential impacts are
                           related to the agriculture activities under the promotion of sugarcane production with the existing
                           famer groups with the increasing of pesticide usages. There is a potential risk of agriculture parcel
                           extension into the forest areas in the absence of specific dispositions /measures in the project.
                           Expected impacts could include: the water quality, soil pollutions and waste management; accident
                           risks on the transportation and storage sites of ethanol; under groundwater pollution; liquid waste
                           from the micro distillery; use of potentially harmful pesticides and other biocide products; the
                           extension of agriculture parcels into the forest zones, air pollution, health risks, land acquisition
                           with potential extension of agriculture parcels and micro distillery plant, land use conflicts and
                           involuntary resettlement. Therefore, the project’s impacts on the environment are generally
                           modest. A census has been conducted in the area of the projects. Identified impacts include:
                           •        Negative impacts on human health and the environment with potential increase of using of
                           pesticides and fertilizers by the farmers;
                           •        Involuntary resettlement of the populations directly affected by extension of sugarcane
                           parcels and micro distillery plant rehabilitated/constructed ;
                           •        Increase in social conflicts and increased STD/AIDS transmission risks;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •        Improved livelihood of local populations, farmers, opening of new markets and improving
                           the quality of the sugarcane products and creating new jobs.
                           The Project also has the potential to positively impact to: (i) the household participating in this
                           program expects to consume 220 liter ethanol which replaces two tons of charcoal consumption
                           and reduce five tons of GHG emissions; (ii) the people in the project target areas, especially
                           women, their children and youth who rely disproportionately on agriculture as a leading livelihood
                           source; and (iii) create jobs and access to affordable food products for urban consumers.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           There are no alternatives to the present project design.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Green Development AS has been actively responsive in addressing safeguards issues. At the
                           national level, Madagascar has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive to good
                           environmental management. In addition, Madagascar has signed a number of international treaties
                           and conventions to ensure sound environmental management. Under this proposed project, Green
                           Development AS is committed to implementing the activities in compliance with National law and
                           World Bank requirements. Green Development AS has the ultimate responsibility for the project’s
                           compliance with World Bank safeguards guidelines. The Malagasy Environmental law mentions


                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                         that Environmental assessment for both private and public development is regulated under Décret
                         N°2004-167 (MECIE). This is fairly effective but institutional capacity needs to be developed to
                         ensure more widespread application and improved monitoring. The national environmental law
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be reinforced by the World Bank safeguard policies for this proposed project. Safeguards
                         instruments being prepared by Green Development AS.

                         Green Development AS has engaged the services of a consultant to prepare three separate
                         safeguards instruments. These instruments have assessed the potential impacts of all activities to
                         be supported by the proposed operation, the expected adverse environmental and social impacts,
                         and identified mitigation measures, including the principles, procedures to be followed for the
                         safeguards policies triggered: OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest
                         Management), OP 4.36 Forests; and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).

                         Since the precise locations and potential impacts of future subprojects cannot be identified prior to
                         appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to be
                         used to screen sub-project proposals for environmental, social, gender, and health and safety
                         impacts by using the ESMF screening form and checklist. The ESMF includes an Environmental
                         and Social Management Plan (ESMP), has taken into account Eco regional environmental and
                         social review and described the environmental and social profiles in the project areas on the
                         potential activities to be supported by the project. The ESMF/ESMP outlines an environmental
                         and social screening process for future sub-projects to ensure that they are environmentally and
                         socially sound and sustainably implementable, in line with Malagasy National Laws and World
                         Bank policies and guidelines on environmental and social impact management. The screening
                         outcomes will determine if sub-projects will need to prepare an Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessment (ESIA), a freestanding Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), a
                         Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs), implement a
                         Pest Management Plan (PMP) or if no action will be needed. The screening of the sub-projects
                         will be done by the safeguard specialist, who will be part of the Green Development AS
                         Implementation Unit. In case safeguard instruments need to be prepared the Green Development
Public Disclosure Copy




                         AS, the safeguard specialist will prepare the Terms of Reference for these safeguard instruments,
                         be responsible for the procurement of consultants to prepare them, supervise the consultants and
                         they will be responsible for the monitoring of the implementation of the ESMPs, PMPs and RAPs
                         for all potential sugarcane producers groups and micro distillery plant retained for the proposed
                         operation by Green Development AS in the project areas. The ESMF contains sample TORs for
                         Environmental and Social Impacts Assessments (ESIA) that may be needed for Project-supported
                         activities, as well as screening guidelines to be used to implement Project-supported activities. The
                         safeguard specialist also will ensure that all Green Development AS Implementation Partnership
                         Agreement should include environmental and social clauses, in order to ensure adequate
                         environmental and social management practices into the sugarcane productions and micro
                         distillery; the ethanol transportation, storage and distribution system and is used by the
                         households. Mitigation measures were also considered to avoid any pressures to forest areas with
                         the extension of agriculture sugarcane zones by the smallholders. All activities which could affect
                         natural habitat will be ineligible for project financing. A measure has been identified to avoid and
                         reduce impacts on critical forests to develop the agricultural extension to noncritical forest zones
                         and the adoption of reforestation in compliance with OP 4.36 on the Forest. Based on the
                         outcomes of the screening process, Environmental and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs) will be
                         carried out as necessary and ESMPs will be prepared as needed for the micro distillery plant and
                         sugarcane producers groups. Funds to prepare and implement these potential ESIAs, ESMPs,
                         PMPs and RAPs have been included in Green Development AS financing.

                                                                   Page 8 of 12
                           The Green Development AS funds will not be used to purchase and distribute agrochemicals,
                           however agribusinesses may encourage farmer groups to use more inorganic fertilizers and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           pesticides. To ensure safe pest management, the Green Development AS has prepared an
                           Integrated Pest Management Plan which includes: (i) a survey on the local bio pesticides and
                           agronomic technical practice to reduce the impacts of pests on the sugarcane parcel of existing
                           farmers in potential project zones: (ii) actions to reduce the exposure of sugarcane farmer groups
                           to pesticides used in sugarcane production systems; (iii) guidelines to be adopted on the possibility
                           of agrochemical application and disposal; training sessions to strengthen capacity of different
                           actors (farmers, local vendors, etc.) on the use, storage and disposal of agrochemical products
                           with a coherent budget available in the project financing. Finally, it recommends the application of
                           an integrated pest management approach coupled with the promotion of agro-ecological practices
                           by the farmers' groups.

                           Since the physical locations of the proposed activities are unknown at this stage and the Project
                           activities in components 1 may lead to the acquisition of land, loss of assets and/or means of
                           livelihood that could result in the involuntary resettlement of people, Green Development AS has
                           prepared a detailed Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that sets forth the basic principles and
                           procedures that Green Development AS must follow to mitigate any potential adverse social
                           impacts. Because some project activities may lead to the acquisition of land, loss of assets and/or
                           means of livelihood that could result in the involuntary resettlement of people. The RPF includes
                           details information on legal and institutional framework, eligibility criteria, assets evaluating
                           methods, implementation arrangements, grievances redress mechanism, resettlement budget totally
                           covered by Green Development AS and monitoring and evaluation. The RPF contains the basic
                           principles and procedures/directives to be followed by the Borrower for the preparation of the
                           Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) once the physical locations of the proposed activities are known.
                           The result of socio- economic studies have characterized different forms of compensation. Green
                           Development AS proposed to finance the costs of resettlement (land acquisition costs;
                           compensation on crops, trees, shelter, habitat, structures, etc.) for the households affected by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           extension of sugarcane parcels and micro distillery on the potential RAPs or ARAPs.

                           Monitoring of Environmental and Social Management Framework: Within Green Development
                           AS implantation Unit, an environmental and social specialist will be a key and integral part of the
                           team. The environment specialist will carry out ESMP/RAP monitoring to ensure that the
                           mitigation plans are being effectively implemented, and will conduct field visits on a regular basis.
                           Monitoring checklists will be prepared on the basis of the mitigation plans for this purpose.
                           Progress Reports (PR) shall document the progress of ESMF implementation. Finally, Green
                           Development AS will engage specialists/firms to conduct detailed environmental and social
                           studies (ESIA/ESMP; RAP). In addition, the project should also monitor inclusiveness in targeted
                           zones the appropriation of IPMP by the local sugarcane producer partner of Green Development
                           AS.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key project stakeholders primarily include: (i) farming households; (ii) sugarcane producers
                           and their upstream and downstream networks of Medium to Small entrepreneurs; (iii) urban
                           household users of ethanol cooking stoves; (iv) Civil Society Organizations CSOs; and (vi) Non-
                           governmental Organizations (NGOs) in the targeted project areas.



                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           With respect to the applicable safeguards policies and instruments, the project preparation process
                           sought to identify and analyze the interests, concerns, and effects of project activities on major
                           stakeholders and vice-versa. During project preparation, Green Development AS through its
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Consultant firm conducted public consultations and meetings on the project in the regions of
                           Atsinanana, Itasy and Vakinan’Ankaratra. Extensive public consultations were also conducted
                           during the preparation of ESMF, RPF and IPMP to take into account the local populations and
                           communities views on the project design and impacts.

                           Likewise, during project implementation, Green Development AS is expected to consult project-
                           affected groups, and local governmental and nongovernmental organizations on all environmental
                           and social aspects of the project and take their views into account accordingly. Public
                           consultations will be carried out as early as possible and provide, in a timely manner prior to
                           consultation, all the relevant materials in the form and language(s) needed to be understandable
                           and accessible to the groups being consulted. Preparation of stand-alone environmental and social
                           safeguards instruments of potential sub-projects if and when needed will also be prepared through
                           a consultative and participatory process involving all stakeholders at the regional and national
                           levels, as well as within local communities and among beneficiaries of the sub-projects.

                           All the environmental and social safeguards instruments have been approved by the Bank and
                           disclosed in-country and at Infoshop on February xx, 2016 in compliance with the relevant World
                           Bank safeguards and national policies and Disclosure Policies.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        07-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     22-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        22-Feb-2016
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Madagascar                                                         22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        07-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     22-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        07-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     22-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Madagascar                                                         22-Feb-2016
                           Comments:


                                                                    Page 10 of 12
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?


                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Giovanni Ruta,Nuyi Tao
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                       Date: 18-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                         Date: 19-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
