                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC17381

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Bhutan                          Project ID:      P159600
                            Project Name:        Strategic Program for Climate Resilience
                            Team Leader(s):      Poonam Pillai,Dechen Tshering
                            Estimated Date       14-Apr-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSU18                           Lending          IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General public administration sector (40%), General water, sanitation and
                                                 flood protection sector (60%)
                            Theme(s):            Natural disaster management (40%), Climate change (60%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.5                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Climate Investment Funds                                                                      1.5
                            Environment        B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The main objective of the proposed activity is to strengthen the capacity of the RGoB in its effort to
                           develop a Strategic Program for Climate Resilience (SPCR) for Bhutan, and undertake targeted
                           technical studies to set foundational work which will help enable Bhutan to address climate
                           vulnerability and change. The SPCR will be informed by extensive consultations with stakeholders
                           and by the scope of the background technical studies. The intent is both to develop a national vision
                           for addressing climate resilience and also identify a roadmap and investment priorities to support its
                           implementation and build capacity through the process. Further, given that climate related issues are
                           not just national but also have regional dimensions, the proposed SPCR will also help address how
                           Bhutan can position itself in the region in terms of addressing its long term climate risks.

                           The proposed SPCR will build on activities already underway and existing information gaps. In a
                           scoping mission in October 2015, stakeholder consultations were organized by the GNHC to
                           undertake a scoping exercise and identify key sector priorities and concerns. A literature review has
                           also been initiated to identify gaps and areas which require additional technical work. The proposed
                           SPCR process builds on these activities to develop a long term strategic vision for climate resilience
                         in Bhutan.

                         Project beneficiaries here are defined as persons who have access to improved technical capacity and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         information for decision making. At the country level, the SPCR document will benefit Bhutan’s
                         key government agencies responsible for planning and integrating climate resilience into sector plans
                         and programs. These include GNHC, NEC, DHMS and other sector agencies. Indirectly, the
                         document should benefit citizens across the country, particularly climate vulnerable communities
                         through the development of an integrative strategic national process.
                         C. Project Description
                         The proposed activity has three main components:-

                         Component 1: Preparation of the SPCR Report: (0.2 million)
                         The main objective of this component is to prepare an SPCR report that identifies a strategic vision
                         and key priorities for climate resilience in Bhutan. The SPCR report which is a government owned
                         document will identify three main pillars/focus areas prioritizing climate resilience. Funding will be
                         used for (i) consultancies to prepare the SPCR document, (ii) sector specific reviews to assess impact
                         of climate change in key sectors such as hydropower, agriculture, tourism, water resources, urban
                         development, etc. (iii) analysis of policies and institutions and human resource capacity in key
                         sectors, (iv) stakeholder consultations and (v) editing, publication and dissemination.

                         Component 2: Technical Studies to Support Preparation of the SPCR Document: (1.1 million)
                         The main objective of Component 2 is to support preparation of technical studies that will inform the
                         preparation of the SPCR report and inform the pipeline investments. These include studies focusing
                         on the following areas:
                         (i)      Capacity needs Assessment and Proposal for Training and Curriculum Development: (100k)
                         – Ministry of Education and National Environment Commission Secretariat (NECS)
                         (ii)     Assessment of climate information gaps, development of climate maps/climate vulnerable
                         areas and digital library of climate related information (DHMS) and development of sector specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                         climate services (250k) (In collaboration with WB) - DHMS
                         (iii)    Study on the potential role for private sector in Climate Change Adaptation to assess how
                         private sector can be better engaged in addressing climate change challenges in Bhutan and what
                         policy measures both by the Royal Government of Bhutan and also the development partners can
                         take - (100k) (in collaboration with IFC and PPIAF)
                         (iv)     Preparation of Hazard and Exposure maps and Vulnerability Analysis to inform flood
                         mitigation measures and Impact Based Forecasting in hotspot areas (250k): (to be undertaken in
                         collaboration with Department of Engineering Services, DHMS, Department of Geology and Mines)
                         (with WB collaboration)
                         (v)      Develop a Framework and design for Assessing Water Scarcity in priority water scarce
                         aquifers (100k)
                         (vi)     Public expenditure review (100k) – GNHC and Ministry of Finance
                         (vii)    Development of Watershed Management Plans for Priority Basin (proposed) (100k)
                         (alternately study could be done in a different sector—eg. Roads, Transport or Hydropower)
                         (viii) Study on Urban Resilience focusing on adaptation and mitigation measures to highlight
                         investment areas and recommendations for addressing urban resilience in Bhutan (100K) (In
                         collaboration with WB)
                         These studies have been identified based on the consultations undertaken during the scoping mission
                         in Oct-November 2015, the INDC and priorities identified by GNHC based on consultations with
                         relevant agencies.
                           Component 3: Training, Capacity Building, Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation:
                           (0.2 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The main objective of this Component is to support project management which will include
                           workshops and seminars, technical training, and monitoring and evaluation. Funding will be used to
                           support GNHC in the management of this project, to undertake monitoring and evaluation. Funds
                           will also be used to support training and capacity building relevant to the resilience agenda.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           All the activities to be supported by the project are related to technical studies, capacity building,
                           consultations, trainings & workshops and the scope of project is nationwide. The nature of activities
                           envisaged under the project suggests that environmental and social impacts of the project will be
                           minimal, if any. OP/BP 4.01 is triggered considering that the TA activities like technical studies
                           which are included in component 2 may have some impact on the environment. On the social front,
                           the project will not involve any form of land acquisition, and neither any activities that will directly
                           impact human populations. However, the main SPCR report as well as the technical studies
                           commissioned to support the main report will examine measures for mainstreaming resilience into
                           development planning in Bhutan focusing particularly on Bhutan’s local communities, vulnerable
                           groups, women and forest-dependent communities.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The GNHC has worked with the Bank on Bank Executed TAs and is aware of safeguard
                           requirements of the Bank but this is the first time that GNHC will be working with the Bank on a
                           Recipient Executed Grant project. In case of any need of compliance to safeguard policies, support
                           isuch as human resource, training and capacity building activities, for the management of social and
                           environmental impacts/issues will be required during project implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Annu Rajbhandari (GENDR)
                           Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)
                           Drona Raj Ghimire (GEN06)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          Yes             Since there are technical studies like watershed
                           BP 4.01                                               management plan included in component 2
                                                                                 which may have some implications on the
                                                                                 environment, OP/BP 4.01 has been triggered.
                                                                                 The project is categorized as “B”.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09               No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               Yes
                           4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation

                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                 30-May-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.


                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Poonam Pillai,Dechen Tshering
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                                     Date: 25-Apr-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)                             Date: 25-Apr-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
