                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA12657

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-May-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-May-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Bangladesh                        Project ID:   P151070
                                                       Parent        P118708
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     HSDP Additional Finance (P151070)
   Parent Project    Bangladesh - Health Sector Development Program (P118708)
   Name:
   Task Team         Bushra Binte Alam
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         06-May-2016                       Estimated   18-Jul-2016
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GHN06                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Health (100%)
   Theme(s):         Health system performance (40%), Child health (20%), Nutrition and food
                     security (20%), Population and reproductive health (20%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:     150.00           Total Bank Financing:              150.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                     Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                      0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                           150.00
     Total                                                                                 150.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                            Page 1 of 12
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To enable the Government of Bangladesh to strengthen health systems and improve health
   services, particularly for the poor.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing (AF) is required to partially fill a financing gap in the last year of
the Project. The financing gap is due to (a) higher than planned disbursements linked to accelerated
achievement of results; (b) exchange rate fluctuations; and (c) lower levels of co-financing from
development partners (DPs) compared to original commitments.

Under the AF, the disbursement modality is being changed from input-based financing to a results-
based financing mechanism (using Disbursement Linked Indicators, DLIs). This will pave the way
for a more results-focused intervention for the future. Based on HSDP implementation, a set of
seventeen priority actions has been identified as DLIs clustered around the two components of the
Project: i) Improving Service Delivery for a total of US$40 million; and ii) Strengthening Health
Systems for a total of US$110 million. The PDO will remain the same under the AF.

To date, HSDP has performed well. The achievement of the PDO as well as the Implementation
Progress, have been rated as Moderately Satisfactory in the last twelve months. The MOHFW has
complied with all of the five legal covenants. Two of the three PDO indicators and two of the eleven
intermediate indicators have already achieved their end-project targets. Seven intermediate indicators
are on track to be achieved, and for the remaining three, more efforts will be needed to achieve the
end-project targets.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will be implemented nation-wide including the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT). Although
the country is almost monolingual, there is a small population of tribal/indigenous peoples, who
mostly live in the north-eastern and south-eastern regions, including a concentration of IPs in the
CHT. The Project investments will target all regions with a focus on those that have higher incidence
of poverty and malnutrition and lacking access to health care services and facilities. The AF will
continue the nationwide delivery of measles immunization of children under 12 months (DLI 1),
increasing normal deliveries for pregnant women at public health facilities (DLI 2), and increasing
notification rate of tuberculosis (DLI 3). OP 4.10 Indigenous People will therefore remain triggered
for the AF.

Improving access to and use of the essential health services may require rehabilitation/ expansion as
well as creation of new physical facilities. A review of infrastructure works financed by the Bank in
the original project demonstrates that only small scale civil works and expansion activities have
taken place. All expansion and upgrade works have been carried out on government owned land and
no displacement or resettlement activities were triggered. The civil works packages initiated under
the original project will continue and be completed under the latter. No new civil works packages
will be initiated/funded under the AF. Therefore no resettlement or displacement inducing activities
are anticipated under the AF. However OP 4.12 will remain triggered for the AF since the original
project is still active. The original Social Management Framework (SMF), which included an
Indigenous Peoples Framework (IPPF) have been updated for the purposes of the AF based on


                                             Page 2 of 12
consultations with the client, local communities and the Bank➢❨ s review and findings. The updated
social safeguards documents include a Resettlement and Social Management Framework (RSMF)
and a standalone Framework for Tribal Peoples Plan (FTPP), with the requisite screening formats
(the government does not recognize the terminology ➢❨ indigenous people➢❨ anymore). The
findings from consultations with stakeholders, on the basis of which the updates were made are
discussed briefly below.

A Gender Equity Strategy (GES) for the health sector was developed by the Ministry of Health and
Family Welfare (MOHFW) with support from DFID which was later updated with support from
GIZ. The main objectives of the Strategy include: to ensure MOHFW policies, strategies,
operational plans and other programs adhere to the gender equity principles; to ensure equitable
access to and utilization of health services within a rights-based approach; to ensure gender-sensitive
human resources (service providers) in the health sector with appropriate skills development for
health service providers to deliver gender sensitive, non-discriminatory services; and to ensure
gender mainstreaming in all programs with MOHFW and other ministries. Gender, NGO and
Stakeholder Participation (GNSP) Unit of MOHFW is now developing a Gender Equity Action Plan
based on the GES 2014 and in consultation with stakeholders. There is a Gender, Equity, Voice and
Accountability (GEVA) Task Group under the current sector program to oversee progress of gender
mainstreaming and gender related interventions in the program.

In order to strengthen the environmental practices, an environmental action plan agreed. This also
includes environmental screening guidelines and Environmental Code of Practices (ECoPs) for small
construction under original project. Since the exact location of these interventions will only be
known during the implementation phase, a framework approach will be followed in Additional
Financing for environmental assessment similar to original project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Sabah Moyeen (GSU06)

6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental                Yes            As mentioned earlier the AF is required to partially fill a
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       financing gap in the last year of the Project and to support
                                            a smooth transitioning from the current Project to a more
                                            results oriented engagement going forward. There is no
                                            change in the PDO. The category of the project will
                                            remain the same i.e., Category "B". Based on the
                                            environmental review and assessment carried out of the
                                            project, an Environmental Action Plan has been
                                            developed for AF in addition to the original
                                            Environmental Assessment and Action Plan for the
                                            HPNSDP which was prepared by MOHFW in 2011. This
                                            action plan has been prepared mainly to strengthen the
                                            medical waste management practice. Further to that, the
                                            implementing agency has also revised its screening and
                                            monitoring protocol for small-scale civil construction
                                            activities for the original project. The AF has included 2
                                            key actions as DLIs (DLI # 8 and 9) for environmental
                                            management. DLI#8 relates to approval of guidelines for


                                             Page 3 of 12
                               medical waste management (MWM) and DLI#9 aims to
                               improve temporary storage of medical waste at the district
                               hospitals.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    The AF does not include any physical intervention, which
4.04                           may have any impact of the natural habitats. As such the
                               policy is not triggered here. It was also not triggered in
                               the original project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The proposed AF is not expected to have any impact on
                               the forests, the rights and welfare of people and their level
                               of dependence upon or interaction with the forests; and
                               the management, protection, or utilization of natural
                               forests or plantations. Accordingly, the policy was not
                               triggered in the original project and has not been triggered
                               in the AF.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The proposed AF will not finance procurement of
                               fertilizers and pesticides. Also the proposed AF will not
                               promote an increased use of fertilizers and pesticides.
                               Accordingly, the policy has not been triggered.
Physical Cultural        No    The proposed AF does not support any physical
Resources OP/BP 4.11           intervention which may have impact on property of
                               historical, cultural or religious importance. So, the policy
                               has not been triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The program will be active in areas where indigenous
BP 4.10                        people live. The original Social Management Framework
                               (SMF) included a Indigenous Peoples Planning
                               Framework (IPPF). The terminology ➢❨ indigenous➢❨
                               is not accepted by the government and is replaced by
                               ➢❨ small ethnic communities and vulnerable people➢❨
                               or ➢❨ tribal people➢❨ , while keeping the definition,
                               coverage and essence of the term ➢❨ indigenous➢❨ as
                               applied by OP 4.10 unchanged. In this case, since the
                               client has been using the terminology ➢❨ tribal
                               people➢❨ for the previous phase of the project, for the
                               sake of continuity, the project will continue using the
                               same terminology. The AF will continue the nationwide
                               delivery of measles immunization of children under 12
                               months (DLI 1), increasing normal deliveries for pregnant
                               women at public health facilities (DLI 2), and increasing
                               notification rate of tuberculosis (DLI 3), OP 4.10
                               Indigenous People will therefore remain triggered for the
                               AF. The Indigenous People➢❨ s Planning framework
                               (IPFF) for the original project has been extracted as a
                               standalone document and updated as a Framework for
                               Tribal Peoples Plan (FTPP) with additional information
                               on the findings (improved consultation and
                               communication strategies, broad community consensus


                                Page 4 of 12
                               building, improved documentation and data management
                               as well as strengthened implementation arrangements).
                               The updated version was approved and disclosed
                               according to Bank rules. However, following the
                               disclosure, the design and the scope of the AF were
                               changed. This change is from an input based financing to
                               a DLI based operations. The FTPP and the RSMF have
                               been conditionally cleared based on the incorporation of
                               the changed scope and modality in the said documents.
                               These will be re-disclosed following Bank procedures.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Small civil works, such as upgrading of upazila health
OP/BP 4.12                     complex from 31 bed to 50 (in approximately 150
                               upazila), upgrading district hospital from 100 to 250 beds,
                               is being financed through the pooled fund under the
                               original project. All civil works are contained within the
                               existing compound of the facilities and no land
                               acquisition or displacement of people, and or adverse
                               impacts on livelihoods have taken place. No civil works
                               will be financed under the AF. However OP 4.12 remains
                               triggered as the original project is still active. All major
                               new construction and upgrade of larger facilities is under
                               GOB finance. The original SMF contained a resettlement
                               policy framework which has been followed in terms of
                               screening and documentation. Going forward no new civil
                               works packages will be undertaken under the project (AF)
                               so it is unlikely that any resettlement or displacement
                               impacts will result under the AF. The provision has been
                               kept open as ongoing work under the original project will
                               be continued. An updated Resettlement and Social
                               Management Framework (RSMF) was prepared and
                               disclosed according to Bank rules. However, as
                               mentioned above, following the disclosure the design and
                               the scope of the AF was changed to a DLI based
                               modality. The TPF and the RSMF have been
                               conditionally cleared based on the incorporation of the
                               changed scope and modality in the said documents. These
                               will be re-disclosed following Bank procedures.
                               A Gender Equity Strategy (GES) for the health sector was
                               developed by the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare
                               (MOHFW) with support from DFID and later was
                               updated with support from GIZ. The main objectives of
                               the Strategy include: to ensure MOHFW policies,
                               strategies, operational plans and other programs adhere to
                               the gender equity principles; to ensure equitable access to
                               and utilization of health services within a rights-based
                               approach; to ensure gender-sensitive human resources
                               (service providers) in the health sector with appropriate



                                Page 5 of 12
                                              skills development for health service providers to deliver
                                              gender sensitive, non-discriminatory services; and to
                                              ensure gender mainstreaming in all programs with
                                              MOHFW and other ministries.

                                              Gender, NGO and Stakeholder Participation (GNSP) Unit
                                              of MOHFW is now developing a Gender Equity Action
                                              Plan based on the GES 2014 and in consultation with
                                              stakeholders.

                                              There is a Gender, Equity, Voice and Accountability
                                              (GEVA) Task Group under the current sector program to
                                              oversee progress of gender mainstreaming and gender
                                              related interventions in the program.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             This policy is not triggered, as the proposed AF is neither
   4.37                                       financing any of constructing new dams, nor does it
                                              finance an existing dam.
   Projects on International   No             The proposed AF does not include any work or impact on
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       the international waterways.
   Projects in Disputed        No             The proposed AF is not located in any disputed area.
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Medical Waste Management (MWM) has been previously identified as a significant challenge in
     the health sector in Bangladesh. These include, administrative inadequacies and limitations in
     medical waste management, unsegregated medical waste collection and dumping with municipal
     solid wastes, having no centralized waste collection facilities outside Dhaka city causing waste
     being dumped in an uncontrolled causing environmental pollution and risk of exposure, lack of
     supervision from hospital authorities (especially the public hospitals) and occurrence of pilferage,
     lack of adequate in-house treatment facilities and limitation of NGOs to establish out-house
     treatment facilities in remote areas and other issues (e.g. lack of transfer of knowledge from nurses
     to ward-boys, ineffective needle-cutters, lack of supervision and monitoring at ward levels, lack of
     in-house temporary storage etc.), which need to be addressed to make medical waste management
     effective.

     The Project will be implemented all over the country, including the Chittagong Hill Tracts that
     have the largest concentration of indigenous peoples (IPs), as well as plain districts which are also
     inhabited by IPs. Both OP 4.12 and OP 4.10 were triggered for the original project. So far, the
     small scale civil works funded under the program has not triggered the requirement for any
     Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) as the client has strictly used existing government lands and
     spaces belonging to existing health complexes/facilities for small scale extension and
     refurbishment works. No displacement or adverse livelihood impacts have been triggered due to
     these actions. The AF will not fund any civil works packages. However, OP 4.12 will remain


                                                Page 6 of 12
triggered as the original project is still active. The AF will continue the nationwide delivery of
measles immunization of children under 12 months (DLI 1), increasing normal deliveries for
pregnant women at public health facilities (DLI 2), and increasing notification rate of tuberculosis
(DLI 4), OP 4.10 Indigenous People will therefore remain triggered for the AF.

The updated social safeguards documents include a Resettlement and Social Management
Framework (RSMF) and a Framework for Tribal People➢❨ s Plan (FTPP) and appropriate
screening formats to be applied to each sub-project at the time of identification. The FTPP has
been extracted from the original SMF and updated as a standalone document as per guidance from
the Regional Safeguards Advisers and for drawing adequate and focused attention to its proper
implementation. The implementation arrangements in this regard have also been strengthened and
updated (in the FTPP). If the screening shows that, land acquisition, displacement or any adverse
impact on livelihoods are expected due to project activities, a site specific Resettlement Action
Plan (RAP) must be prepared based on the guidance provided in the RSMF. Given that the AF will
not fund any civil works it is unlikely that any resettlement or displacement impacts will take
place under the AF.

The project does work in areas where indigenous people live. OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples is
triggered for the AF as it was done for the original project too. The SMF for the original project
included an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPFF) based on which and the screening
process, site specific or sub-project specific Tribal Peoples Plans (the Bangladesh Government
does not recognize the terminology ➢❨ indigenous➢❨ ) were required to be prepared. A Tribal
Health Nutrition and Population Plan (THNPP) was prepared and implemented under HNPSP for
the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT). The THNPP prepared for HNPSP was updated highlighting the
lessons learned from implementation of the UNDP program in CHT by the MOHFW. A Task
Force had been established for the implementation of the plan.

During consultations with the client and the beneficiaries, as well as other DPs, it was observed
that there was lack of adequate and properly documented consultation with beneficiaries and
communities while formulating and implementing the THNPP. The capacity of the appointed Task
Force was also not adequate. In this light and in consultation with the above mentioned
stakeholders it was decided to update the FTPP. The latter document now places highest emphasis
on community consultation and broad based consensus building, as well as strategies to carry out
such consultation and communication and document them according to Bank guidelines. The
FTPP, under the AF, will not be implemented by an outside Task Force, but by the MOHFW itself
with the help of specialized consultants who are experienced in dealing with Tribal People and are
sensitive to their particular issues. However, overall, beneficiaries, especially women were
appreciative of the services being provided under the project, particularly in remote areas where
alternative health care is hard to access.

For the purposes of the AF, the FTPP has been extracted as a standalone document, improved and
updated according to mission findings and consultation with the client, other development partners
and beneficiaries (described above). The review, consultations and analysis undertaken for the
update of social safeguards documents and management show that improvements are required in
conducting the screening, data analysis and documenting and reporting and in preparing the site
specific Tribal Peoples Plans (TPP) based on this. Improved database management, disaggregated
data collection, identification of specific indicators for the purpose are highlighted.




                                          Page 7 of 12
 A Gender Equity Strategy (GES) for the health sector was developed by the Ministry of Health
 and Family Welfare (MOHFW) with support from DFID and the strategy was updated with
 support from GIZ. The main objectives of the Strategy include: to ensure MOHFW policies,
 strategies, operational plans and other programs adhere to the gender equity principles; to ensure
 equitable access to and utilization of health services within a rights-based approach; to ensure
 gender-sensitive human resources (service providers) in the health sector with appropriate skills
 development for health service providers to deliver gender sensitive, non-discriminatory services;
 and to ensure gender mainstreaming in all programs with MOHFW and other ministries. Gender,
 NGO and Stakeholder Participation (GNSP) Unit of MOHFW is now developing a Gender Equity
 Action Plan based on the GES 2014 and in consultation with stakeholders. There is a Gender,
 Equity, Voice and Accountability (GEVA) Task Group under the current sector program to
 oversee progress of gender mainstreaming and gender related interventions in the program.

  There are no large scale or irreversible negative social impacts associated with the program.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Given the nature of the Project, it is anticipated that it will not have any long term negative
  impacts. Any social safeguard and environment related adverse effect arising out of the Project
  activities can be mitigated following the measures outlined in the RSMF, FTPP and environmental
  action plan.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Given the nature of HSDP AF, no alternative proposal feasible for the small scale infrastructure
  works are being considered under this project, as no civil works packages are included under the
  AF. The original project remains active. Any negative impacts due to small scale civil works will
  be mitigated following the measures outlined in the environmental assessment and action plan. In
  order to improve the medical waste management, the project will promote the appropriate
  measures relevant to the local context.

  As mentioned above, a THNPP was prepared and implemented under HNPSP (as detailed out
  under section 4). The THNPP had some weaknesses which have been addressed during the update
  of the FTPP. The MOHFW will implement the FTPP in accordance with the guidance provided
  therein. Any impacts identified through the sub-project screening process will be duly mitigated in
  accordance with the provisions of the RSMF and the FTPP and the Environmental Action Plan.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environment: An Environmental Assessment and Action Plan for the HPNSDP was prepared in
  2011 by MOHFW which identified health care waste management (HCWM) as a significant issue
  relating to HPNSDP operation. The other issues identified included clean water supplyand
  sanitation, and environmental issues related to construction work. A review of the environmental
  management implementation of the HPNSDP was conducted in 2014. Report was prepared
  principally highlighting the existing limitations and gaps in the medical waste management
  system. Another safeguards assessment in 2015 reiterated that the issues related to improper
  medical waste management still exist specially in public hospitals.

 Overall, the application of Environmental Assessment and Action Plan has been weak in civil
 works related activities and the improvement of medical waste management has been marginal.


                                            Page 8 of 12
This highlights an inherent weakness in the institutional capacity of the implementing agency,
which needs improvement. In this respect, the findings of the report was communicated with the
DGHS and an Additional Environmental Action Plan has been developed to strengthen the
medical waste management practice and improve environmental screening, management measures
and monitoring of civil works in the project. The Additional Environmental Action Plan is based
on the findings of the previous assessment reports and sets out activities that needs to be
performed in a short-term and medium-term basis in order to improve the current state of medical
waste management particularly in public health care facilities. These action plans include
improved record-keeping of in-house waste management, effective training, efficient segregation
of waste at source, reduction of pilferage of waste, improved management of sharps as well as
other measures. The implementing agency has also revised its screening and monitoring protocol
for small-scale civil construction activities which will be used for safeguard compliance during the
additional financing period.

The DGHS has appointed two environmental consultants in June 2015 to oversee the
environmental safeguard activities with especial focus on improvement of medical waste
management. It is expected that with the addition of relevant expertise to oversee the
environmental safeguard activities (both for civil construction and medical waste management),
the institutional capacity of the borrower will be strengthened.

Social: The original SMF included a Tribal Peoples Framework based on which and the screening
process, site specific or sub-project specific Tribal Peoples Plans (the Bangladesh Government
does not recognize the terminology ➢❨ indigenous➢❨ ) were required to be prepared. A Tribal
Health Nutrition and Population Plan (THNPP) was prepared and implemented under the original
project for the Chittagong Hill Tracts (CHT) which was reviewed and approved by the Bank. The
THNPP prepared for the original project was updated highlighting the lessons learned from
implementation of the UNDP program in CHT. MOHFW has established a Task Force for
implementing THNPP. Recommendations of the Task Force were incorporated in the updated
THNPP and will be implemented under the Sector Program.

The review, consultations and analysis undertaken for the update of social safeguards documents
and management showed that improvements were required in conducting the screening, data
analysis, screening, documenting, reporting and in preparing the site specific Tribal Peoples Plans
based on this. For the purposes of the AF, FTPP has been be extracted from the original SMF. This
document has been updated as a standalone document with the findings of the review and
stakeholder consultation to ensure that the implementation arrangements are in compliance with
the FTPP. The original SMF has been updated to a Resettlement and Social Management
Framework (RSMF). Improved database management, disaggregated data collection, identification
of specific indicators for the purpose has been highlighted. The existing THNPP and any future
site specific tribal plan will be updated/prepared in accordance with the updated RSMF and the
FTPP.
Specific training on the RSMF and FTPP, and preparation of site specific plans based on the latter
must be arranged for field level staff who are responsible for carrying out the screening,
documenting and reporting. Requisite staff/consultants dedicated to the preparation, review,
implementation, monitoring and reporting on social safeguards management have to be appointed
and trained.

The RSMF and FTPP will ensure compliance with the Government, World Bank and other



                                          Page 9 of 12
  development partners➢❨ social safeguard policies and will apply to the activities funded by the
  World Bank and pooling partners and provide the basis to prepare and implement mitigation plans
  as and when the program activities are found to cause adverse impacts.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders include the Project beneficiaries, Government entities, development partners
  as well as community based organizations active in the health sector. The relevant stakeholders
  have been consulted with on the current situation as well as updated environmental action plan.
  The consultation included discussion on key challenges relating to the policy, institutional
  arrangements, resource requirement and ways to overcome the challenges of medical waste. The
  draft documents have been reviewed by the Government entities and the development partners.
  These documents were cleared by the World Bank, and disclosed through the World Bank's
  Infoshop as well as the Ministry of Health and Family Welfare's website. However, as mentioned
  above, following the disclosure the design and the scope of the AF was changed to a DLI based
  modality. The FTPP and the RSMF have been conditionally cleared based on the incorporation of
  the changed scope and modality in the said documents. These will be re-disclosed following Bank
  procedures.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         05-Oct-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      16-May-2016
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Bangladesh                                                          16-May-2016
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         05-Oct-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Bangladesh                                                          15-May-2016
  Comments: It was earlier disclosed on the client's website and notified in the newspapers on
                October 14, 2015. Now with the change in disbursement modality, the document will
                be disclosed on the client's website.
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         05-Oct-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      15-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Bangladesh                                                          15-May-2016
  Comments: Has been disclosed in client websites and notified in the newspapers (one English
                and one Bangla)It was earlier disclosed on the client's website and notified in the
                newspapers on October 14, 2015. Now with the change in disbursement modality,
                the document will be disclosed on the client's website.


                                          Page 10 of 12
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

  Provided estimated number of people to be affected
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
 assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
 livelihoods)

  Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the project cost?


                                            Page 11 of 12
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Bushra Binte Alam
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                           Date: 16-May-2016
   Practice Manager/    Name: Rekha Menon (PMGR)                          Date: 16-May-2016
   Manager:




                                            Page 12 of 12
