                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA1187
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vanuatu                             Project ID:    P154149
                            Project Name:      Vanuatu Aviation Investment Project (P154149)
                            Task Team          Christopher R. Bennett
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          18-Mar-2015                         Estimated   07-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTIDR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Aviation (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (15%), Trade facilitation and market
                                              access (85%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      59.80           Total Bank Financing:                   59.50
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 59.50
                              Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund                                          0.30
                              Total                                                                                       59.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve operational safety and oversight of international air
                           transport and associated infrastructure in Vanuatu.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                        Page 1 of 10
                         The project is part of the Pacific Aviation Investment Program (PAIP), an on-going Series of Projects
                         with the overarching objective of improving regional aviation safety and security. Phase I (2011) of
                         PAIP included Kiribati, Tonga and Tuvalu, and Phase II (2014) Samoa. Vanuatu was identified from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the onset as a potential participant in PAIP The project finances the second phase of the Vanuatu
                         Aviation Investment Program (VAIP).

                         VAIP is being presented to the World Bank Board as an Emergency Operation under paragraph 12 of
                         OP/BP10.00 on the premise that the immediate risk of complete pavement failure on some 600m of
                         Bauerfield International Airport (VLI) runway would result in the cessation of all jet operations,
                         which would have a detrimental impact on the national economy which relies heavily on tourism. A
                         Project Preparation Advance (PPA) of US$ 1 million was mobilized in early 2015 to address
                         emergency remedial works on the runway and apron pavements to ensure the continuation of
                         international flights.

                         This first set of activities financed under the PPA include: (a) conducting core sampling and
                         pavement strength and deflection testing, including preparing an engineering design brief, for the
                         Bauerfield International Airport’s main runway and apron areas; (b) finalizing, publishing, and
                         holding consultations on Project safeguard instruments; (c)undertaking an independent assessment of
                         the condition of fire tenders and preparing bid documents for their repair, refurbishment and/or
                         replacement;(d) preparing detailed engineering designs and bid documents for civil works to
                         rehabilitate the Bauerfield International Airport’s main runway and apron areas, including support
                         during bidding;(e)carrying out emergency civil works for maintaining the Bauerfield International
                         Airport’s main runway and apron areas, and supervision of civil works;(f) provision of critical goods
                         for navigation, aviation safety and security; (g) technical assistance in prioritization of aviation
                         investments; and (h) procurement, financial management and Project coordination support provided
                         by the Pacific Aviation Investment Project (PAIP) Technical and Fiduciary Services Unit (TFSU).

                         VAIP will finance implementation of investments in aviation infrastructure to meet and maintain
Public Disclosure Copy




                         minimum international safety and security standards (ICAO standards) and include investments in
                         key international aviation infrastructure, navigational and communication equipment as well as the
                         development of an Airport Master Plan and an Aviation Sector Strategy to identify long-term needs
                         of the sector. The project involves activities at Vanuatu’s three international airports – Bauerfield,
                         Santo-Pekoa (Espiritu Santo) and Whitegrass (Tanna Island) – and has five components:

                         •        Component A: International Airport Infrastructure Investments. The component will invest
                         in international aviation infrastructure to meet and maintain minimum ICAO safety and security
                         standards. The focus will be on international airports, including: (i) rehabilitation and/or resurfacing
                         of airport runway, apron and taxiway pavements at Bauerfield International Airport; (ii) extension of
                         the apron area at Bauerfield International Airport; (iii) construction of new taxiways and widening of
                         the existing taxiway at Bauerfield International Airport; (iv) upgrading of airport runway lighting and
                         cabling at Bauerfield International Airport and Whitegrass International Airport; (v) construction of a
                         new domestic terminal, and demolition of the existing domestic terminal, at Bauerfield International
                         Airport; (vi) provision of air traffic control equipment at Bauerfield International Airport and Pekoa
                         International Airport; (vii) provision and installation of aviation navigation aids; (viii) provision and
                         installation of weather monitoring equipment at Bauerfield International Airport and Whitegrass
                         International Airport; (ix) upgrading of communications equipment and systems; (x) provision and
                         installation of a VSAT communications system at Bauerfield International Airport; (xi) provision of
                         equipment for improved power supply for Bauerfield International Airport and Whitegrass


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         International Airport; (xii) provision and/or upgrading of fire safety equipment, including fire tender
                         vehicles; (xiii) provision of safety and security equipment, including x-ray machines for passenger
                         baggage and cargo screening, at Bauerfield International Airport and Pekoa International Airport;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and, (xiv) provision of design and supervision consulting services required for implementation of the
                         infrastructure investments.
                         •        Component B: Aviation Sector Reform and Training. This component will help strengthen
                         the Civil Aviation Authority of Vanuatu (CAAV), Ministry of Infrastructure and Public Utilities
                         (MIPU) and other line ministries’ technical capacity through targeted technical assistance to
                         strengthen institutional capacity and dedicated training. Specific activities include: (i) development
                         of an Aviation Sector Strategy; (ii) provision of advisory services to assist the CAAV to: (a) review
                         and update Vanuatu’s legislative framework applicable to the aviation sector; (b) address national
                         and international regulatory requirements for the aviation sector; and (c) implement the Aviation
                         Sector Strategy; (iii) provision of advisory services to assist MIPU with its management and
                         oversight of Vanuatu’s aviation sector; and, (iv) training for capacity-building.
                         •        Component C: Strengthening Airport Operations and Management Capacity: This
                         component will strengthen AVL’s airport operations and management capacity through: (i)
                         development of an Airport Master Plan; (ii) provision of technical assistance to improve the
                         planning, financial viability, efficiency, safety and security of airport operations; and, (iii) training on
                         aviation policy, operations and management.
                         •        Component D: Emergency Reconstruction After Cyclone PAM. During project preparation
                         Cyclone Pam devastated Vanuatu, including damaging all three international airports. Damage
                         assessments are still underway. This component is to provide support to the GoV with emergency
                         reconstruction activities in the form of goods and works.
                         •        Component E: Project Support. This component covers: (i) project management, advisory
                         and administrative support for the Vanuatu Project Management Unit (VPMU) and AVL; (ii) costs
                         for the support services provided to the VPMU and AVL by the PAIP Technical and Fiduciary
                         Services Unit (TFSU); (iii) incremental operating costs of the VPMU and TFSU; (iv) Very Small
                         Aperture Terminal (VSAT) subscription costs; and, (v) project financial audits.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Republic of Vanuatu is a small Pacific Island nation located in the South Pacific. Comprising of
                         about 80 islands, the country’s 12,336 sq. km of land spread over 1,300 km. Vanuatu’s population of
                         approximately 266,000 are 98.5% Melanesians. The largest island, Efate, hosts the country’s capital
                         Port Vila and is home to a quarter of its population. Vanuatu it is located in the "ring of fire" and at
                         the center of the Pacific "cyclone belt". This results in a relatively high frequency of volcanic
                         eruptions, cyclones, earthquakes, tsunamis, storm surges, coastal and river flooding and landslides.

                         Tourism and travel make a significant contribution to Vanuatu’s economy representing about 23.2%
                         of GDP in 2013. Tourist arrivals have been steadily increasing, recording around 330’000 visitors in
                         2013. A quarter of these tourists arrive by air. In 2013, tourism and travel services directly engaged
                         12,500 workers representing around 18.2% of total employment. The direct contribution of Travel &
                         Tourism to GDP is expected to grow by 4.3% per annum to 25.0% by 2024. To accommodate this
                         projected growth, efficient and functional aviation services are critical.

                         Tourism activities provide significant opportunities for women in Vanuatu, where gender inequality
                         remains a development challenge. Women have poorer access to health care, particularly in rural
                         areas, and prevalence of gender-based violence (GBV) is reportedly very high, affecting up to 60%
                         of women aged 15-49. Lower levels of secondary school attainment and literacy pose barriers to


                                                                        Page 3 of 10
                         women’s equal participation in economic activity with half as many women active in formal
                         employment as men. With no formal national private sector organization to represent their interests,
                         ni-Vanuatu women continue to operate informally or semi-formally as micro-enterprises.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bauerfield International Airport (IATA code: VLI) is located approximately 3km north of Port Vila
                         and is the main international gateway for Vanuatu and the Air Vanuatu hub. The airport is relatively
                         small in size, but its runway has the capability and length to accept jets up to the Airbus A330.
                         Santo-Pekoa International Airport (IATA code: SON) is situated at Luganville, in the south-east
                         corner of Espiritu Santo and services predominantly domestic locations, with international services to
                         Brisbane, Australia. Whitegrass Airport (IATA code: TAH) is situated on Tanna Island in the
                         southern part of the Vanuatu archipelago. The land of the airports is owned by, or under long-term
                         lease to, Airports Vanuatu Limited (AVL).

                         Materials required for the infrastructure investments at Bauerfield Airport (mainly basalt aggregate)
                         will be sourced locally. The preferred aggregate source is the Malarua Quarry (the only basalt quarry
                         on Efate) situated approximately 50 km from Port Vila on the northern side of Efate. The ownership
                         of the quarry site is currently in dispute, so there is the potential that other existing quarries may be
                         utilized or that a new basalt quarry will need to be established in the Malarua vicinity. Several
                         established coronous aggregate quarries are situated on Efate, with the Orangorango Quarry the most
                         convenient being situated less than 1 km north-east of the Airport.

                         The recent devastation caused by Cyclone Pam in March 2015—the full extent of which is not yet
                         known—has included reported deaths, widespread displacement of communities, destruction of
                         houses and buildings, damage to Bauerfield Airport, roads and wharves, communications systems,
                         and other critical infrastructure. This event has implications for the project scope and damage at the
                         airport caused by Cyclone Pam has increased the need for urgent repairs.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Julie Babinard (GTIDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
                         Ross James Butler (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            Project impacts primarily relate to the transport and
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       construction impacts of runway, terminal building and
                                                                     apron re-surfacing at Bauerfield, and the transport of
                                                                     materials from the quarry to site. Impacts will be
                                                                     mitigated through the use of the Environmental and Social
                                                                     Management Plan (ESMP) consistent with the PAIP
                                                                     Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                     (ESMF). An ESMP was prepared and disclosed.

                                                                     Environment and social impacts from two other airports
                                                                     are expected to be minimal as the project activities will
                                                                     involve mainly upgrading of airport runway lighting,
                                                                     provision of air traffic control equipment, weather
                                                                     monitoring equipment, improved power supply equipment



                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                                                       and safety and security equipment, including x-ray
                                                       machines for passenger baggage and cargo screening.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       Potential impacts associated with any downstream
                                                       activities identified through the master planning/strategy
                                                       process will be considered through the Terms of
                                                       Reference for the consultant undertaking this work. This
                                                       will allow due consideration of the potential safeguard
                                                       implications of activities under the Master Plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   No impacts on natural habitats will result from works on
                         4.04                          any of the three airport sites as works will be carried out
                                                       in existing airports. Construction materials will be either
                                                       sourced from existing quarries or new quarry that does not
                                                       have presence of natural habitats.

                                                       The Terms of Reference for consultants preparing the
                                                       master plan will require consideration of the Natural
                                                       Habitats policy as it relates to any potential downstream
                                                       physical works.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   No impacts on natural forests will result from works on
                                                       any of the three airport sites as works will be carried out
                                                       in existing airports. Construction materials will be either
                                                       sourced from existing quarries or a new quarry site that is
                                                       not located in forest areas.

                                                       The Terms of Reference for consultants preparing the
                                                       master plan will require consideration of the Forests
                                                       policy as it relates to any potential downstream physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       works.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No    The project will not require the use of pesticides.
                                                       Accordingly this OP is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural        No   No impacts on Physical Cultural Resources will result
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11          from works on the airport sites as works will be carried
                                                       out in existing airports. Construction materials will be
                                                       either be sourced from existing quarries or new quarry
                                                       that does not have presence of PCRs.

                                                       The Terms of Reference for consultants preparing the
                                                       master plan will require consideration of the Physical
                                                       Cultural Resources policy as it relates to any potential
                                                       downstream physical works.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No   Based on analytical work completed by the Bank, OP 4.10
                         BP 4.10                       is not triggered in Vanuatu. The master plan consultants
                                                       will be required to undertake a social analysis to assess
                                                       potential issues, risks and impacts related to customary
                                                       land tenure.



                                                        Page 5 of 10
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               The majority of the project’s activities are expected to be
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 on existing land within airport precincts. However this
                                                                       policy is triggered given the uncertainty around land
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       ownership of a preferred quarry and the location of the
                                                                       construction camp. An RPF is included in the ESMP
                                                                       (based on the PAIP ESMF) to cover this eventuality.
                                                                       Further OP/BP 4.12 is triggered in accordance with
                                                                       Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard
                                                                       Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-
                                                                       Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the
                                                                       Bank (January 2014). This is because there is the potential
                                                                       that the Master Plan may lead to involuntary resettlement
                                                                       outcomes. The Terms of Reference for this Master Plan
                                                                       will ensure that the master plan consultants will be
                                                                       required to verify this during their social analysis (where
                                                                       any land issues may be relevant/required in a master
                                                                       plan).
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             Not relevant to the project.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No             Not relevant to the project.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             Not relevant to the project.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Potential environmental and social safeguard issues are associated with three project activities at
                              Bauerfield Airport: civil works and installation of equipment at airfields; sourcing of materials for
                              runway and apron rehabilitation (i.e.. quarried aggregate); and potential future subprojects arising
                              from the Airport Master Plan and Aviation Sector Strategy (see Section 2 below). The project’s
                              area of influence includes the three airfields, quarry sites and truck haul routes for externally-
                              sourced materials.

                              The ESMP focuses on works at Bauerfield International Airport, however applies to the project.
                              The works at the other airports are expected to relate to the installation of technical equipment and
                              so the approach for Bauerfield is expected to be applied. In the event that it does not—or due to
                              Cyclone Pam other investments are required - the ESMP will be updated and redisclosed and/or
                              additional measures will be prepared and disclosed to specifically address these other Project sites.
                              The ESMP may also be updated based on the findings and recommendations of the Aviation
                              Master Plan that is being prepared under the Project.

                              Airfield civil works are not likely to cause significant environmental or social impacts and are
                              limited to minor construction-related impacts such as noise, dust, waste disposal and worker health
                              and safety. No physical cultural resources have been identified within the construction footprint.


                                                                         Page 6 of 10
                           These impacts can be readily managed through standard mitigation measures (time limits for noisy
                           works, dust control etc.) which will be incorporated in a contractor’s ESMP. The on-site impacts
                           are all site-specific and expected to be reversible. Potential social impacts are likely to be limited
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to airport concessionaires and small businesses which may experience temporary business impacts.

                           Aggregates for construction will likely be sourced from an existing quarry located in reasonable
                           proximity to the airport. The quantity of material required will not be known until engineering
                           assessments determine the volume of existing aggregate within the airport pavements that can be
                           reused. Potential impacts associated with quarried resources include on-site quarry operations
                           (dust and noise emissions, water management, slope stability, quarry limits etc.) and transport
                           impacts along haul routes associated with heavy vehicles (noise, dust, road safety, road surface
                           condition etc.). In Vanuatu, quarry operations are regulated by Quarry Permit Regulation Order
                           No. 8 (under the Mines and Minerals Act). A quarry permit requires an OH&S Plan and an
                           Environment Management Plan.

                           Runway and apron rehabilitation will likely require removal of some existing materials that are no
                           longer to standard. This material will require disposal either within the airfield or at an approved
                           landfill. Potential waste management and transport impacts were assessed and management
                           measures incorporated in the ESMP.

                           No resettlement is expected and if any resettlement issues emerge, they will be addressed through
                           a resettlement plan developed on the basis of the policies and principles outlined in the RPF in the
                           ESMP for VAIP and the PAIP ESMF.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Improved safety and security will be beneficial to both travelers and residents in the vicinity of the
                           airports. The investments are not expected to directly increase air operations, but may indirectly
                           change the frequency or timing of flights.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The proposed Airport Master Plan and Aviation Sector Strategy to be developed under the Project
                           will cover all international airports in Vanuatu: Bauerfield Airport, Whitegrass Airport on Tanna
                           Island and Pekoa Airport on Espiritu Santo. The potential subprojects that may be identified
                           through the master planning and strategy development process are unknown; however they may
                           include activities with the potential for environmental and social impacts (eg. runway lengthening,
                           terminal expansion, runway rehabilitation etc.).

                           It is proposed that potential safeguard implications be incorporated within the Master Plan/Sector
                           Strategy to ensure they are considered in the development of subprojects. The Terms of Reference
                           (ToR) for the Master Plan and the Aviation Sector Strategy consultant will include a requirement
                           to consider World Bank safeguards provisions.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           There are no alternatives to the activities proposed under Component A. In the absence of a safe
                           aviation operating environment at Vanuatu’s international airports (particularly Bauerfield) there is
                           the risk that aircraft operations may be cancelled, with significant follow-on issues for Vanuatu’s
                           economy.

                           The ESMP undertook an analysis of alternative aggregate sources, including existing basalt and

                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           coronous quarries on Efate. The preferred basalt aggregate source – Malarua Quarry in northern
                           Efate – is the subject of an ownership dispute, which if unable to be resolved may require the
                           establishment of a new quarry in the vicinity. Five coronous quarries were considered, with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           closest proximity site (Orangorango Quarry) the preferred option for minimizing potential adverse
                           impacts.
                           The Master Plan and the Aviation Sector Strategy are likely to involve consideration of multiple
                           subproject alternatives. Potential environmental and social impacts will be considered under these
                           processes in determining the feasibility of the Master Plan and the Aviation Sector Strategy
                           proposals
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower recruited consultants to prepare the Project ESMP and support disclosure and
                           consultations prior to appraisal. This ESMP will inform the Contractors ESMP and a design
                           consultant will be recruited to oversee the civil works process and will be responsible for ensuring
                           compliance with the ESMP by the contractor.

                          The project design includes funding for consultants to assist with technical support and the TFSU
                          will be retained to provide support to MIPU, VPMU and AVL in relation to technical,
                          procurement, financial management, safeguards, contract management, reporting, and monitoring
                          and evaluation activities.

                           Consultants will be procured to prepare the Airport Master Plan and the Aviation Sector Strategy,
                           with ToRs that will follow both the ESSIP and Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard
                           Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds
                           Administered by the Bank (January 2014).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Institutional stakeholders in safeguards compliance are the implementing agency (MIPU), VPMU,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Airports Vanuatu Ltd. (AVL) and the Department of Geology, Mines and Water (Mines and
                           Minerals Section). Local stakeholders are the communities surrounding the airports, quarry sites
                           and transport routes for materials and airport concessionaires. Consultation with these key
                           stakeholders has has taken place, is ongoing and will continue including during implementation of
                           the ESMP.

                          Further public consultation was originally scheduled at the National Council of Chief's Nakamal in
                          Port Vila. However, Cyclone Pam impacted Vanuatu on 13 March creating widespread damage
                          and disruption. Accordingly, these consultations were not able to proceed as planned and have
                          been rescheduled to take place as soon materially possible and will continue take place as needed
                          throughout the implementation of the project. This ESMP will be revised and updated as needed
                          following further public consultations and will be re-disclosed.

                          Stakeholders will be consulted on a continuous basis during implementation (for example to
                          announce the start of works or to advise of traffic management plans during the construction
                          phase).
                          This will include communities near the quarry sites and along the transport route for materials.
                          Furthermore, neighboring communities will be made aware through these media of the procedure
                          for registering any complaints or grievances in relation to the project. Where the airport Master
                          Plan process has the potential to impact on communities outside the airports, these communities,

                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           with representatives of both men and women groups, will be engaged in a meaningful way in the
                           master plan process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           In-country disclosure (considering the post-Cyclone Pam circumstances) will involve provision of
                           documents at the AVL offices together with direct discussions with airport concessionaires where
                           possible. Subsequent iterations of the ESMP will be disclosed prior to works commencing
                           following further public consultations with stakeholders. The ESMP was disclosed in-country on
                           27 March and at the World Bank InfoShop and on 28 March 2015.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         25-Mar-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      27-Mar-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vanuatu                                                             27-Mar-2015
                           Comments: At Airports Vanuatu Limited Office
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         ////
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      ////
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Christopher R. Bennett
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                            Date: 29-Mar-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
