                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR18357
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                                        Project ID:           P124978
                            Project Name:      Changzhi Sustainable Urban Transport Project (P124978)
                            Task Team          Yuhui Jiao
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          28-Sep-2011                                  Estimated   22-Mar-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI02                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Urban Transport (95%), Sub-national government administration (5%)
                            Theme:             City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (95%), Municipal governance and
                                               institution building (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       200.00           Total Bank Financing:                                      100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                            100.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                               100.00
                              Total                                                                                               200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transport mobility in the central
                           city of Changzhi in a safe, energy-saving, and efficient manner for all users.
                           Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)

                                                                                 Page 1 of 8
                         The Proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve transport mobility in the central
                         city of Changzhi in a safe, energy-saving, and efficient manner for all users.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project includes four integrated components, as follows:

                         Component 1: Integrated Corridor Improvement. This component aims to improve transport
                         mobility, energy efficiency and traffic safety on the selected corridors in the city center, through the
                         introduction of a combination of public transport priority, non-motorized transport, traffic
                         management, parking management and safety improvements. Improvement activities include
                         dedicated bus lanes, junction improvement and channelization, improved pedestrian sidewalks and
                         crossings, improved bicycle facilities, and street lighting.

                         Component 2: Intelligent Urban Transport Management System. This component addresses traffic
                         management and safety issues in Changzhi city through the introduction of the Intelligent Transport
                         Systems. It includes installation of an area-traffic control (ATC) system, traffic enforcement and
                         monitoring system, provision of software and equipment for a traffic command center, procurement
                         of auxiliary equipment, and installation of a traffic information system.

                         Component 3: Public Transit Supporting Infrastructure. The component aims to improve public
                         transport systems through the provision of better public transport infrastructure and services. It
                         supports investments in a new bus hub at Bayi Square and two new bus depots, as well as
                         implementation of an advanced public transport system for supporting improved operations.

                         Component 4: Institutional Capacity Development. This component aims to help build urban
                         transport institutional capacity to ensure the long-term sustainability of the project. Specifically, the
                         component includes training and study tours, urban transport planning modeling and applications,
                         thematic studies, training of an urban transport professional team, development of a public
                         engagement platform, and project management support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Changzhi City in the central Chinese province of Shanxi, with a total area of
                         13,864 km2 and population of about 3 million. The central urban area of Changzhi is about 55 km2,
                         with a population of 390,000. All the proposed project components are within the urban built-up area
                         of the city.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chaogang Wang (GSU05)
                         Meixiang Zhou (GSU02)
                         Peishen Wang (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04



                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Based on the environmental screening at PCN stage and confirmed through later EA preparation,
                              the project is a Category B project as per OP4.01. Two safeguards policies are triggered: OP4.01
                              Environmental Assessment and OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement.

                             Environmental Impacts. The project is anticipated to have substantial net positive environmental
                             benefits through integrated improvement of corridor, public transport and traffic management, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             consequent improvement of road safety and reduction of vehicle emissions at city level. The main
                             physical activities include limited construction works related to channelization, junction
                             improvement, bus stops and parking facilities along the existing corridors, and a number of transit
                             hubs, terminals and depots. There is no ecologically and culturally sensitive site (natural habitat,
                             protected area or physical cultural resources) in the vicinity of the project, given its urban context.

                             Since only limited civil works are foreseen in the project, manageable environmental issues are
                             mainly those related to construction activities, i.e., traffic disturbance, accessibility of pedestrian
                             and business operation, pedestrian safety during construction, nuisance of dust and noise,
                             construction wastewater/solid waste management, etc.; and those related to operation, i.e., road
                             safety, noise, safety and waste management of depots and terminals. These impacts are well
                             known in nature and can be readily minimized and mitigated through proper project design and
                             construction management practice. There is no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
                             impacts envisaged in the project.


                             Social Impacts The project will bring in significant social benefits through improved public
                             transport services and facilities. There may be very limited negative social impacts. The project
                             physical activities are planned to be constructed within the existing land (such as roads, streets and
                             public places) available. There is no involuntary land acquisition involved based on current project


                                                                         Page 3 of 8
                           design after some adjustment of the specific locations of construction. For instance, a public bus
                           hub which was previously planned to be located in Shijiazhuang (the suburban area of the city), is
                           not included in the project any more. Another location for the construction of a bus terminal
Public Disclosure Copy




                           parking station is in Mafangtou where 37.5 mu (2.5 hectare) of land was requisitioned in 2010. In
                           addition, the project construction may cause temporary inconvenience in accessing local markets,
                           shops and public facilities during the construction period. These impacts can be minimized and
                           mitigated through proper project design and construction management.



                           A due diligence report on resettlement of the proposed Changzhi South Public Transport Parking
                           Centre which will be built in Mafangtou where 37.5 mu land (about 2.5 hectare, 28 affected
                           households and 87 affected individuals) had been required before the project identification. The
                           Construction of this public parking place has been discussed for several years, since it was
                           included in the development plan of public transportation in the city. The land taking process
                           started in 2006. A land acquisition agreement was signed between the General Bus Company (as
                           the subproject owner) and Mafangtou Village. The compensation fees were paid by the project
                           owner to the affected village committee in April 2010 and those fees for the directly affected
                           people were also paid. The land requisition was basically completed in late 2010 except for two
                           actions currently underway. A due diligence report on resettlement for this piece of land was
                           prepared by an independent consulting institute. The review report shows that the affected people
                           and village are satisfied with the land compensation and assistance arrangements and their
                           livelihoods have been restored without being worse-off. There are two minor remaining actions.
                           One is the redistribution of some of the land compensation from the village committee to villagers
                           which is under processing. The other is the relocation of some power facilities which has been
                           agreed to be jointly done with the local branch of the State GRID before the project actual
                           implementation. The PMO is committed to ensure satisfactory completion of the two remaining
                           actions of this land acquisition and external monitoring is carried out during the project
                           supervision.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Based on the screening at PCN stage, Alternatives related to land use were explored through
                           optimizing locations and land use so as to minimize social risks and adverse impacts. The team
                           concluded that the Bank safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is triggered.

                           As of May 2016, the project is restructured, with the following restructuring contents: (a)
                           increasing the Bank's financing percentage for Civil Works from 50% to 100% effective since
                           December 1, 2015; (b) adding a core sector PDO indicator "length of rehabilitation of non-rural
                           roads"; and (c) reallocating Bank Loan between Category 1 and Category 2. Such restructuring
                           does not involve any change of physical activities of the original project, thus there is no change of
                           environmental and social impacts envisaged. The ISDS is updated to reflect the project
                           restructuring.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             N/A.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The main project activities are improvement of existing streets, and construction of public
                           transport facilities (bus terminal, depots) at locations that have been determined in the existing city

                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                          master plan. Alternatives were considered during the project feasibility study, e.g. cross-section
                          configuration for bus lane, road surface materials, and fuel options for buses. Comparisons were
                          analyzed in FS and EIA with comprehensive consideration of technical, economic, as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                          environmental and social factors.

                           Alternatives were explored to minimize adverse impacts in relation to land taking and house
                           demolition. Some location options for bus parking places, public transport hub and depots were
                           reviewed and adjusted from land to be requisitioned to existing ready-for-use land. Comparisons
                           of alternatives of major project activities were shown in the FS.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Changzhi PMC has commissioned Shangxi Academy of Environmental Science, a Class A
                           licensed EIA consultant in China, to conduct the EIA preparation, with guidance and advice from
                           the Bank's environmental team. The EIA report thoroughly addressed the potential environmental
                           and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed adequate measures in the
                           Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the
                           potential adverse impacts.

                          A stand-alone EMP has been prepared based on the findings of the EIA report. The EMP detailed
                          the environmental management and supervision arrangements and responsibilities, mitigation
                          measures, capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP implementation.
                          It also includes a set of Standard Environmental Specifications for contractors to be incorporated
                          into bidding documents and contracts to ensure effective implementation.

                          EMP implementation is managed by Changzhi PMC. An environmental management unit is
                          established in the PMC with dedicated environmental staff. The contractors and supervision
                          engineers are required to assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective
                          implementation of the EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Social Safeguards-Involuntary Resettlement

                          The Changzhi PMC has hired a professional institute to prepare a resettlement policy framework
                          (RPF) to handle possible land taking and house demolition which might arise from the change of
                          specific location of certain bus terminals or depots. The task team will provide training and
                          consultancy services throughout the project cycle. The resettlement policy framework (RPF) and
                          due diligence report were reviewed by the Bank team and deemed acceptable in line with the Bank
                          social safeguards policy. The RPF sets detailed principles and procedures as well as other crucial
                          requirements for handling involuntary resettlement. Implementation of the RPF and the remaining
                          work mentioned in the due diligence report has been monitored periodically during the
                          Supervision stage of the Project. The RPF has been observed and will remain valid until project
                          completion. No new involuntary resettlement emerged during project implementation by project
                          restructuring in May 2016.

                          Institutional Capacity for Resettlement Implementation. This is the first Bank financed project in
                          Changzhi, and the institutions involved do not have experience with Bank projects. However, the
                          government has implemented many urban construction projects that have involved significant
                          resettlement impacts, and local institutions have strong experiences in resettlement implementation
                          of domestic projects. Overall, resettlement performance for domestic projects is satisfactory in the


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           city, and to the Task Team's knowledge, the local government has not received any complaints
                           regarding resettlement in last few years. The PMC assigned a dedicated social staff to coordinate
                           social safeguards work, together with the local government departments in charge of local land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           requisition.

                           As the project restructuring in May 2016 does not cause any change of environmental and social
                           impacts, the previously developed EMP and RPF remain relevant and valid.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             During the EA preparation, public consultations were conducted in accordance with the Bank's
                           OP4.01. These were supplemented by a combination of opinion surveys and public meetings with
                           the general public along the transport corridors and the communities around the bus depots.
                           Information about the project, potential environmental and social impacts, and planned mitigation
                           measures were provided to the public during consultation. Main concerns from the public included
                           construction nuisance of noise and exhaust gas, night-light disturbance, management of solid
                           waste, provision of temporary access, and timely road restoration. These concerns have been
                           addressed in the EIA, and necessary mitigation measures were developed in EMP and the project
                           design.

                           During the project RPF and due diligence preparation, public consultations were conducted
                           through surveys, interviews and meetings with affected people. Information and alternative
                           options about the project, plan of civil works, proposed locations of transport corridors, major
                           parking and depot sites were shared with the public and key stakeholders during consultation.

                           The EA documents have been locally disclosed in Changzhi PMC and the website of Changzhi
                           Government (www.changzhi.gov.cn/info/news/2011/nry/211315.htm) on September 12, 2011.
                           Disclosure was announced through Changzhi Daily on September 10, 2011. The RPF and due
                           diligence report on resettlement were locally disclosed on September 21. The EA and RPF
Public Disclosure Copy




                           documents were disclosed in Infoshop on September 21, 2011.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Sep-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      21-Sep-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                               15-Sep-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         16-Sep-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      21-Sep-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                               21-Sep-2011
                           Comments:


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yuhui Jiao
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                          Date: 01-Jun-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
