                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA17483
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Papua New Guinea                   Project ID:   P155087
                            Project Name:      Water Supply and Sanitation Development Project (P155087)
                            Task Team          Fook Chuan Eng,Edkarl M. Galing
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          08-Apr-2016                        Estimated   24-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWA02                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Water supply (90%), Sanitation (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Urban services and housing for the poor
                                              (75%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      77.30           Total Bank Financing:                  70.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          7.30
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                70.00
                              Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                                          0.00
                              Total                                                                                      77.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to support the development and strengthening of the
                           planning and implementation capacity of water sector institutions, and to increase access to water
                           supply services in selected urban towns and rural districts.


                                                                       Page 1 of 11
                         3. Project Description
                         Three major components are proposed for the project, with a fourth additional Contingent
                         Emergency Response component provisioned for the Bank to provide emergency support in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         event of a natural disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic event. The three major components are:
                         the (1) National Water Supply, Sanitation and Hygiene Behavior (WaSH) Policy Component, (2)
                         Rural and Peri-urban Water and Sanitation (WSS) Component, and (3) Urban WSS Component. The
                         rural and peri-urban WSS component, and the urban WSS component, are in turn subdivided into a
                         policy implementation or institutional strengthening subcomponent and an associated infrastructure
                         investment subcomponent. Given the phasing and pace of supports to the different sub-sectors,
                         funding allocation is expected to be largest in the urban WSS component.

                         Component 1: Institutional structures for the implementation of the National WaSH Policy

                         This component is focused on supporting the development of the key sector institution i.e., the
                         WaSH PMU, and key sector tools (strategies, plans and sector instruments) that will form the
                         management framework of the sector as envisaged in the National WaSH Policy. At the end of the
                         project, it is envisaged that the WaSH PMU will be able undertake its basic mandate of development
                         planning and facilitating investments in the rural and peri-urban areas. A sector monitoring system is
                         expected to be developed and begun operations during the project period. The National WaSH
                         Policy provisions for the development of comprehensive sector institutions and sector tools over a
                         period of time. Starting from a nascent setup, the WaSH PMU is envisaged to be developed over
                         time into a full-fledge national sector authority (the National Water, Sanitation and Hygiene
                         Authority, NWSHA) responsible over a range of sector issues – development and investment
                         planning and coordination, monitoring, regulations, etc. The establishment of the NWSHA will take
                         time and may not occur during the project period.

                         Component 2: Rural and Peri-urban Water and Sanitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component is focused on supporting the WaSH PMU to develop a framework for the
                         coordination, planning and implementation of rural and peri-urban WSS in districts and in peri-urban
                         areas. It is envisaged that the delivery of services will be through the sub-national authorities, in
                         particular the new District Development Authorities (DDAs). The primary role of the WaSH PMU is
                         thus to coordinate and provide a systematic national framework (including common policies,
                         guidelines, financing frameworks and mechanisms, monitoring, regulations, etc.) and supporting the
                         subnational authorities for rural and peri-urban WSS development and investments. Support towards
                         building the national framework is addressed in Component 1. Component 2 will focus on supporting
                         and building the capacity of the new district level authorities (DDAs) to plan, develop, implement
                         and monitor rural WSS. District-wide systematic WaSH planning, development and monitoring is
                         not yet practiced. This component will begin by piloting the development of District WaSH
                         Development Plans in up to four selected pilot districts during the first 18 months. This will provide
                         lessons on how the WaSH PMU could work through subnational authorities towards a systematic
                         increase of access to services in districts. At the same time, the development of these plans provides
                         the opportunity for building the capacity of DDAs in WaSH. Upon the successful development of
                         district plans, selected investments in rural WSS based on these plans are expected to be undertaken.

                         Component 3: Urban Water and Sanitation

                         This component is focused on supporting the expansion of WSS services to urban areas, specifically


                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                         in district and provincial towns where Water PNG has the mandate to provide these services. It is
                         envisaged that a rolling program of design and investment support for new provincial and district
                         towns schemes (planned to be implemented in batches) would be carried out. Investment will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commence with a first priority town scheme, which has been designed during project preparation, to
                         test out and pave the way for a smooth rolling investment program. Given the water security and
                         sustainability issues linked to climate change risks, scheme designs will include optimal design
                         options for water conservation, energy efficiency, and source sustainability. Other town schemes, to
                         be identified from the pool of currently unserved district and provincial towns, will follow suit during
                         implementation. This component will also support technical and financial improvements in Water
                         PNG’s existing operations. The existing operations of Water PNG would be assessed through
                         technical audit and priority recommendations for improvement-focused rehabilitation of existing
                         water and sanitation infrastructure implemented with project financing support. This will
                         complement Water PNG’s existing re-investment program to improve performance and extend
                         service of critical profitable systems, which amounted to about US$ 7 million in 2015. This
                         component will also support a critical assessment of Water PNG’s existing business and operating
                         model, in particular to identify options that could be adopted in the future to ensure continual
                         financial viability as it expands service provision new (and generally small and less profitable)
                         district towns.

                         Component 4: Contingent Emergency Response

                         Given PNG’s vulnerability to climate and disaster risks this ‘zero component’ (initially without any
                         allocated funding) is proposed to be included. This Component will allow for the rapid reallocat ion
                         of funds from other components to provide emergency relief, recovery and reconstruction support in
                         the event of a natural disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic event. Funds potentially reallocated to
                         Component 4 would be disbursed either against a positive list of critical goods and/or against the
                         procurement of works, and consultant services required to support the immediate response and
                         recovery needs. Implementation will be guide by a Contingent Emergency Response
                         Implementation Plan to be developed as necessary in response to the emergency.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Papua New Guinea with sub-project investments in rural areas and various
                         district and provincial towns across the country. The focus of the investments will be on water supply
                         systems comprising a water source, treatment plant, water storage and reticulation to end users. In
                         terms of scale, rural schemes are typically small spring-fed, gravity-based piped systems. Rural
                         sanitation efforts financed by the project will be to be limited to sanitation/hygiene training in
                         selected districts. In urban settings, investments will be in small reticulated systems within towns,
                         with possible extensions to surrounding villages. Volumes are relatively small, with water sourced
                         from within or very near town usually from groundwater. For Water PNG’s existing operations,
                         investments may include rehabilitation and performance improvement within the existing water and
                         sewerage systems.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nicholas John Valentine (GENDR)
                         Ross James Butler (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         Environmental            Yes   The sub-project investments are generally expected to
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01          have limited environmental and social impacts through
                                                        sire selection and the application of mitigation measures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        This policy is triggered to ensure a commensurate level of
                                                        environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA). The
                                                        ESIA process for sub-projects is governed by an ESMF,
                                                        which incorporates an Indigenous Persons Planning
                                                        Framework (IPPF) and Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                        (RPF). All sub-projects will be screened using the
                                                        procedures included in the ESMF. An initial sub-project
                                                        investment has been identified – the Bialla Water Supply
                                                        Project – for which an ESIA has been prepared in
                                                        accordance with procedures in the ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    Program activities will not involve significant conversion
                         4.04                           or degradation of natural habitats. Sub-project
                                                        investments may involve incidental vegetation clearing
                                                        for installation of reticulation; however there is sufficient
                                                        design flexibility to minimize this, thereby avoiding
                                                        significant impacts. Most infrastructure will be sited on
                                                        already converted lands within existing urban settlements.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The project will not support any civil works that have
                                                        impacts on the health and quality of forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The Project does not involve procurement or use of
                                                        pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   While known physical cultural resources can be avoided
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           by sub-project design there is a chance that these
                                                        resources may be uncovered during the course of civil
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        works, hence this policy is triggered. A chance finds
                                                        procedure has been included in the ESMF to cover these
                                                        eventualities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   OP 4.10 would be triggered as indigenous peoples (IP)
                         BP 4.10                        communities may exist within subprojects’ areas of
                                                        influence. Subprojects under Component 2 may include
                                                        rural areas where the majority of beneficiaries are IP. For
                                                        these projects no separate Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP)
                                                        will be prepared with IPP elements instead incorporated
                                                        into overall subproject design. Investments under
                                                        Component 3 are unlikely to meet the four defining
                                                        criteria for IP communities in PNG under the
                                                        Environmental and Social Safeguard Instruments for the
                                                        Pacific Islands (ESSIP) as most infrastructure will be
                                                        sited within urban areas which are expected to comprise
                                                        heterogeneous populations. However ancillary
                                                        infrastructure (eg. rising mains from stream sources) may
                                                        traverse customary/IP community lands beyond the urban
                                                        boundary in which case OP 4.10 would be triggered and



                                                         Page 4 of 11
                                                                      site specific IPPs will be prepared. If land acquisition is
                                                                      needed in customary/IP community lands, voluntary land
                                                                      donation (VLD) mechanism or negotiated agreements on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      land use will be utilized. A social assessment will be
                                                                      undertaken for each sub-project to establish the presence,
                                                                      or otherwise, of IP communities in the respective project
                                                                      areas. If present, IP communities will be provided with
                                                                      equitable and culturally-appropriate benefits from the
                                                                      subproject. A process of free, prior and informed
                                                                      consultation with IP communities will be undertaken to
                                                                      establish broad community support. An Indigenous
                                                                      Persons Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared
                                                                      and is incorporated in the ESMF.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              It is anticipated that sub-projects requiring involuntary
                            OP/BP 4.12                                resettlement will be ineligible for project financing and
                                                                      will be screened out at the eligibility screening stage. The
                                                                      bulk of land required for water supply infrastructure
                                                                      established under Component 3 sub-projects is expected
                                                                      to be Government-owned. In some instances however (e.
                                                                      g. installation of rising mains) private or customary land
                                                                      may be traversed. In these circumstances voluntary land
                                                                      donation (VLD) or other a negotiated agreement (e.g.
                                                                      lease, easement) will be the mechanism. Under
                                                                      Component 2 in rural situations VLD will likely be the
                                                                      primary mechanism. Although no involuntary
                                                                      resettlement is anticipated the process and requirements
                                                                      for VLD and negotiated land use agreements have been
                                                                      included in an RPF which is part of the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The Project does not involve dams. Raw water sources
                            4.37                                      will be either groundwater or stream sources, with no in-
                                                                      stream impoundments proposed.
                            Projects on International   No            The Project does not involve international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The Project is not located in disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Overall, the project is environmentally and socially beneficial. The sub-project components will
                              involve simple, appropriate, low cost technologies that do not pose significant environmental or
                              social consequences. The provision of safe drinking water and sanitation facilities is expected to
                              have a significant positive impact on the improvement of livelihoods and the environment. Minor
                              and temporary negative environmental impacts may occur resulting from the construction
                              activities. This may include noise and dust, and temporary access restrictions due to pipe laying


                                                                        Page 5 of 11
                         activities during construction. These impacts are readily manageable by standard mitigation
                         measures. Observations at existing construction sites under Water PNG oversight suggest that the
                         organization’ staff is well-equipped to manage environmental issues at work sites. The World
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bank Group’ General Environmental, Health, and Safety (EH&S) Guidelines and EH&S
                         Guidelines for Water and Sanitation will be the key environmental guidance documents for the
                         construction, operation and maintenance of potable water treatment and supply systems to be
                         financed under the WSSDP.

                         A key environmental issue for the project is the sustainability of the raw water supply and the
                         avoidance of any environmental impacts from source development. To ensure these impacts are
                         avoided, assessments of the proposed water sources will be undertaken to determine their
                         sustainability under the proposed extraction regime. These assessments will consider the
                         ecological values of the water sources, seasonal variations in supply volumes and the proposed
                         extraction regime to determine the source sustainability. Candidate water supply schemes with
                         sources that are not sustainable from an environmental perspective will not be eligible for project
                         financing. Furthermore, if source development may result in unacceptable impacts on natural
                         freshwater habitats these schemes will not be eligible for project financing.

                         The project will not seek to develop water sources that require changes to watershed management
                         regimes. Similarly, no water sources will be developed where there is the potential for significant
                         impacts on protected areas or biodiversity nor will infrastructure be sited in these areas.

                         Investments in sanitation will be mostly in rural situations and will be limited to hygiene behavior
                         education including technical assistance with simple technologies, i.e. pit latrines. Investments in
                         urban sanitation infrastructure will be limited to rehabilitation of existing Water PNG sewerage
                         systems. Hence the potential for environmental impacts from the sanitation activities is expected
                         to be insubstantial. During the course of rehabilitation works of Water PNG systems, the
                         environmental performance of these systems will be reviewed and recommendations made for
                         improvements where necessary.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Potential negative environmental impacts are expected to be associated with civil construction
                         activities for new water supply systems (eg. noise, dust, access restrictions), utilization of water
                         resources for these systems, disposal of minor quantities of sludge from water treatment plants,
                         and relatively low levels of operational noise. Aluminum Sulfate sludge generated from water
                         treatment will be buried. For the purposes of noise compliance the guideline values specified in
                         the General EHS Guidelines will be adopted for the project, with commensurate monitoring to be
                         undertaken on specific sub-projects. Siting of project infrastructure will consider proximity to
                         sensitive receptors including hospitals, schools, religious institutions and residences and avoid
                         these as far as practicable.

                         Positive social impacts include (i) improved quantity and quality of safe drinking water (ii)
                         reduction in water related diseases such as diarrhea, dysentery, cholera, typhoid and thereby
                         minimizing the cost of health care in households (iii) reduction in infant, child and maternal
                         mortality and morbidity due to improved health and sanitation services (iv) reduced distances to
                         water points which will lead to gains in productive time for women and girls (v) better and
                         properly sited sanitation facilities will reduce the risk of contamination of surface and groundwater
                         resources.

                         Potential negative social impacts are associated with poor water quality from the new supply

                                                                    Page 6 of 11
                           systems. To avoid these impacts on sub-projects under Component 3 raw water will be treated
                           with disinfecting agents such as chlorine and treated water will be regularly monitored by Water
                           PNG at several points in the distribution system against World Health Organization (WHO)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           drinking water quality guidelines.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The only indirect and long term impacts associated with the project will be positive. As noted in
                           section 1 above, the provision of water supply and improved sanitation has numerous health and
                           social benefits.

                           The sustainability of raw water sources will be assessed during project design to ensure that the
                           proposed water supply system demands do not cause any significant reduction in either stream
                           flow or compromise ecological values or other users.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Within individual water supply schemes to be financed under Component 3 alternative water
                           source options will be examined. The suitability criteria will include sustainable yield, water
                           quality and minimal environmental or social impacts. Alternative options for infrastructure siting
                           will be assessed to determine a preferred option that minimizes the need for land acquisition
                           (private or customary), avoids environmentally or socially sensitive locations and is acceptable to
                           the local community. This will also include options that minimizes operational inconveniences (e.
                           g., operational noise levels) acceptable to the local community.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Water PNG will implement Component 3, i.e., those sub-projects related to the provision of water
                           and sanitation services in district and provincial towns and which trigger safeguards policies.
                           Water PNG will form a dedicated Project Management Unit (PMU-WPNG) similar to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           arrangements previously adopted for donor-funded projects. Water PNG has a track record of
                           implementing donor financed water supply and sanitation infrastructure projects of comparable
                           size, including capacity for procuring and managing the preparation of safeguards instruments and
                           construction supervision against Environmental and Social Management Plan requirements.
                           Nevertheless, the project will support capacity and technical skills gaps through a complement of
                           technical assistance consultants as required. This will include technical assistance activities where
                           relevant for environmental and social safeguards during project preparation and/or
                           implementation. The Bank team’s international water quality expert has assessed the capacity and
                           track record of Water PNG with respect to water quality monitoring to be satisfactory. Water
                           PNG has a track record of operating water supply (it was established in 1986 as the PNG
                           Waterboard). Water PNG performs regular and systematic sampling and monitoring of water
                           quality in all its operations, as required by the authorities. All sampling and analytical work is
                           performed by a NISIT (National Institute of Standard and Industrial Technology) registered
                           laboratory. The PNG drinking water quality code of practice and the World Health Organization
                           (WHO) Drinking Water Quality Guidelines are the basis for Water PNG Water's water quality
                           operations and monitoring.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders for the investments proposed under Component 3 include the recipient
                           communities, local government representatives, PNG Conservation and Environment Protection


                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                         Agency (CEPA), private or customary landholders (if infrastructure is to be sited on these lands)
                         and local indigenous peoples’ communities. The mechanisms for consultation and disclosure for
                         these various groups are as follows:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Extensive consultation was carried out during the preparation of the project ESMF including
                         discussion with key stakeholders including Water PNG, other government ministries, local level
                         governments (LLG) and members of currently identified potential subproject communities in
                         January 2016. Consultations in Bialla (the first identified town water supply investment) included
                         approximately 200 people in a public location (50% of which were women), involving subproject
                         beneficiaries and local representatives. Several types of accessible and appropriate documents,
                         were made available to the stakeholders and beneficiaries during the consultations. Feedback from
                         consulted people provided key contributions for the preparation of the ESMF and the specific
                         ESIA. During these consultations, the various issues associated with accessing land for the
                         purposes of project delivery – especially the focus on identification and design of projects so that
                         any land impacts would be avoided - were discussed. Similar consultations will be undertaken for
                         other towns as schemes are identified and prepared.

                         There has been several consultations during project preparation. Continuous consultations
                         appropriate for the project investments are planned as a part of project implementation
                         arrangements. Stakeholders and beneficiaries consultations will continue during project
                         implementation. The mechanisms for consultations and disclosure during implementation include
                         the following:

                         •        Recipient communities – residents of towns that will be provided with new water supply
                         systems will be consulted during the design phase on various issues including infrastructure design
                         and siting and willingness to pay. The format for consultation will generally be town meetings.
                         These consultations will include gender-specific activities as water collection is predominantly the
                         role of women and girls;
                         •        Local government representatives – Water PNG will need to secure agreements with local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         government entities for siting of infrastructure;
                         •        CEPA – environmental permits will need to be secured from CEPA for the abstraction of
                         water for sub-project supply;
                         •        Private or customary landholders – with the types and settings of projects (i.e. low density
                         urban) contemplated under Component 3 there is almost always an alternative siting or routing
                         available for infrastructure to avoid private or customary land. If infrastructure must be sited on
                         non-government land the relevant landholder will be consulted during the design phase with the
                         view to securing the necessary land via voluntary land donation or other negotiated agreement. If
                         this is not possible, an alternative sub-project location will be selected to avoid implementation
                         delays rather than pursue compulsory acquisition;
                         •        Indigenous peoples’ (IP) communities – if IP communities are determined to be present in
                         the sub-project area (in accordance with the four criteria specified in the World Bank’ policy free,
                         prior and informed consultation will be undertaken with the aim of securing a collective
                         expression of broad community support for the sub-project.

                         The project’s ESMF incorporates grievance redress mechanisms which will be designed in to each
                         sub-project.

                         The revised version of the ESMF (which also includes the IPPF and the RPF) has been made
                         available on the Bank Infoshop and Water PNG websites, and hard copies made available at Water

                                                                   Page 8 of 11
                           PNG offices and the relevant project area district/local-level government office. Stakeholders and
                           project beneficiaries will have further opportunities to provide feedback to these documents during
                           project implementation, including during further consultations related to the preparation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           specific ESIAs as new town schemes are identified.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Papua New Guinea                                                 07-Apr-2016
                           Comments: The safeguards instruments (ESMF and ESIA) have been disclosed on the Water
                                         PNG website and in hard copy at the Bialla Town local government office.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Papua New Guinea                                                 07-Apr-2016
                           Comments: The RPF (incorporated into the ESMF) will be disclosed on the Water PNG website
                                         and in hard copy at the Bialla Town local government office.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Apr-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Papua New Guinea                                                 07-Apr-2016
                           Comments: The IPPF (incorporated into the ESMF) will be disclosed on the Water PNG website
                                         and in hard copy at the Bialla Town local government office.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [     ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [     ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [     ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?


                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Fook Chuan Eng,Edkarl M. Galing
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 07-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                        Date: 07-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
