                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR16297
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P123133
                            Project Name:       China: Gansu Qingyang Urban Infrastructure Improvement Project (P123133)
                            Task Team           Jens Christian Helbech Hede
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           12-Dec-2011             Estimated     31-May-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI10                     Lending       Specific Investment Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       192.35           Total Bank Financing:     100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              92.35
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                100.00
                              Total                                                                                                192.35
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist Xifeng District to improve selected
                           urban infrastructure services including urban roads and urban environmental services.
                           Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist Xifeng District to improve selected
                           urban infrastructure services including urban roads and urban environmental services.



                                                                                  Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Urban Infrastructure Improvement
                         (a)      Sub-component 1: Urban Bypass Road Construction including (i) construction of bypass
Public Disclosure Copy




                         roads of the southern section of Xifeng's West Ring Road and the northern section of Xifeng's East
                         Ring Road with installation of associated pipes; (ii) construction of three connection roads to the two
                         bypass corridor of West Ring Road and East Ring Road with installation of associated pipes.
                         (b)      Sub-component 2: Integrated Road Corridor Improvement, including: (i) improvement of
                         three selected main road corridors (Nan Bei Street, Anding Dong Xi Road, West Ring Road),
                         including road pavement, traffic channelization, and lighting and greening, along with drainage and
                         sewage system improvements; (ii) rehabilitation of three selected backstreets and small lanes for
                         slow traffic; (iii) carrying out of the Parking Action Plan, the Public Transport Action Plan; and the
                         Traffic Safety, Education and Enforcement Action Plan.
                         (c)      Sub-component 3: Drainage and Sewage Pipes, including including: (i) construction of
                         drainage and sewer mains for a section each of the West Ring Road, the Anding East Road and the
                         Anding West Road; (ii) rehabilitation of sewage collection pipes in the Xifeng's built-up area; and
                         associated improvements of road pavement, street lighting and greening along these roads; (iii) GIS-
                         based assets management of QWSSC's drainage/wastewater pipes networks.
                         (d)      Sub-component 4: Wastewater Treatment Plant including construction of (i) a new
                         wastewater treatment plant in the eastern area of Xifeng; (ii) a wastewater pumping station in
                         Xifeng's northern area; (iii) wastewater trunks and collectors associated to the investments in (i) and
                         (ii) above.

                         Component 2: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building
                         This component includes provision of technical assistance for (i) carrying out of a water resource
                         study covering, among others, for water reuse, sub-basin water environment improvements and
                         industrial wastewater discharge licenses in Xifeng District that supports the ongoing investments of
                         wastewater management (ii) the improvement of the operation and maintenance capabilities of
                         QWSSC, Xifeng District's Public Utility and Transportation Bureaus in the provision of urban
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure services in the key sectors of drainage and wastewater, urban road transport;.(iii)
                         capacity building and training for Qingyang Municipality's and Xifeng District's agencies; (iv)
                         project management and construction supervision under the Project.

                         For Restructuring:

                         The main changes adopted during this project restructuring are: (i) cancel two sub-projects (an
                         equipment contract and a road section); (ii) increase, with October 21, 2015 as cut-off point, the
                         disbursement percentage from 80% to 100% for sub-projects under the civil works category; and (iii)
                         extend closing date by one year to December 31, 2018. The restructuring will also revise the LA and
                         PA text to be more flexible, enabling adding smaller PDO relevant activities to the project in 2017, if
                         PMO can show significant progress and further cost savings materializes. Any such activities will not
                         involve resettlement, land acquisition, or any activities which will affect the project's environmental
                         rating.

                         In terms of specific changes to civil works (physical changes) which are relevant to safeguards, these
                         comprises dropping one road section, which is no longer needed as an alternative route has now been
                         established with the construction of the Dongbei Road (not part of the Project, nor a linked project).
                         This will result in less land acquisition and less resettlement. Consequently the EA/EMP and RAP
                         will not need updating.


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will be located in Xifeng District, Qingyang Municipality, which is in the east of Gansu
Public Disclosure Copy




                           province bordering Shaanxi Province in the east and north, and Ningxia Hui Autonomous Region in
                           the west. Xifeng District is the only urban district of the Qingyang Municipality which was
                           developed over last two decades as the center of local governmental agencies, commerce and
                           industry, public services and residential housing. There are no significant physical culture resources
                           inside the project area. Xifeng is situated on the Dongzhi Plateau with elevation from 1200-1500m. It
                           is surrounded by ravines and is largely within the Jinhe Basin. There are two major rivers in Xifeng
                           including the Malian and Pu. The rainfall is mainly concentrated around July to September. Annual
                           precipitation is 459.5mm. Its annual average temperature maintains between 8 C and 10 C.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Feng Ji (GEN2A)
                           Shuang Zhou (GSU02)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           Yes
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               OP 4.01. Environmental Assessment. The project is overall positive. Nevertheless some negative
                              impacts have been identified in the EA process. The principal negative impacts are summarized
                              below.

                             -       Soil Erosion. There would be impacts, if not managed well, of the soil erosion caused


                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                         project activities, such as WWTP effluent discharge;
                         -        Sludge Disposal. 19.5 tons/day of dewatered sludge (moisture@60%) will be generated
                         from the WWTPs;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -        Noise and Odor from the operation of a new wastewater treatment plant and pumping
                         stations;
                         -        Noise Impact. Traffic on the improved roads will increase noise level to some extent;
                         -        Construction-related Impacts from construction activities.

                         OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The road construction will cause relocation of 35 graves
                         owned by local farmers and demolition of a farmer house (400m2) which is used as a church by
                         the Catholic Patriotic Association of the Xifeng District.

                         OP 4.12. Involuntary Resettlement. The project will affect 8 villages in 5 townships in a peri-
                         urban area. The project will require the permanent acquisition of 741 mu (489 hectares) of land.
                         The breakdown of this land use is 363 mu (24 hectares) of cultivated land, 133 mu (8.9 hectares)
                         of forest land, 110 mu (7.3 hectares) of orchard land, 90 mu (6 hectares) of housing lots and 45 mu
                         (3 hectares) of unused land. The dominant land use is for growing corn and wheat (50 percent of
                         the area), and the rest is mostly forest, land for apple orchards and housing in roughly equal
                         shares. Some temporary land use will be required during project implementation by contractors,
                         mitigation measures will be taken. The municipal resettlement office will supervise the activities.
                         The project will affect 206 families with 892 persons by land acquisition and 143 families with
                         528 persons by structure demolition in the peri-urban areas. The 528 people to be displaced belong
                         to 143 families, consisting of 113 families in peri-urban areas (average size 3.62 persons) and 30
                         families in city areas (average size 3.7 persons). Among those displaced peri-urban families, no
                         any family will lose all of their cultivated land. Lastly, 10 shops and a church will be demolished
                         and relocated, affecting 56 employees. The church relocation has been addressed by environmental
                         safeguards.

                         OP 4.10. Indigenous People. A field screening and desk review were conducted and TT concluded
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that there is no indigenous community in the project area. According to the census data
                         information of Xifeng District, there are over 220,000 populations in the Xifeng District and there
                         are eleven Chinese minorities in this District, including Hui, Mongolia, Man, Korea, Zhuang,
                         Miao, Tu, Tujia, Dongxiang, Zhang and Russian minorities. The total Chinese minorities in
                         Xifeng District are 1,859 populations with 442 households. Among those Chinese minorities, Hui
                         minorities contribute 88% of entire Chinese minority population in Xifeng District. The rest of the
                         Chinese minorities are scattered in Xifeng District. There are two villages among those eight
                         affected villages in the project area where Chinese minorities are present in. One village has only
                         one Chinese female Hui minority who was immigrated by marriage with a villager and another
                         village has Chinese Hui minorities with 29% of village populations. Based on the Bank definition
                         of indigenous peoples, Chinese Hui minority within the project area does not present the criteria of
                         Bank indigenous peoples. It was thus determined that OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is not
                         triggered.

                         Linked Projects. The local funded projects linked to the Bank supported project in Xifeng District
                         were identified as the southern session of western ring road, the middle session of eastern ring
                         road and two earth borrower pits. The resettlement work of the above two road sessions and two
                         earth borrower pits were implemented in 2009. For those two road sessions, the affected villages
                         received their entitlement and shared their land compensation after land redistribution among the
                         affected villages as village traditional way. For those two borrower pits that were used by local

                                                                   Page 4 of 9
                           funded projects and will contribute to the Bank supported project, they us ed to be hilly dry earth
                           land and owned by the collective villages. The villagers received RMB 500 over than their losses
                           of crops yearly agreed by both of project entities and the community. The hilly land will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           leveled down and return to the villages without any charge after the civil work of the project.

                           For restructuring: The restructuring does not pose a substantial change in the overall project
                           safeguards risks nor in the original environmental categorization (Category B), nor does trigger a
                           new safeguard policy. It does not need any new or additional or supplemental safeguards
                           instrument. Environmental progress reports for the ongoing project were prepared by the PMO,
                           confirming that there are no significant outstanding environmental safeguard implementation
                           issues. Resettlement Monitoring Reports were prepared by the PMO with no significant
                           implementation issues reported, and will regularly update the resettlement progress and numbers
                           of PAPs throughout the project implementation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The investments in the urban roads and urban environment services in Xifeng District will
                           alleviate the traffic congestion, protect local water resources, improve public health, and atheistic
                           impact, and are also expected to have a positive impact on local economy development in the area.

                           The project has certain adverse impacts related to the land acquisition and structure demolition. In
                           some cases displaced persons viewed the housing demolition as an opportunity to improve their
                           living conditions significantly.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Technical alternatives were considered for the investment components during the feasibility
                           study and the EA to minimize environmental impacts. The EA and the feasibility study analyzed
                           alternatives for WWTP configuration (two small WWTPs vs one large WWTP), WWTP sites,
                           wastewater treatment technology, sludge treatment technology, road construction. The EA also
Public Disclosure Copy




                           includes the "without project" scenario.

                           The two bypass road designs and the selection of the waste water treatment plant and pump station
                           considered the alternatives to minimize the adverse impacts to the land acquisition and structure
                           demolition.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Environmental Safeguards. The client has engaged EA consultants-Lanzhou University to
                           prepare the Environmental Assessment (EA) report for all project components in accordance with
                           the Bank's requirements for OP.4.01 and Chinese EA regulations. The EA and EMP specified the
                           appropriate mitigation measures, environmental monitoring plans, institutional arrangements,
                           training and equipment requirements together with budget estimates for the implementation of the
                           mitigation measures and monitoring plans. The proposed mitigation measures are mainly
                           described below.

                           -       Soil Erosion. The EA includes an analysis of water and soil conservation in the project
                           area. The EMP specifies soil conservation measures for the construction activities. To minimize
                           the impacts of WWTP effluent discharged to a nearby gully, mitigation measures include: (a)
                           proper selection of discharge point with adequate facility(e.g. hydraulic drops) to dissipate the


                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                         effluent energy; and (b) control of water flow velocity along the gully by using physical and
                         vegetative methods to avoid or minimize soil erosion.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -        Sludge Disposal. 19.5 tons of dewatered sludge (moisture@60%) will be generated from
                         a new WWTP and an existing WWTP. The volume of excess sludge will be reduced significantly
                         by utilizing plate and frame filter press facilities. Sludge cake will be sent for disposal to a nearby
                         sanitary landfill which is equipped with lining and leachate collection and treatment facility.
                         Traffic impacts associated with the transport of dried sludge for off-site landfill disposal will be
                         minimized by restrictions on the times of day allowed for these activities.

                         -       Noise and Odor of the operation of the wastewater treatment plant and pumping stations
                         will be minimized by proper siting and by the provision of buffer zones and landscaping. The
                         odor impact will be minimized by a bio-filter system which is an integral part of the WWTP.

                         -       Noise Impact of the Improved Roads. The sensitive receptors have been identified. The
                         noise impact, after confirmed once the roads are put into operation, will be reduced to the
                         acceptable level by provision of acoustic barriers and noise insulation facilities.

                         -        Construction-related Impacts. Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOP) has been
                         prepared to address these general impacts (e.g. dust, spoil disposal, noise, wastewater, disturbance
                         to local communities). The mitigation measures for the construction phase will be included in
                         bidding documents and civil works contracts.

                         Physical Cultural Resources Impacts. Due to the road construction, 35 graves owned by local
                         farmers will be relocated. New sites for these graves have been selected and auspicious dates for
                         the relocation will be agreed in advance with project affected people. In addition, the road
                         construction will cause demolition of a farmer house (400m2) which is used as a church by the
                         Catholic Patriotic Association of the Xifeng District. To mitigate adverse impacts, the church will
                         be re-built in a site approximately two kilometers away from the existing one. The new site with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         an area of seven mu (equivalent to 4,669m2) has better access to the city road networks. An
                         auxiliary building will be installed first at the new site as a temporary place to maintain the
                         religious activities during the construction of the new church. Public consultation with affected
                         people (e.g. priest, farmersï❼❱and concerned parties (e.g. local Religious Affair Bureau) has been
                         conducted, and concerns about the proposed measures incorporated into the EMP.

                         Social safeguards. An experienced social safeguards consultant was contracted to guide and assist
                         Qingyang to prepare the resettlement action plan. The analysis of the alternatives was carried out
                         during the road designs and the site selection of the waste treatment plant and pump station so as
                         to minimize the impacts to the resettlement. Vulnerable groups to be affected by the project were
                         identified and specific resettlement policy will be provided. Land redistribution will be approached
                         to ensure that no any family will lose their farming land even land income only contributed less
                         20% of their family income. Medical insurance and pension programs will be provided for those
                         affected families. The analysis of family income generation presented in the draft RAP showed
                         that the displaced families will not reduce their family income.

                         Qingyang Municipality has established a Project Leading Group at the municipal level to oversee
                         and coordinate the preparation and implementation of the Project. This Leading Group is chaired
                         by a Vice Mayor with officials from a number of governmental agencies. In addition Qingyang
                         has established a project management office (PMO) with 14 full-time staff, including staff for

                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           safeguards management. For project preparation, Qingyang PMO has engaged a French consulti
                           ng firm with extensive experience in preparing Bank projects to prepare the consolidated
                           feasibility study report. The safeguarded documents such as EA and RAP reports have been
Public Disclosure Copy




                           prepared by the professional institutions with the required qualification and adequate experiences
                           on Bank projects in China. During project preparation, Qingyang PMO has received necessary
                           trainings on Bank safeguard polices and on-the-job training by working with the external
                           safeguards consultants. Its capacity to handle the safeguards compliance during project
                           preparation is deemed adequate. The PMO➢❨ s capacity will be further enhanced during the
                           project implementation stage by engaging the project management and supervision consultants.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Environmental Safeguards. In accordance with Bank Safeguard policies and Chinese regulations,
                           public consultations were conducted from June to October 2011, including public consultation
                           meetings and questionnaire survey, with project affected persons and other stakeholders. Their
                           opinions and concerns have been taken into account in the EA process and project design. The
                           full-sized EA and EMPs were disclosed in November 2011 via Xifeng district government website
                           and the PMO. The EA report was sent to the Bank InfoShop for disclosure on December 7, 2011.

                           Social Safeguards. Public consultations and participations were conducted from last November,
                           2010 to this November, 2011 and will continue until the completion of the project. The displaced
                           families are located in peri-urban area and most of the displaced families considered that the
                           resettlement relocation is an opportunity to improve their living and increase their family property
                           value. A specific public consultation was led by the project management office in the early
                           November, 2011, focusing on the housing relocation. Four mitigation measures were provided for
                           the consideration of the displaced families, such as; cash compensation, centralized resettlement
                           sites in three villages, multi-floor relocated apartments and high-building apartments in the center
                           of the city. The RAP was locally disclosed on December 2, 2011 via Xifeng district government
                           website.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               07-Dec-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                        28-Nov-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                  21-Nov-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                               12-Dec-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                        01-Dec-2011
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jens Christian Helbech Hede
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                          Date: 20-Jul-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
