                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR6308
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Dec-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kazakhstan                                   Project ID:           P090695
                            Project Name:      TECHNOLOGY COMMERCIALIZATION PROJECT (P090695)
                            Task Team          Karen Grigorian,Yeraly Beksultan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          26-Oct-2007                                  Estimated   15-Jan-2008
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTC10                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            General industry and trade sector (60%), Central government administration
                                               (20%), Tertiary education (20%)
                            Theme:             Other Private Sector Development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        75.00           Total Bank Financing:                                       13.40
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             61.60
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                13.40
                              Total                                                                                                75.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description


                                                                                Page 1 of 11
                         The Project will be implemented over a five year period and will have three components:

                         COMPONENT 1 - STRENGTHENING KAZAKHSTAN'S SCIENCE BASE
Public Disclosure Copy




                          With its ageing cadre of scientists and ageing stock of physical equipment, Kazakhstan?s existing
                         S&T base is depreciating rapidly, in most instances generating
                         revenues from past scientific achievements rather than new scientific breakthro
                         ughs. Immediate action is needed to stanch the decline, rebuild Kazakhstan's S&T
                         legacy, and put the S&T system on a more sustainable and modern path of renewal
                         so it can once again serve as a resource for economic growth and competitivenes
                         s.

                          Therefore, this component will finance: (i) the establishment of the International Science and
                         Commercialization Board (ISCB); (ii) the Senior Scientist & the J
                         unior Researcher Programs that will conduct world class research and (iii) an In
                         ternational Materials Science Center (IMSC) furnished with modern, up-to-date la
                         boratory equipment.

                         Sub component 1.1 ➢❨ International Science and Commercialization Board (ISCB)

                          1.      The ISCB will provide scientific and commercialization guidance related to the project,
                         including the selection of the Groups, monitoring of their scientific            progress and
                         achievements, and oversight of the operation of the IMSC. The ISCB                 will be comprised of 7
                         distinguished individuals, of whom 5 will be scientists           and 2 commercialization experts from
                         different parts of the world. The ISCB will            represent the fields of scientific and commercial
                         expertise that are of strateg        ic importance for Kazakhstan, from a large variety of
                         technologically-advanced c            ountries, including Europe, North America and Asia. In addition,
                         under this sub-          component, funding will be provided for the establishment of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         internationally-          peer reviewed journal.

                         Sub-Component 1.2 - Senior Scientist and Junior Researcher Programs (SSJRP)

                          2.       Grants for the Senior Scientist and Junior Researcher Programs will provide funding to
                         identify leading Kazakh scientists and talented young researchers moti
                         vated to conduct R&D at international standards. This sub-component will suppor
                         t 2 types of grant programs: (i) Senior Scientist Groups (SSGs) and (ii) Junior
                         Researcher Groups (JRGs). These Groups would be selected on the basis of the fol
                         lowing criteria: (i) their potential for conducting world class scientific resea
                         rch, i.e. scientific merit; (ii) relevance of their research for current or futu
                         re scientific, economic and industrial development of Kazakhstan, including the
                         possibility of forging research partnerships with local or foreign business firm
                         s; (iii) plans for mentoring graduate and undergraduate students and to provide
                         training fellowships aimed at nurturing the next generation of scientists; (iv)
                         their potential for and interest in conducting multidisciplinary research, and
                         (                                     v) their proposals for outreach activities to universities, secondary
                         schools, a                                      nd the general public.

                         3.      The grant programs➢❨ objectives will be achieved by financing the following activities:


                                                                        Page 2 of 11
                          ➢❨¢ Purchase and maintenance of modern laboratory and pilot plant equipment and facilities.
                          ➢❨¢ International cooperation scientific projects with research teams outside Kazakhstan.
                          ➢❨¢ Funding for doctoral students and post-doctoral scholars to conduct research with SSGs to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         encourage a younger generation of scientists to pursue scientific ca reers in areas supported by the
                         Groups.
                          ➢❨¢ Funding to attract visiting professors from outside Kazakhstan to teach and conduct research
                         at the Programs. These visiting professors could be either expatr                                  iate
                         Kazakh scientists currently living and working outside Kazakhstan or foreig
                         n scientists.
                          ➢❨¢ Organization of conferences and workshops in Kazakhstan and grants for Kazakhscientists to
                         attend international conferences and workshops outside Kazakhstan.

                          4.      Senior Scientist Group (SSG): Approximately ten Kazakh scientists of advanced standing
                         will form an SSG to perform research in one or more cutting-edge field
                         s. One senior scientist would lead each SSG as Scientific Director. Each SSG can
                         receive up to $500,000 per year for three years. The precise amount of funding
                         per SSG will vary based on scientific discipline and the nature of the research
                         proposal. Generally, resources will be commensurate with those allocated to anal
                         ogous groups in developed countries. The SSG proposals will be market-oriented a
                         nd internationally competitive scientifically. Relevant disciplines could includ
                         e new materials development, environmental remediation e.g. of the Caspian Sea,
                         renewable energy development, energy efficiency solutions, metallurgy, biotechno
                         logy, etc.

                          5.       Junior Researcher Group (JRG): A smaller group of promising young researchers displaying
                         the potential to graduate to senior scientist status will form a JRG                            .
                         The Research Director of each JRG will have recently received her/his postgrad
                         uate degree. Each JRG can receive up to $200,000 per year for three years. The e
Public Disclosure Copy




                         xact amount of resources will be defined based on the scientific field and activ
                         ities planned. The selection process will be similar to that of SSGs and the mer
                         it of the proposals is paramount.

                          6.      Call for Proposals (CFP): There will be 2 CFPs; the first round will be conducted just after
                         effectiveness and a second round will be organized during the pr
                         oject➢❨ s second year of operation. The second CFP will be adjusted based on the l
                         essons learned from the first round. Over the course of the project it is envisi
                         oned that up to 10 SSGs and 10 JRGs will be financed; with 5 SSGs and 5 JRGs fin
                         anced per CFP. Pending success of the programs, the Government may finance subs
                         equent programs with its own resources. Thus, the primary role of the Bank under
                         this subcomponent is to usher in a competitive selection mechanism to finance t
                         he initial Groups and facilitate their access to world class instrumentation to
                         conduct R&D.

                          7.      The Selection Mechanism will be based on the following principles:
                          1.      The competition will be open to scientists from all disciplines. There will not be any attempt
                         to pre-judge the eligible fields or to limit the competition t                                o
                         scientists from a select few disciplines.
                          2.      The CFP will specify the eligibility requirements and selection criteria.


                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                          3.      Scientists and researchers wishing to compete for funding will complete a short application.
                          4.      An International Science and Commercialization Board (ISCB) composed of eminent
                         international scientists and representatives from the business community will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         review the applications and rank them according to scientific merit and commerc
                         ial feasibility.
                          5.      The best proposals will then be invited to submit a much more detailed application.
                          6.      The ISCB will review detailed applications in consultation with at least three international
                         peer reviewers identified by them. The ISCB will create the shor                                   tlist
                         of 12 proposals per CFP.
                          8.      The MoES (with the assistance of the Project Management Unit) will select the 10 finalists
                         from among the 12 proposals short-listed by the ISCB. During this
                         last phase of the selection process, the PMU can take additional factors such as
                         strategic importance for Kazakhstan into consideration. Selection will be limit
                         ed to 10 out of 12 proposals certified by the ISCB as acceptable in terms of sci
                         entific excellence and commercial relevance.

                         Sub-component 1.3 - International Materials Science Center (IMSC)

                          8.      This component will finance the establishment of the International Materials Science Center.
                         The IMSC will be established in a building that will be purchas                               ed and
                         renovated to meet international standards for the project. Much of the l
                         aboratory equipment in Kazakhstan is either obsolete, worn out, or both. Most s
                         cientific instruments are obsolete and date to the 1960s or 1970s. The materia
                         l base for modern science simply does not exist in Kazakhstan today. Moreover, m
                         any of the existing laboratories in Kazakhstan do not comply with international
                         standards either for good laboratory practices or for waste management.

                          9.      The Groups will be procuring laboratory equipment specific to their own research. The
                         Government wants to avoid duplication and underutilization of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         equipment                                   . The Government also wants to avoid a situation in which
                         isolated pieces of mod                                   ern equipment are housed in third rate
                         laboratories. The Government wants to ens                                    ure that at least one
                         world-class modern instrumentation center exists with (i)                                    state-of-
                         the-art specialized scientific equipment and pilot plant facilities; (i                                i)
                         world class laboratory management practices; and (iii) world class standards
                         for environment protection and waste disposal.

                          10.      The real dilemma therefore, is not between geographic concentration and dispersion of
                         laboratory equipment, but between scattering new equipment in obsolete laboratories vs.
                         concentrating it in one, modern center where international sci entific experimental procedures,
                         facilities, and hazardous waste disposal practi ces will be observed. The existence of the
                         instrumentation center would, in tur n, serve as a model and benchmark for other Kazakh
                         laboratories. It is envisione d that a modern IMSC would foment the environment where scientists
                         can meet, net work and collaborate on cutting-edge ideas and in time help break down the rigid
                         disciplinary silos that currently characterize Kazakh science.

                          11.    An experienced international contractor will be selected through a competitive bidding
                         process to manage the IMSC, and be coupled with qualified Kazakh spec                ialist trainees.
                         Kazakh staff would work side-by-side with the foreign experts a             nd observe and

                                                                       Page 4 of 11
                         participate in IMSC procurement and maintenance activities. Once               sufficiently
                         experienced, Kazakh staff would assume full responsibility for man             aging the IMSC. The
                         IMSC will be authorized to enter into subcontracts with othe            r consulting firms to provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                         specialized services in order to maintain, service          , upgrade and provide training for the
                         use of IMSC equipment on a continuous bas               is.

                          12.     The precise list of equipment for the IMSC will be determined in consultation with the ISCB
                         following the review of the equipment requisitions submitted by                                      the
                         CFP finalists. Scientists from all SSGs and JRGs as well as from other labo ratories, research
                         centers, and universities would be eligible to use the IMSC f acilities, with priority given to Project
                         grantees. The IMSC would also be equip ped with access to up-to-date electronic scientific journals
                         and modern informat ion and communication technologies.

                         COMPONENT 2 - LINKING KAZAKH SCIENCE TO MARKETS

                          Even if Kazakhstan improves the quality and relevance of its scientific output, the Groups will not
                         generate the expected economic benefits unless they are conn                           ected to
                         domestic and global technology markets. Unfortunately, too many Kazakh
                         research institutes, universities and even some high tech enterprises operate l
                         argely in a ?commercial vacuum.? They do not know how to find investors, find c
                         ustomers, or determine whether they are selling an invention embodied in a concr
                         ete product or their capacity to solve complex technical problems and conduct hi
                         gh quality research in response to orders from domestic and international custom
                         ers.

                          Many Kazakh scientists mistakenly believe that Kazakhstan has a large stock of inventions that can
                         be easily commercialized, especially if venture capitalists c an be induced to invest in the country.
                         Unfortunately, most Kazakh scientists, like most scientists around the world, do not know how to
                         commercialize their in ventions nor do they have the connections to global markets and venture
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capitali sts that would be needed to mount a successful commercialization effort. Last b ut not least,
                         Kazakhstan does not have the necessary commercialization instituti ons that can assist early stage
                         entrepreneurs and scientists. To be sure, many individual pieces such as techno parks and incubators,
                         and numerous innovation s upport institutions are present in one form or another, but they neither
                         operate efficiently nor act as a coherent, effective system. As long as this piece of the status quo
                         remains unchanged, Kazakhstan will never realize its full technology commercialization potential.
                         Therefore, the objective of this component is t                                  o provide the expertise
                         required to link Kazakh science more closely to domestic and international markets.

                          A Technology Commercialization Contractor (TCC) will be employed to establish and manage all
                         the activities envisioned under this component. (See chart below).
                         However, from the beginning the foreign contractor?s experts will train Kazakh
                         staff hired by the PMU to manage and operate the technology commercialization ac
                         tivities, and administer all four sub-components. In order to replace foreign st
                         aff within a reasonable period of time Kazakh staff will go through comprehensiv
                         e on-the-job training and will work in close partnership and proximity with the
                         foreign expert staff. The office of the TCO will be based in the same building
                         as the IMSC.

                         Sub-component 2.1 - Technology Commercialization Office

                                                                      Page 5 of 11
                          This sub-component will finance the activities of a pilot Technology Commercialization Office
                         (TCO) that would provide a wide range of complementary technology
Public Disclosure Copy




                         commercialization services. The TCO will be staffed with an international contra                ctor
                         and Kazakh specialists selected on a competitive basis who will receive on-               the-job
                         training from the TCC. The TCO will work initially with the Groups estab                lished under
                         the auspices of Component 1. Later, the office will expand to work                with other research
                         institutes and universities, and additional commercializati            on offices could be formed if
                         demand grows.

                         Sub-component 2.2 - Technology Audit & Forecasting

                          The goal of this sub-component is to identify, structure, and create access to and for Kazakhstan?s
                         national scientific competences and predict its capacity to                                 join the
                         forefront of global scientific research trends. It will entail identif
                         ication of:
                          -scientific capabilities in univer sities and research institutes,
                          -inventions and technologies available in universities and industries,
                          -technology capabilities within and demand from industry,
                          -capacity for change, including attitudes of research managers and champions.

                          A knowledge map database will be created and maintained by conducting regular follow-up
                         technology audits. A web-based portal will network companies, industria
                         l research centers, universities, science parks, and other generators of knowled
                         ge with the firms and industrial partners that demand this knowledge and technol
                         ogical know-how.

                         Sub-component 2.3 - Policy, Legal and Regulatory Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Improving the quality of research will not generate economic benefits for Kazakhstan if the legal
                         and regulatory environment impedes technology commercializatio                                      n
                         and innovation. Unfortunately, many existing government policies, laws, rules,
                         and regulations inherited from Soviet times do, in fact, impede achievement of
                         these objectives. Therefore, this sub-component would provide TA and advisory s ervices to review
                         existing laws, rules and regulations and highlight those that are at variance with OECD best practice.
                         The review would cover such item as int er alia, the legal and regulatory framework for industrial
                         innovation and S&T, R &D financing, technology commercialization, protecting intellectual property
                         gen erated by scientists working in Kazakh research institutes, universities and pri vate research
                         laboratories, quality, standards, metrology, and incentives for te chnology adoption by industry. The
                         PMU will be responsible for identifying international expert consultants and implementing this sub-
                         component.

                         Sub-component 2.4 - Design and Implementation of Grant Programs

                          This sub-component will provide technical assistance to the PMU to design and administer the
                         following PMU-financed grant programs:
                          -Pre-Commercialization Grant Program. The objective of the pre-commercialization grants is to
                         determine the commercial feasibility of ideas and to convert resea rch into commercial applications.
                         The program will provide grant financing to en able scientists to demonstrate the technical feasibility

                                                                      Page 6 of 11
                         of their laboratory dis coveries and also to enable them to develop a business plan and detailed
                         marketi ng strategy. The grants will be awarded in three phases to support: (i) developm ent of a
                         commercially-interesting scientific idea at a concept stage, (ii) inves tigation of the feasibility of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         idea, and proof of concept, and (iii) full R& D and prototype development. The grants will be
                         awarded on a competitive basis t o small businesses engaged in R&D, and also partnerships between
                         small businesse s and research entities such as research institutes and universities. Grant appl ications
                         will be peer reviewed by Kazakh and international experts in the area o f science and technology
                         related to the proposal.
                          -Joint Research with Industry. The purpose of this grant program is to promote joint research with
                         both domestic and foreign industry. Kazakhstan?s research ins           titutes and universities need help
                         in obtaining contracts for joint research wit        h industry, outsourced corporate R&D, and new
                         product development. This program             would provide grants to research consortia from
                         universities, research institute       s, and private industrial companies undertaking collaborative
                         R&D, and research          training, in areas of importance to Kazakh industrial development. The
                         private i       ndustry and public sector agencies involved in the consortia will be required to
                         make in-kind and cash commitments to support these cooperative activities.
                          -Joint Research with International Research Partners. Kazakhstan?s research institutes and
                         universities need help in establishing partnerships and obtaining con                           tracts for
                         cooperative research with international partners. The foreign partic                           ipant
                         would generally be expected to fund all their own expenses. Kazakh institu
                         tions generally do not have the funds to finance their share of the joint resear                           ch
                         project. The joint research grant program would be used to defray these costs                              .
                         The technology commercialization contractor will assist the PMU to develop cle
                         ar, transparent eligibility criteria and systems to ensure accountability for th                         e
                         use of funds. This program will have a simplified selection process, since the
                         fact that a legitimate foreign partner is financing a portion of the project co                         st
                         will provide some sort of de facto quality control.
                          -International patenting. The objective of this grant program is to help defray the cost of patenting
                         inventions with commercial potential in North America, the                                       EU, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Asia. For the pilot phase of this program, grant applications would be
                         restricted to inventions generated by SSGs and JRGs, proposals supported by the
                         pre-commercialization grant program, and proposals generated by projects support
                         ed by TCO. Protection in high growth markets of the IP underpinning successfully
                         commercialized Kazakh inventions is essential if global markets are to be acces
                         sed by Kazakh technology-based companies and research institutes, with sales of
                         resulting products in these markets.
                          -Industrial Internships for Scientists. The purpose of this grant program is to help Kazakh scientists
                         obtain economically relevant, first hand, on-the-job expe                             rience in how
                         companies convert research into new products and services. They w                                  ould
                         obtain this experience by working for a short period of time alongside expe
                         rienced industrial scientists in foreign company research laboratories. Most imp
                         ortantly, the program would help scientists develop professional contacts with i
                         ndustrial research laboratories. Experience shows such relationships are the mos
                         t effective and fruitful source of technology commercialization deals.

                         COMPONENT 3 - PROJECT MANAGEMENT UNIT

                          The project will fund the building that will house the IMSC, TCO and the office of the PMU. In
                         addition, the project will finance the salaries of PMU staff, op                            erating

                                                                        Page 7 of 11
                           costs and any consultants required to supplement the PMU staff to succes
                           sfully implement the project.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will support various forms of technical assistance and some R&D activities that will
                           mostly be concentrated in Almaty and Astana. The project will f
                           inance the rehabilitation of an existing building to accommodate (i) state-of-th
                           e-art laboratories as part of an International Material Science Center, (ii) a T
                           echnology Commercialization Office, and (iii) the office of the PMU.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Agnes I. Kiss (OPSPF)
                           Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project will purchase a building and refurbish it to house the International Materials Science
                              Center, the Technology Commercialization Office and the Proje                                      ct
                              Management Unit. This project has been classified as environmental assessment
                              category B according to the World Bank policy OP/BP 4.01 since minor environmen
                              tal impacts are anticipated in relation to small scale civil works for the rehab
                              ilitation of such building. These possible potential environmental impacts are e
                              xpected to be localized and able to be mitigated during the implementation


                                                                         Page 8 of 11
                           stage                                . Other possible environmental issues associated with the
                           project are related to                                the laboratory safety and safe disposal of
                           wastes once the new laboratories wil                                  l start their operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Environmental effects of the project, if any will be minor and short-term. Identified
                           environmental impacts will relate principally to civil works during the pr
                           oposed rehabilitation activities including impacts at the respective building si
                           te resulting from: (i) noise, dust, and the re-direction of traffic, if necessar
                           y, during the execution of works; (ii) the quarrying of stone and gravel; (iii)
                           removal of construction related waste materials; and (iv) alteration of drainage
                           and potential soil erosion during the construction period. However, these poss
                           ible impacts could be managed through supervision of environmental aspects and u
                           se of adequate technical construction standards. An EMP checklist that covers ty
                           pical mitigation approaches to common civil works contracts with localized impac
                           ts and related monitoring actions that are compatible to the Bank safeguard requ irements would
                           be directly usable and applicable in bidding documents and as an integral part of contract
                           documents for the respective civil works.

                            In accordance with World Bank procedures and requirements, an Environmental Management
                           Plan was prepared by the Ministry of Economy and Science (MoES) in order                        to
                           integrate environmental concerns into the design and implementation of the pr                    oposed
                           Project. The public consultation of the EMP took place in Almaty in March                      2006. It
                           was since revised and has been publicly disclosed on the MoES website                      in Almaty on
                           November 5, 2007 and at the infoshop in Washington on November 15,                        2007. The
                           policy on OP/BP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resource is not triggered b                    y the project,
                           but the EMP will include measures to address any chance finds.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Discussions with the Borrower have identified their interest in using Bank funds for upgrading
                           laboratories and research facilities. Consequently, there could                                      be
                           resulting environmental implications regarding waste management once the labo
                           ratories start their operation. However, a research and laboratory safety expert
                           from the Howard Hughes Institute of Biomedical Research in Bethesda, Maryland c
                           reated an-in depth digest of international best practice standards for laborator
                           y safety and waste disposal. These standards cover all classes of physical, chem
                           ical, biological, and radioactive hazards. They discuss procurement and transpo
                           rt, storage, protocols and facilities for use in research, training of
                           personnel                                     , segregation of waste types, and disposal of wastes. The
                           standards also describ                                     e core processes for establishing functioning
                           environmental management systems w ithin laboratories, including development of training for
                           personnel, designation of responsibility for environmental management, performance of needs
                           assessment                           and waste stream assessment, installation and maintenance of
                           appropriate equipm                           ent, treatment processes, and safe transport. These best
                           practice standards wer                          e incorporated into the Kazakh EMP so that they
                           would serve as the environmental                             standards and procedures that will be
                           employed by scientists working in the Gra                            nts Programs supported under
                           Component 1.2 and the International Materials Scien                            ce Center supported
                           under Component 1.3.


                                                                       Page 9 of 11
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The idea of constructing a new building was considered and discarded.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Borrower has already prepared an EMP for the proposed rehabilitation works and anticipated
                           environmental risks related to the waste generated by the new lab
                           oratories; this EMP provides environmental guidelines and outlines appropriate m
                           itigation and monitoring measures during the proposed activities. The MoES will
                           be responsible for the implementation of the proposed Project. The PMU created w
                           ithin MoES will be responsible for the EMP implementation. The draft EMP has bee
                           n disclosed on the MoES website on November 5, 2007 and in Washington on Novembe
                           r 15, 2007.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the MoES, researchers, scientists, and those benefiting from the
                           formation of the IMSC and the TCO.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     00000000
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  00000000
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive     00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies


                                                                   Page 10 of 11
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Karen Grigorian,Yeraly Beksultan
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                             Date: 28-Dec-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Irine Kokaia (PMGR)                           Date: 29-Dec-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
