INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13857
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Mar-2015, 04-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Vietnam                    Project ID:  P150058
Project Name: Renovation of General Education Project (P150058)
Task Team       Michael F. Crawford
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Apr-2015                Estimated    30-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General education sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (50%), Education for all (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      77.00            Total Bank Financing:   77.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                77.00
Total                                                                      77.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to raise student learning outcomes by: (i) revising and
implementing the curriculum following a competency-based approach; and (ii) improving the
effectiveness of instruction by creating and disseminating textbooks aligned with the revised
curriculum.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 9


﻿Component 1: Curriculum Development (US$17.5 million). This component will support the
development and implementation of a revised curriculum that is competency-based for all school
subjects from grades 1 - 12. More specifically, this component seeks to: (i) develop and pilot a
revised curriculum that aims to promote students' acquisition of both competencies and content
knowledge; (ii) deliver online and face-to-face training to educators and administrators on
implementing the new curriculum; and (iii) draft materials to guide publishers on developing
appropriately aligned textbooks and other pedagogical materials. This work will primarily be
undertaken by the Core Technical Committee (CTC) and the Subject-Specific Technical Committees
*         (SSTCs), who will ensure that the new curriculum exhibits coherence, rigor, and focus.
Subcomponent 1.1: Curriculum Development. This subcomponent will support the creation and work
of a Core Technical Committee (CTC) for curriculum revision plus up to eleven Subject Specific
Technical Committees (SSTCs). The CTC will be composed of the chairpersons of each SSTC. The
CTC will carry out the main curriculum revision, with the technical "legwork" conducted in each of
the SSTCs. The work of the CTC will ensure that the curriculum is coherent and coordinated across
subjects and years. Outputs of the work of the CTC and the SSTCs will be, inter alia: (i)
comprehensive micro-level reviews of Vietnam's existing curriculum; (ii) partial and selective
reviews of other countries' successful "general curricula" (including their definitions of key terms,
desired characteristics of graduates, selection of specific subjects, and basic first-order time
allocations); (iii) draft SSC; (iv) indicative menus of pedagogical approaches and learning resources
aligned with the new curriculum; and (v) guidance for the development and evaluation of textbooks
and other pedagogical materials.
Subcomponent 1.2: Curriculum Implementation. Once the curriculum has been developed, this
Project will support several ancillary activities to ensure that the curriculum is implemented
appropriately. Such activities include: (i) curriculum piloting; (ii) delivery of face-to-face and online
training to teachers and Curriculum Champions who can act as peer coaches for fellow teachers as
they seek to understand and implement the new curriculum; and (iii) development of guidance
materials for publishers of textbooks and other pedagogical materials that are aligned with the
O
Learning Outcome Standards for the new curriculum.
Component 2: Development and Dissemination of Aligned Textbooks (US$21.6 million). This
component will support the development a set of textbooks aligned with the new curriculum and the
provision of aligned textbooks to schools with high numbers of economically-disadvantaged
students.
Subcomponent 2.1: Development of Textbooks Aligned with the New Curriculum. After the new
curriculum has been completed and officially adopted by MOET, the CTC and the SSTCs will be
"converted" into mechanisms to develop a set of textbooks aligned with the new Learning outcome
standards. The CTC and its members will migrate to the role of "appraisers" of textbooks while the
SSTCs will add editors and textbook writers to the subject-specific expertise embodied in the SSTC
membership. The enhanced SSTC committee will work under a management structure of subject
specific editors and a general editor. The CTC will review and appraise the extent to which texts
align with the new curriculum and are therefore suitable for classroom use and official adoption by
MOET. The CTC's recommendations on textbook alignment will be transmitted to the Steering
Committee, who will make final decisions on the authorization of textbooks. This structure will
preserve the institutional memory and knowledge of the nature of the new curriculum, and guide the
development of aligned texts.
Page 2 of 9


﻿This sub-component will also seek to translate a selection of textbooks into ethnic minority bilingual
textbooks. The textbooks will be printed and disseminated to ethnic minority learners who are also
economically disadvantaged. The subjects and languages chosen for translation will be selected
O
under the Project in close consultation with ethnic minority leaders and communities.
Subcomponent 2.2: Provision of Textbooks to Disadvantaged Schools. Under this subcomponent, the
Project will provide sets of textbooks to schools whose students are most economically-
disadvantaged. A survey will be conducted to assess the level of need in different geographic areas
and among schools. Based on survey results, the books will be distributed to libraries of schools at
the bottom 10 percent based on household income. The books will be on loan for students for the
duration of the academic year.
Component 3: Learning Assessment and Analysis for Continuous Improvement of Curriculum and
Policy (US$35.4 million). In order to ensure that learning outcomes are measured and analyzed for
continuous improvement of curriculum and policy, this component will support: (i) the establishment
of the National Centre for Sustainable Development of General Education (NCSDGEQ) and the
National Center for Foreign Language Testing (NCFLT); (ii) research and capacity-building in
curriculum development and assessment for the Centers' staff and relevant officials; (iii) expansion
of the National Large-Scale Assessment system (NLSAS); and (iv) consultations/outreach
campaigns. A significant focus of this component will be to understand better and narrow the
learning achievement gaps that exist within the Vietnamese public education system.
Subcomponent 3.1: Establishment of the NCSDGEQ and the NCFLT. To facilitate the research and
measurement activities, this Project will support the construction of up to a total of six sites for the
NCSDGEQ and the NCFLT. The NCSDGEQ will be staffed by full-time staff and individuals
seconded from agencies such as the Vietnam Institute of Educational Science (VNIES) and General
Department of Education Testing and Accreditation (GDETA), inter alia. It will also house "visiting
researchers" from the university sector. The purpose of the NCSDGEQ will be to advance research in
several areas related to curriculum, assessment, learning, and the educational policies that affect
these. Moreover, as improved foreign language skills have been identified as a national priority, the
NCFLT will be become a leading center for research and training aimed at improving the teaching
and learning of foreign languages.
Subcomponent 3.2: Research and Capacity-Building on Curriculum Development and Assessment.
The educational elements in a curriculum require continuous review and, in many cases, adjustment.
The process of continuous improvement enhances the effectiveness of the curriculum and promotes
more and better learning. Goals for reading and literacy skills, and learning outcomes for early
readers, for instance, should be reviewed and perfected on an on-going basis. Research advances
various domains related to education need to be understood, and, where relevant, appropriately
incorporated into the pedagogy or learning outcomes standards. While formal revision of the
curriculum and its Learning Outcome Standards usually takes place about once every ten years,
review of the curriculum in light of emerging research is an on-going process. This subcomponent
will sponsor research programs in several areas related to the new curriculum and the Learning
Outcome Standards. This research will be carried out by a National Centre for Sustainable
Development of General Education Quality, which is expected to continue to function after the
Project ends.
Subcomponent 3.3: Expansion of the National Large-scale Assessment System. This subcomponent
Page 3 of 9


﻿will improve the coverage, technical quality, alignment, validity, and reliability of the national
assessment system. More specifically, it will support: (i) integration of curricula and assessment; (ii)
closer alignment of assessment with learning goals; (iii) training for educators and administrators at
various levels of the system to design and implement assessments and analyze and report the results;
U         and (iv) creation of specialized expertise within MOET about continuously improving large-scale
assessment capacity. In addition, this sub-component will finance the implementation of two rounds
of learning assessment in each of the education levels (Primary, Lower, and Upper Secondary) that
are of the desired level of quality and incorporate the assessment of core competencies.
Subcomponent 3.4: Consultation and Outreach Campaign. This subcomponent will develop and
implement a Consultation and Outreach campaign to promote the public's awareness of the reform
and to instill public trust in the transparency and meritocracy of the reform process. The key
messages of the reform will be delivered through several forms of media, such as print, television,
word-of-mouth and social media. The primary source of information, however, will be the MOET
website devoted to explaining the reform to the public.
Component 4: Project Management (US$2.5 million). This component combines Project
Management with Monitoring and Evaluations (M&E).
Subcomponent 4.1: Project Management. This subcomponent will finance the incremental costs
associated with project management, including activities designed to ensure efficient program
management and early identification of corrective measures to solve any implementation challenges.
Subcomponent 4.2: Monitoring and Evaluation. This subcomponent supports the development and
implementation of Project M&E in order to ensure that the determined indicators are achieved and to
continuously identify areas of the Project that can be improved.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This Project finances critical technical assistance that is, intellectual inputs into the curricular and
assessment design processes, which will be implemented nation-wide.
In addition, the Project will assist the development of a NCSDEGEQ (main office located in Hanoi
and two other facilities located in two regions) and NCFLT. The exact locations of the main centers
and their satellites are still not yet determined, however, it is expected that these will be set within the
current premises of MOET and MOET's universities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Khang Van Pham (GENDR)
Nghi Quy Nguyen (GSURR)
Thuy Cam Duong (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The policy is triggered due to the potential environmental
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               and social impacts associated with project activities. The
project is classified as an Environmental Assessment
category B. To meet the requirement, an ESMF has been
prepared in line with the Bank's safeguard policy on
Page 4 of 9


﻿Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01).
This Project finances critical technical assistance that is,
intellectual inputs into the curricular and assessment
design processes. There is a possibility that vulnerable
and other marginalized groups would be impacted by the
revised curriculum and improved national assessment
system. A project wide social assessment is required to
provide a better understanding of the social environmental
and broader social impacts, in respect to the proposed
activities.
In addition, under the component 3, the project will
support the development of a National Center for
Sustainable Development of General Education Quality
(main office located in Hanoi and two other facilities
located in two regions) and a National Center for Foreign
Languages Testing (the center is expected to be located in
Hanoi). The two main centers with their satellites will be
newly constructed. It is expected that the newly
constructed buildings for the center purpose will be set
within the current premises of MOET and MOET's
universities; however their exact locations will be
finalized during implementation.
The project will cause potential localized and short-term
environmental impacts relating generation of noise, dust
and waste, traffic and social disturbance associated with
construction/renovation activities. At the operation stage,
the environmental concerns are related to the generation
of solid waste and wastewater during the operation of
centers.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No            The project will not have any adverse impacts on natural
4.04                                  habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No            The project will not finance activities that would involve
significant conversion or degradation of critical forest
areas or related critical natural habitats as defined under
this policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The policy is not triggered since the project (a) will not
procure any pesticides, nor (b) will the use of pesticides
increase as a result of the project.
Physical Cultural        No            It is highly unlikely that the construction of two new
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  buildings in the existing premises of MOET and MOET's
universities will have any impact on any archeological,
paleontological, historical, religious, or unique natural
values.
The ESMF has, however, included standardized ECOP
with provisions for chance-find procedures, which will be
Page 5 of 9


﻿incorporated into relevant construction contracts to ensure
that in case such physical or cultural assets are identified,
appropriate measures will be taken.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes        The project will be implemented nationwide, including
BP 4.10                             locations where there is intensive presence of indigenous
people (known as ethnic minority people in Vietnam)
such as Northern Mountain, Central Highland, Mekong
Delta regions. Although it is expected that the project has
no adverse impact on ethnic minority communities, it is
important that the new curriculum and pedagogical
materials will portray ethnic minority peoples and their
heritage in a respectful and positive manner. The
proposed Project constitutes a significant opportunity to
ensure that Vietnamese public schools handle ethnic
minority people curriculum and assessment's issues fairly.
An Ethnic Minority Development Plan was prepared in
line with the Bank's safeguard policy on Indigenous
Peoples.
Involuntary Resettlement No         The policy is not triggered as there is no land acquisition
OP/BP 4.12                          as part of the civil works being financed by the project.
The construction of the two new buildings will be on
existing MOET's premises or those of MOET's
universities which they have land ownership. The ESMF
has incorporated procedures to ensure that these lands are
free of any legacy issues.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                of any dams.
Projects on International  No       There are no known project activities involving
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No          The project is not located in any known areas under
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    territorial dispute. It will take place throughout
Vietnamese national territory, but it has neither a physical
location within.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment)
Although, the project will support development of education infrastructure through construction
and rehabilitation of learning centers located in Hanoi and other regions, impacts associated with
civil works are assessed to be small, localized, temporary and can be mitigated. Typical
environmental and social impacts related to civil works include generation of noise, dust, wastes,
traffic and social disturbance. During operation, the environmental impacts are mostly related to
the generation of solid waste and wastewater from operation of centers, but these impacts are
however minor.
Page 6 of 9


﻿Indigenous People. Overall, the project will have overall positive social impacts as mentioned in
project development objectives. Although it is expected that the project has no adverse impact on
ethnic minority communities, the failure to take into account specific characteristics of
O
disadvantaged groups (including ethnic minority people) in the curriculum and pedagogical
materials may prevent them from fully accessing the project's benefits. The findings of Social
Assessment (SA) also confirm that it is important that the new curriculum and pedagogical
materials will portray ethnic minority peoples (among other disadvantaged groups) and their
heritage in a respectful and positive manner.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No potential and/or long-term adverse environmental impacts due to anticipated future activities in
the project area are foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
None.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
OP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment)
An Environmental and Social Framework (ESMF) has been developed by the Client during
preparation to ensure that activities during implementation and operation shall be in compliance
with the World Bank environmental safeguard policies and national environmental protection law.
The ESMF has set out the principles, rules, guidelines and procedures to assess the environmental
and social impacts. It contains measures and plans to reduce, mitigate and/or offset adverse
impacts and enhance positive impacts, provisions for estimating and budgeting the costs of such
measures, and information on the agency or agencies responsible for addressing project impacts.
As such, the ESMF has included (i) safeguard screening process to ensure that any activities which
would cause significant environmental impacts are not supported under the project and (ii)
standardized ECOP describing environmental measures and clauses for mitigating generic
environmental and social impacts associated with small rehabilitation and construction activities.
The ECOP will be incorporated into bidding documents and relevant renovation/construction
contracts to ensure that contractors understand and strictly follow. The ESMF has also included
measures to manage wastes generated during operation of centers. On the other hand, in order to
satisfy the GoV requirements, MOET will have to prepare Environmental Management Plans
(EMPs) for specific rehabilitation and construction activities in line with the ESMF.
OP 4.10 Indigenous People
The MOET has conducted a social assessment to: (i) identify and characterize key stakeholders
influencing the project objectives and implementation; (ii) identify potential barriers for ethnic
minority communities to maximize the project benefits and services; and (iii) to document the
'broad community support' toward the project's activities and define the processes for ensuring the
consultation and participation of these stakeholders (especially ethic minority communities) in
project design, implementation, and monitoring and feedback. The findings of social assessment
have been translated into a bias-avoidance framework in which an Ethnic Minority Development
Plan (EMDP) will be included in order to: (i) ensure that the ethnic minority peoples receive social
and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate; (ii) avoid potentially adverse effects on the
Page 7 of 9


﻿ethnic minority communities; and (c) minimize, mitigate, or compensate for such effects.
Borrower Capacity
MOET has managed and implemented Bank-financed education projects since 1990 so MOET is
O
familiar with the World Bank policy requirements including environmental and social safeguard
policies. However, it is necessary to provide safeguard training to staff of MOET to update them
on the Bank safeguard policies.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders of the project include: (i) MOET; (ii) teachers and students at primary, lower
and upper secondary schools; and (iii) locally-affected people.
During the preparation of safeguard instruments (ESMF,EMDP), the consultation with key
responsible persons at MOET and other ethnic minority representative agencies has been
conducted and their views have been taken into account. During project implementation,
consultation with locally-affected people and local NGOs will be conducted by MOET during
preparation of EPPs for specific rehabilitation and construction activities.
The draft safeguard instruments (ESMF, EMDP) in Vietnamese language were disclosed locally
through MOET's websites, project offices and Vietnam Development Information Center (VDIC).
The English versions have been disclosed at the Bank's InfoShop prior to appraisal. EMPs
prepared during project implementation will be disclosed locally at commune offices.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
O
o          Vietnam                                                 31-Oct-2014
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Nov-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                  14-Nov-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Page 8 of 9


﻿OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
O
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michael F. Crawford
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Prateek Tandon (PMGR)                Date: 04-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


