                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA17332
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Feb-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Kenya                             Project ID:   P151831
                            Project Name:     Kenya Youth Employment and Opportunities (P151831)
                            Task Team         Cornelia M. Tesliuc
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         25-Jan-2016               Estimated     19-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSP01                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       150.00           Total Bank Financing:    150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             150.00
                              Total                                                                                   150.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase employment and earnings
                           opportunities for targeted youths.
                            3. Project Description
                           1. The Project consists of four components: (i) Improving Youth Employability; (ii) Support for Job
                           Creation; (iii) Improving labour market information system; and (iv) Strengthening Youth Policy
                           Development and Project Management. The fourth component will also support the establishing of a
                           Project Coordination Unit (PCU).


                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         Component 1: Improving youth employability (US$75 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. This component responds to Kenyan employers who assert that youth who come out of schools
                         and training centers frequently lack the relevant work experience and competencies, including
                         behavioral skills, needed for employment. The component will scale up the pilot KYEP providing
                         targeted youth with training and work experience in the private sector with the goal of improving
                         youth employment outcomes. The component will be jointly implemented by the MPSYGA and
                         NITA and it contains two subcomponents:

                         a) Sub-component 1.1: Provision of training and work experience in the formal sector (US$37.7
                         million). This subcomponent will provide targeted beneficiaries with three months of training and
                         three months of internship experience with a formal sector employer. The training will cover life
                         skills, core business skills, and technical skills. The MPSYGA will enter into a national contract with
                         a number of providers for delivery of life skills and core business skills using a standard curriculum.
                         Following completion of the life skills and core business skills training, NITA will organize further
                         technical training that will include an internship. The technical training will be offered by public and
                         private formal training institutions accredited by NITA, the Technical Vocational Training Authority,
                         or other recognized accreditation agencies under a results-based contract . These training providers
                         will partner with employers and provide skills training demanded by the employer. This and the
                         following subcomponent will include support for NITA capacity building and program management
                         by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU).

                         b) Sub-component 1.2: Provision of training and work experience in the informal sector (US$37.3
                         million). This subcomponent will be especially suitable to vulnerable youth with limited education
                         and youth in rural areas. Its duration and training approach will be the same as that in the formal
                         sector with targeted youth receiving the same life and core business skills training organized by the
                         MPSYGA. Technical training, however, will be offered on the job by a master craftsman in a
                         traditional apprenticeship. NITA will contract with master craftsmen to deliver this training and an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         internship. Master craftsmen will be certified by NITA. To improve the quality of the training
                         offered by master craftsmen and the recognition of this training in the marketplace, the
                         subcomponent will support the (i) upgrading of master craftsmen skills and (ii) development and
                         updating of NITA certification standards for traditional apprenticeship trades. NITA will implement
                         this activity.

                         Component 2: Support for Job Creation (US$41.5 million).

                         3. This component will address key constraints and market failures that limit the demand for youth
                         employment and hamper youth productivity, once they are employed.This component is structured
                         into two subcomponents, jointly implemented by the MPSYGA and the Micro and Small Enterprise
                         Authority (MSEA)

                         a) Sub-component 2.1: Support for the self-employed. This subcomponent supports employment and
                         earnings generation among urban and rural youth by financing: (i) business start-up grants; and (ii)
                         relevant BDS.

                         b) Sub-component 2.2. Catalytic interventions for job creation. This subcomponent supports
                         innovative interventions to create jobs for targeted youths by financing (i) a business plan
                         competition for high-potential job creators and (ii) an innovation challenge to identify high-impact

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         interventions for creating economic opportunities for the hard-to-serve and fund them to scale.

                         Component 3: Labour Market Information System (LMIS) (US$13.5 million).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. This component responds to the problem of obtaining timely information about labor demand and
                         supply as well as career prospects in Kenya. LMI helps private and public actors in the labor market
                         make decisions and formulate policies. This component will provide support the development of a
                         one-stop-shop for access to LMI by strengthening Kenya’s Labor Market Information System
                         (LMIS) with its survey and administrative data sources through the following activities: (a)
                         identification of LMIS users and their information needs; (b) production of LMIS content; and (c)
                         dissemination of LMI content and creation of awareness. It will be implemented by the MLEA
                         through its Department of National Human Resource Planning and Development (DNHRP&D).

                         Component 4: Strengthening Youth Policy Development and Project Management (US$ 20 million).

                         5. This component will support capacity building for the DoYA of MPSYGA and the management
                         and coordination of the overall project. It includes three subcomponents: (a) building youth
                         employment policy development and coordination capabilities; (b) M&E of youth employment
                         policies and funds; and (c) project management and coordination. The overall implementation,
                         coordination, and progress reporting of the activities under this component will be assigned to a
                         Project Coordination Unit (PCU) to be established within the Directorate of Youth Affairs

                         a) Sub component 4.1: Building Youth Employment Policy development capabilities: This
                         subcomponent will finance activities aimed at building the Directorate of Youth Affairs’ capacity to
                         better review current policies and conceptualize, develop, and coordinate new policies and strategies,
                         including the proposed NYES and the National Youth Internship Policy. The component will also
                         finance training key officers in communications, advocacy, and lobbying, equipping them to manage
                         the consultations and validation processes that are key to building policy ownership.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b) Sub-component 4.2: Building capacity for monitoring and evaluation of youth employment
                         policies and programs:

                         This subcomponent will finance capacity-building activities for program evaluation in the
                         Directorate of Youth Affairs to improve its ability to plan for, evaluate, and disseminate the impacts
                         and cost-effectiveness of youth employment policies and programs and generate a more solid
                         evidence base for decision making. This will focus on: (i) Capacity Building for monitoring and
                         evaluation, which will include training and other activities to build officers capabilities to design and
                         undertake M&E activities and contract management (ii) Conducting evaluations of youth
                         employment programs, including (a) a design and implementation evaluation of selected government
                         youth funds and (b) an impact evaluation of at least two of the key interventions supporting job
                         creation under Component 2 of this Project, namely: (i) the targeted start-up grant and business
                         development services; and (ii) the business plan competition for high-potential job creators.

                         c) Sub component 4.3: The MPSYGA will be responsible for the overall project management of the
                         KYEOP. Given the complexity of the project, with different IAs for each component, there is a need
                         to establish a PCU. The unit will be fully integrated into the Directorate of Youth Affairs with its
                         director serving as the national project coordinator (NPC). Day-to-day management and
                         implementation of each activity will remain with the corresponding IA. The PCU will coordinate the
                         activities of these agencies and take responsibility for (i) project management and (ii) managing the

                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         process of intake, awareness-raising on government funds and AGPO, and channelling of eligible
                         project beneficiaries to appropriate services. An important function for the PCU will be to design and
                         implement a complaints and grievance system that will allow potential beneficiaries, the wider
Public Disclosure Copy




                         public, and other stakeholders to raise grievances related to the intake process or the overall
                         administration of the project. The system will enable the PCU to record and address arising
                         complaints and grievances. The complaints system should be linked to the project MIS to ensure
                         proper recording and tracking of complaints received, referred, and resolved.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gibwa A. Kajubi (GSU07)
                         Susanne Ndunge Ndivo (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No            The project does not trigger OP/BP 4.01. This is
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     fundamentally a capacity building project to train and
                                                                    upgrade skills of unemployed youth to find employment
                                                                    and to help launch new business start-ups.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No            The project will not affect or involve natural habitats.
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No            The project will not affect or involve forests or forestry.

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No                The project will not involve pest management
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Physical Cultural           No            The project will not affect or involve physical cultural
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11                      resources
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes           The project will be inclusive and ensure youth from
                          BP 4.10                                   vulnerable marginalized communities / groups have an
                                                                    equal chance of enrollment in the project. The activities of
                                                                    the project will also be in counties with marginalized
                                                                    communities (VMGs) and therefore will involve youths
                                                                    from VMG groups. A Vulnerable and Marginalized
                                                                    Groups Framework has been prepared to ensure they
                                                                    participate and benefit from the project.
                          Involuntary Resettlement No               The project does not involve land acquisition leading to
                          OP/BP 4.12                                involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                                                                    resources and livelihoods.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            N/A
                          4.37
                          Projects on International   No            N/A
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                          Projects in Disputed        No            N/A
                          Areas OP/BP 7.60


                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              9. The KYEOP Project is proposed as category C. There are no irreversible adverse
                              environmental and social issues anticipated from the investments to be financed under the Project.
                              It is anticipated that the project will have positive social impacts at the individual, community,
                              County and National Level. Increased youth employability will result to;(i) increased incomes
                              among the vulnerable youth which will enable them earn decent living and participate in the
                              social- economic life of their communities ;( ii) reduce idleness among the youth reducing
                              insecurity and drug abuse in communities especially in the coastal and Northern Eastern regions
                              were the practice is rampant ;(ii) enhanced capacity ( technical skills and knowledge)among the
                              youth and communities to strengthen the livelihoods ;(iv)enhanced civil awareness among the
                              youth to know their rights and claim their entitlements enabling them play an active role in their
                              lives and participate in public governance; and (v) improved leadership and organizational
                              capacity among the youth.

                              10. However, social risks envisioned in the implementation process include: (i) the provision of
                              cash grants to support job creation may be prone to corruption. The project will put in place
                              accountable and transparent systems where the targeted beneficiaries at county, sub-county and
                              community level may provide feedback and be able to lodge their grievances regarding project
                              implementation (ii) With the recently devolved County Governments their participation in
                              national Government projects is relatively low. The implementation manual will clearly indicate
                              the roles and responsibilities of the various stakeholders enhance county participation in the
                              project; (iii) socio-cultural issues such as early pregnancy, early and forced marriage has forced
                              many young girls take responsibilities of their children and families. This kind of situation may
                              hinder vulnerable girls from benefiting from the project as some communities (North Eastern, such
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Somali, Turkana perceive) marriage as a form of employment. The project will be endeavor to
                              ensure equitable representation of both male and female youth to benefit from the Project.
                              Moreover, the project will make efforts to remove barriers that make it difficult for either
                              gender to access project benefits , such as in scheduling training for young mothers at a time
                              convenient to them , allowing lactating mothers to participate in training with their young babies
                              and caregivers, among others
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              11. The constitutional and policy framework to address safeguard issues is in place, with the
                              Kenya Constitution 2010 explicitly articulating the need for protection for VMGs . The
                              implementation structure of the client is well structured from community level, across the county
                              to the national level. Defined institutions exist at each level with specific roles and responsibilities
                              to handle safeguards. The critical level is at the community, where the targeting process envisions


                                                                          Page 5 of 7
                           having inclusive and participative systems on safeguards with well-defined indicators and simple
                           M&E tools to capture information on the safeguards indicators. This information is aggregated at
                           county level before it is transmitted to the national level. However, in practice there is limited
Public Disclosure Copy




                           institutional capacity for the management of the safeguard policies particularly at county and
                           community level. Major gaps include inconsistency in data collection, analysis and feedback at
                           each of the levels. There is need to build capacity (sensitization and training) at the various levels
                           in order ensure that information is collected, analyzed and used at the various levels in effectively
                           and efficiently manner. The various implementing agencies have appointed competent safeguards
                           focal persons at agency level and at county levels to ensure safeguard issues are address timely and
                           appropriately.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           12. The key stakeholders involved in consultations included ;(i) VMGs sampled from the three
                           regions with presence of VMGs in Kenya including Coastal, Rift Valley and North Eastern; (ii)
                           leaders of civil society organizations working closely with VMGs; ( iii) Social safeguards
                           officers in the four implementing agencies; and (iv) National and County officers working with
                           youth in counties with VMGs presence . In the preparation of VMGF, VMGs and stakeholders
                           were informed, consulted, and mobilized to participate in the process of social assessment. CSOs
                           and county officers played a critical role in informing and mobilizing the VMGs to participate in
                           the consultation meetings which were held at village level providing opportunity for VMG youth,
                           and local leadership to participate. The social assessment gathered information on demographic
                           data; (i) social, cultural and economic situation; and (ii) social, cultural and economic impacts,
                           potential positive and negative effects of KYEOP on the indigenous communities. This provided
                           an opportunity for VMGs and stakeholders to give their views on the project which informed
                           project preparation as well as the VMGF.

                           13. The social assessment and VMGF was publicly disclosed in stakeholders workshop attended
                           by representatives from VMGs and other stakeholders in workshop held February 8th 2016 at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Youth Empowerment Centre in Embakasi, Nairobi. Inputs from disclosure workshop were
                           incorporated to VMGF. The final documents will be disclosed in Ministry of Public Service,
                           Youth and Gender website on February 15, 2016 and copies of the same shared with civil
                           society organizations working with VMGs. The documents will also be disclosed in the Bank info
                           shop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kenya                                                            22-Feb-2016
                           Comments: The disclosed version of the VMG (dated February 2016) includes minor
                                         adjustments to implementation arrangements based on discussions held following the
                                         disclosure forum
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Cornelia M. Tesliuc
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)            Date: 21-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Penelope Jane Aske Williams (PMGR) Date: 01-Aug-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
