INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14815
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Solomon Islands            Project ID:   P151618
Project Name: ELECTRICITY ACCESS EXPANSION PROJECT (P151618)
Task Team       Tendai Gregan
Leader(s):
Estimated                                  Estimated     30-Apr-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEO2                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (50%), Other Renewable Energy
(50%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Other urban development (40%), Social
Inclusion (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      19.10            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         5.00
o         Climate Investment Funds                                         6.40
Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                           4.70
Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                3.00
Total                                                           19.10
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
13. The project development objective is to increase access of low-income households to electricity
services in peri-urban and rural areas of Solomon Islands.


﻿C. Project Description
An Output Based Aid (OBA) subsidy will buy down the investment cost for grid and micro-grid pre-
paid metered connections and basic wiring. The project will be managed by Ministry of Mines,
Energy & Rural Electrification (MMERE) and the national power utility company, Solomon Islands
Electricity Authority (SIEA). It will be implemented by SIEA for grid densification and Rural
Energy Service Companies (RESCOs) and local communities for micro-grid densification/extension.
The project will use self-selection targeting in peri-urban areas and geographic targeting in rural
o areas, whereby all rural beneficiaries will be eligible for subsidies under the project.
The proposed project design will have the following components:
Component 1 (Recipient executed subsidy) - Implementation of low cost electricity access expansion
(US$12.9 million), which has two sub-components:
a) Micro-grid densification/extension to increase access to low cost electricity (US$ 6.9 million).
Where grid extension is not economically justifiable due to high investment cost for low expected
load, the OBA subsidy provides incentives to SIEA and local electricity service providers (RESCOs,
NGOs, etc) to reach poor households in remote areas through micro-grid densification. The subsidy
will cover pre-paid meter micro-grid connections. The expected target under this component is
17,784 low income households (117,368 beneficiaries). Grant financing from Trust Funds would
comprise $1.5 million from the GPOBA and $5.4 million from the Scaling Up Renewable Energy
Program in Low Income Countries ("SREP") under the Strategic Climate Fund.
b) Grid extensions/densification to expand access to low cost electricity services (US$ 3 million).
The OBA subsidy provides incentives to SIEA or RESCOs to increase electricity access of 5,164 low
income households (34,080 beneficiaries) located in peri-urban and rural areas. The OBA subsidy
will cover new pre-paid meter connections.
The grid extensions are proposed in the context of improved technical and operational capacity of
SIEA as reflected by power system reliability and efficiency. The improved financial performance of
the SIEA is enabling it to both plan and seek financing for capital investments across the country,
including in its largest market and cost center, the Honiara grid. Thus, after decades of
underinvestment due to its hitherto poor financial position, a significant program of capital
investment in generation, transmission and distribution infrastructure is planned for 2013-16 to
improve generation, transmission and distribution quality, network efficiency and reach of services.
In this sector context, the GPOBA grant aims at increasing access by enabling the national utility to
provide electricity service to poor households in its project area.
For remote areas, where the extension of the grid is not economically justifiable, a number of local
service providers (RESCOs, NGOs etc.) will be selected by Ministry of Mines, Energy and Rural
Electrification (MMERE) to participate in the GPOBA program, based on clearly defined criteria. A
quota of the GPOBA grant of US$1.5 million and US$5.4 million from the SREP grant will be
allocated to the local service providers. The selection criteria developed by MMERE and the
application process will be presented in the Project Operations Manual (POM) and will include the
pre-financing capacity, technical and operational capacity of local service providers. There is some
success in Solomon Islands over the last 20 years with local communities and RESCOs in developing
micro-grids, and will complement activities planned under Scaling Up Renewable Energy Program
in Low Income Countries (SREP). GPOBA will finance household connections.


﻿Component 2 (Recipient executed activity) - Implementation support for SIEA (US$ 200,000). This
component covers the operating expenses incurred to SIEA for the management of the project. It
includes consultancy and logistics cost to ensure supervision of the project, compliance with
O
U       environmental and social safeguards, training of RESCOs, NGOs, local communities on technical
connection standards, Bank's safeguards and fiduciary procedures as needed, communities' outreach
on GPOBA grant requirements.
Component 3 (Recipient executed activity) - Renewable Energy Enabling Environment (US$ 1
million). Strengthening both the SIEA's capacity in power system planning, and its ability to deliver
capital projects across the Solomon Islands, would underpin efforts to scale up renewable energy and
in meeting its statutory obligations under the Electricity Act to: (i) "promote and encourage the
generation of electricity with a view to the economic development of Solomon Islands"; (ii) "to
secure the cost of electricity at reasonable prices"; and (iii) "to establish, manage and operate electric
power systems". There is also a need to strengthen the capacity of MMERE to further develop the
policies and regulations that govern the energy sector. The existing policy and regulatory
environment limits development of renewable energy by inhibiting investment, including private
investment in renewable generation. The expected outcome of Component 3 will consist of
establishing an improved enabling environment for scaling-up renewable energy. The outputs of
Component 3 will include (i) development of improved processes for land acquisition for distribution
extensions and mini-grids, (ii) revised Electricity Act and Petroleum/Biofuels laws and regulations,
(iii) capacity development within SIEA, and (iv) capacity development within MMERE.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will provide grid and micro-grid connections in peri-urban and rural areas of Solomon
Islands. Under Component 1(b), the SIEA will extend the Honiara grid as well as selected outstation
grids in the provinces, providing connections to peri-urban areas of towns and to some rural areas.
Extensions to SIEA's distribution network are proposed in Honiara East, Honiara West, Auki,
Tulagi, Malu'u, Munda, Gizo and Kira Kira among others and will be agreed upon during project
preparation. Under Component 1(a), connections to micro-grids will be provided in remote rural
areas.
o
Access of poor households to electricity is expected to yield economic, environmental and social
benefits - better health, education, productivity, and overall improvement of the human development
indicators in rural and peri-urban areas. Electricity access creates income generation opportunities,
which is important for the country taking into consideration the youth unemployment. The impact
analysis to be carried out under a Bank-executed activity will assess the impact of the project on
these variables.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The proposed activities are anticipated to have a relatively low environmental impact (grid
extensions with urban settings and village mini-grids), however this will be assessed further during
the project preparation. The operation of the Project should have overall beneficial effects on the
environment through more efficient provision of electrical power from renewable resources and
improved environmental management within MMERE and SIEA. All activities will comply with
requirements of the Environment Act of 1998 and the Environment Regulations of 2008 which
require development consent for prescribed activities to be obtained from the Ministry of
Environment, Climate Change and Disaster Management (MECDM). A development consent


﻿application must include an environmental assessment which complies with Environment Act and
Environment Regulations requirements.
Bank safeguards will apply to the whole project, including those components and activities that will
O
U       be financed by GPOBA, SREP-SCF, Government and SIEA. Preparation will be based on the
"Environmental and Social Safeguard Instruments for the Pacific Islands (ESSIP)" which will guide
which instruments will be applicable to the Project during preparation, Technical Assistance, and
implementation.
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to ensure
compliance with both World Bank Safeguard policies and the environmental legislation of the
Solomon Islands. This ESMF will contain mitigation measures, environmental monitoring, and
capacity development requirements covering the pre-construction, construction and operational
phases. The ESMF will be approved by the World Bank and will form part of the construction
contract documents. Where year one subprojects are known, an Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed prior to appraisal.
The components will be assessed for social safeguard impacts during project preparation, in
accordance with World Bank safeguard policies. A Social Assessment will be undertaken during
preparation, which will include: electricity access, selectivity and affordability of electricity to the
target population, resettlement (including land acquisition requirements), and indigenous peoples.
Components have specifically been selected to minimize land acquisition issues. No physical
relocation or loss of income is expected from the implementation of the project (to be confirmed
during project preparation) as the components will be constructed either along existing road corridors
or within communal/community owned land. The project will provide capacity building support to
strengthen MMERE and SIEA's social safeguard capacity.
The assessment will include a plan of how the Project will address those issues. Land acquisition is a
significant barrier to infrastructure development in the Solomon Islands. Component 3 includes
development of a standardized approach to addressing land acquisition for peri-urban grid extensions
and rural mini-grids. Based on the requirements set out in the Interim Guidelines on the Application
of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust
Funds Administered by the Bank, the preparation of these guidelines will be guided by World Bank
safeguards requirements. To ensure this occurs, any Terms of References for consultants preparing
these guidelines will be approved by the World Bank Safeguards team.
The knowledge and experience of the Implementing Agencies on Bank safeguards policies is limited;
with the SIEA in 2013 preparing an ESMF for new investment activities under the Solomon Islands
Sustainable Energy Project's Additional Financing, approved by the Board on March 21, 2014, and
which has a Category B safeguards rating. The knowledge and experience of RESCOs with Bank
safeguards policies will be assessed during project preparation and any support/capacity building
measures identified as being required will be designed into the project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Anil H. Somani (GSURR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


﻿Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         This safeguard policy is triggered. The project will
OP/BP 4.01                              involve line drop extensions from grids and micro-
grids in peri-urban and rural households. The
environmental impact of the grid-connections
provided under Component 1(b) are expected to be
limited and similar to the impacts enumerated in the
environmental impact assessment conducted for the
IDA Solomon Islands Sustainable Energy Project
(SISEP). The micro-grid densification and extension
activities proposed under Component 1(a) are
expected to have slightly larger environmental
impact due to their implementation in rural areas
which may require some tree felling and brush
clearing to install micro-grids; but these too are
expected to be limited in scale. The risks are
expected to be technically and institutionally
manageable. An Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to
ensure compliance with both World Bank Safeguard
policies and the environmental legislation of the
Solomon Islands. This ESMF will contain mitigation
measures, environmental monitoring, and capacity
development requirements covering the pre-
construction, construction and operational phases.
The ESMF will be approved by the World Bank and
will form part of the construction contract
documents. Where year one subprojects are known,
an ESMP will be prepared. The Project
implementation manual(s) would include provisions
as regards screening procedures, environmental
assessment and mitigation measures.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD         This safeguard may be triggered by the project and
will be confirmed during preparation. The project's
activities are not expected to affect natural habitats as
the grid-extension sub-component is proposed within
SEIA's concession area where human activity has
essentially modified the area's primary ecological
functions since the land has been largely converted
for urban and/or agriculture/livelihood purposes.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The micro-grid extension activities are not expected
to result in deforestation and their environmental
impact is not expected to compromise the integrity
and health of forested areas. Some minor clearings of
trees, shrubs and undergrowth may be necessary to
extend the grids.


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The Project will not involve use of pesticides or
herbicides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         Component 1 (a) provides for extensions grids or
OP/BP 4.11                               development of micro-grids in rural areas, where
physical cultural resources may be encountered in
excavations during the construction phase. However,
the excavation and construction is expected to be
minor. A chance find protocol will be included in the
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) to address chance find of physical cultural
resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         This safeguard policy will be triggered by the
4.10                                     project, as Component 1(a) provides for activities in
rural areas, which on a national level, are inhabited
primarily by indigenous peoples. On this basis and
given that indigenous peoples are also the principal
beneficiaries of Component 1(a), a separate
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan is not
proposed to be prepared. Instead, elements of an
Indigenous Peoples Plan, such as informed
consultations and stakeholder participation, will be
incorporated into project design consistent with
guidance provided in the ESSIP.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD        Given the small physical footprints and the siting of
BP 4.12                                  facilities, consensual and community based
participatory decision-making; land acquisition is
anticipated to be done on a voluntary basis and not to
cause physical or economic displacement. Extensions
of the national grid will be implemented in peri-
urban and rural areas that fall within SEIA's
concession and it is not expected that land
acquisition will be required to serve these ends. The
extension of micro-grids under Component 1(a) will
require small amounts of land on which to establish
drop line connections. Although the land required for
these connections will widely be held under
customary title, it is foreseen that the land will be
acquired through voluntary arrangements with
communities. If Voluntary Land Donation is
envisaged, it will follow the VLD protocol developed
for the Pacific Islands as documented in the ESSIP
and will be included in the ESMF. The applicability
of the policy will also need to be assessed in line
with the SREP supported activities on the
development of the mini-grids. Local communities
and RESCOs will implement these schemes, and as a


﻿result, a strong degree of local ownership of the
project is expected. Furthermore, the project will
target poor households that express a demand for the
connection and will uniquely benefit from it, and it is
therefore expected that they will voluntarily allocate
the necessary land for the drop line. The preparation
of the standardized approach and guidelines to
addressing land acquisition for peri-urban grid
extensions and rural mini-grids will be guided by
World Bank safeguards requirements. To ensure this
occurs, any Terms of References for consultants
preparing these guidelines will be approved by the
World Bank Safeguards team.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           No dams will be affected by the Project.
Projects on International    No           No project activities will take place on international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         There are no known disputed areas in the project
BP 7.60                                   areas of influence.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Dec-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Safeguards related studies are anticipated to be launched in last quarter of calendar 2014 and
completed by December 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Tendai Gregan
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 16-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                    Date: 21-Sep-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


