                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR16250
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bosnia and Herzegovina                       Project ID:           P128950
                            Project Name:      REAL ESTATE REGISTRATION PROJECT (P128950)
                            Task Team          Camille Bourguignon-Roger
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          29-May-2012                                  Estimated   25-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSULN                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Public administration- Information and communications (50%), Law and justice
                                               (20%), Information technology (15%), Public administrat ion- Other social
                                               services (15%)
                            Theme:             Land administration and management (41%), Personal and property rights
                                               (41%), e-Government (10%), Participation and civic engagement (4%), Social
                                               Inclusion (4%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        34.10           Total Bank Financing:                                       34.10
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                    0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                          34.10
                              Total                                                                                                34.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                 Page 1 of 6
                         The project development objective is to support development of a sustainable real estate registration
                         system with harmonized land register and cadastre records in urban areas of both the Federation of
                         Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Srpska.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The project development objective is to support development of a sustainable real estate registration
                         system with harmonized land register and cadastre records in urban areas of both the Federation of
                         Bosnia and Herzegovina and the Republic of Srpska.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Real Estate Registration Project (RERP) and its predecessor, the Land Registration Project (LRP
                         2007 - 2012), are part of a programmatic approach towards supporting a well functioning land
                         administration system in the BH. Land rights registration in local courts, which operate under the
                         guidance of Entity level Ministries of Justice (MOJ), has greatly improved with support from the
                         LRP. The RERP project will focus on the scaling up of cadastre activities and on the sustainability of
                         the land registration and cadastre institutions. The project activities focus on cadastre and land
                         registry data updating and harmonization and integration of this data, primarily in urban areas. The
                         project has three components:
                         A)       Real estate registration data development
                         B)       Real estate registration infrastructure development
                         C)       Policy and institutional development, and project management

                         Component A: (18.3 million USD). Real estate registration data development will support land
                         register and cadastre data harmonization on land, buildings and rights based on the actual situation in
                         the field. The objective is to establish up-to-date and interlinked land register and cadastre databases,
                         or integrated databases of real estate cadastre. The project will encourage and support the registration
                         of legal rights in the land register (in the FBH) or the real estate cadastre (in the RS) using project
                         produced data. The component will ensure equal treatment of all citizens regardless of their gender,
                         ethnicity or social status by accompanying technical field work with raising public awareness,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         vulnerability mapping and social monitoring functions.

                         Component B: (11.1 million USD). Real estate registration infrastructure development will continue
                         LRP work in improving working conditions and infrastructure in the cadastre offices across the
                         country and in those few land registration offices in the FBH that were not targeted by LRP through:
                         office renovations and purchases; creation of digital archives; and provision of furniture and
                         equipment. The office purchases planned in RS have to be approved by the Land Committee of the
                         World Bank. The objective is to improve working conditions, which will help to improve the quality
                         of customer services, the adherence of the service standards developed during LRP, and staff morale.
                         Access to basic surveying technologies will be provided to areas and offices that still rely on
                         conventional methodologies, and sustainability of the recently installed Global Navigation Satellite
                         Systems (GNSS) network will be assured. Information technology investments will lead to further
                         interlinking between real estate registers and other public datasets making the data accessible online
                         to a wide audience and in support of multiple uses. This will lead to incremental provision of
                         electronic online services and eventually to electronic conveyancing.

                         Component C: (4.7 million USD). Policy and institutional development, and project management
                         will support policy and legal development in support of reaching the project development objective.
                         The objective is to enhance sustainability of the real estate registration. The component will have a
                         strong focus on institutional development and capacity building, addressing the long term challenges

                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         of sustainability and governance of real estate registers and emphasizing financial sustainability,
                         quality of service and client orientation and social vulnerabilities. Training for the judiciary and land
                         registration personnel on the new real estate legislation, regulations and procedures will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         systematized in the RS and on other related subjects in both the RS and the FBH. In FBH, the LRP
                         supported training and education program that targeted the land administration employees across the
                         sector, i.e. in land registries, cadastre offices, planning authorities, etc., and this will continue. The
                         program will ensure the continuity of the training through seminars and workshops in the fields of
                         law, management, ICT, cadastral science, physical planning, etc. The Component will also include
                         necessary project management and monitoring support. An impact evaluation (IE) technique will be
                         used to assess how citizens will benefit from the real estate registration programs. The intention is
                         not only to demonstrate the impacts but also to use the evaluation results for improving land
                         registration services, and making urban planning and local property taxation more effective and
                         sustainable.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will operate across the country, in both Entities. The Geodetic Administration in RS has
                         a centralized structure for real estate registration with offices across the country. In FBH, the
                         Geodetic Administration and MOJ operate land registration in a decentralized structure with
                         municipalities and local courts. RERP will not affect any forested areas, wetlands or areas of natural
                         habitats, nor to facilitate the privatization of State lands or forests. There were a number of displaced
                         persons and refugees following the conflict between 1992 and 1995, but a Commission for Real
                         Property Claims of Displaced Persons and Refugees established under the Dayton Agreement dealt
                         with 250,000 claims and finalized their work by 2003. The project will only record existing rights of
                         land holders and the project does not anticipate any resettlement.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Esma Kreso (GEN03)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                          Physical Cultural           No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement    No
                          OP/BP 4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                          4.37
                          Projects on International   No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50



                                                                        Page 3 of 6
                            Projects in Disputed       No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                The project is a category B for environmental assessment purposes given the specific
                              rehabilitation infrastructure works related to Component B. A template Environmental
                              Management Plan has been prepared targeting the main environmental impacts which include dust
                              and noise generation, disturbances to other users of premises, work site safety, waste management.
                              The EMP also includes precautionary provisions in cases of asbestos findings or other chance
                              findings on site. All of these impacts are readily mitigated through the EMP prescribed mitigation
                              measures. The project does not foresee any irreversible or large-scale environmental impacts.

                              No resettlement or land acquisition will be undertaken, but there will be purchases of existing
                              commercial premises in the RS.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               All impacts can readily be mitigated during construction on site. No long term impacts are
                              anticipated.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               The project could have been designed not to fund office renovations and office purchases.
                              However, the land register and cadastre office renovations in the region have proven very efficient
                              in improving working conditions and land governance, and the environmental impacts are readily
Public Disclosure Copy




                              manageable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                               This is a repeater project and the borrower has very good experience in preparing and
                              implementing EMP in office renovations. The Client has prepared an Environmental Management
                              Plan that will be used as a template for the reconstruction works in Component B. This EMP was
                              done jointly by the two Administrations, with public disclosure via internet on March 5, 2012 and
                              consultations on March 20, 2012. The specific environmental mitigation measures set forth in the
                              EMP as well as any additional safety and occupational health procedures will be attached to the
                              Contractors technical specifications and implemented and monitored at the site.

                             The office purchases will be made from willing sellers in the market place, and the Bank’s land
                             committee will be informed of such activities during project implementation.

                              The project will include vulnerability mapping and social monitoring activities to accompany
                              cadastre updating.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.



                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                            The key stakeholders include the users of the buildings in which the real estate registration
                           offices are located, or any neighbors residing in the proximity. These stakeholders will be targeted
                           through public disclosure of the site-specific EMPs which shall be developed for each project site.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The other stakeholders include municipal or cantonal administrations in charge of environment
                           and/or reconstruction.

                           The Environmental Management Plan template has been prepared by the two Entities and
                           disclosed to the public in local language via the websites of the Ministry of Justice and the Real
                           Estate Administration on March 5, 2012. Following disclosure, a public consultation meeting was
                           held in Sarajevo on March 20th 2012. The public consultation meeting was announced in advance
                           in the local and most frequent newspapers of the two Entities, and on the websites of the two
                           Administrations/Ministries of Justice. Targeted invitations were also sent out to the pre-identified
                           key stakeholders.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bosnia and Herzegovina                                           05-Mar-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?


                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Camille Bourguignon-Roger
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                           Date: 29-Feb-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                       Date: 11-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
