INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1200
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Georgia                    Project ID:  P149952
Project Name: East-West Highway Corridor Improvement (P149952)
Task Team       Mustapha Benmaamar
Leader(s):
Estimated       15-Jun-2015                Estimated    17-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Transportation (4%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
Highways (96%)
Theme(s):       Other public sector governance (3%), Regional integration (48%), Trade
facilitation and market access (49%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     164.00            Total Bank Financing:  140.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   24.00
P           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      140.00
Total                                                                     164.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed PDOs are to: (i) increase connectivity in the East West corridor through the reduction
of road user costs along the sections of corridor upgraded under the project; and (ii) strengthen the
capacity of the Roads Department (RD) and the Ministry of Economy and Sustainable Development
(MESD) to manage the road network and provide an enabling environment to improve logistics
Page 1 of 12


﻿services.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Improvement and asset management of the East-West Highway Corridor (Estimated
Cost: US$158.50 million)
(a)    Sub-component 1.1. Civil works (Estimated Cost US$153.50 million). The objective of this
sub-component is to finance the upgrading of existing 2-lane East-West Highway from Zemo
a        Osiauri-Km 5.8 to Chumateleti to a 4-lane dual carriageway road. The section to be upgraded is
approximately 8.0 km long and runs through hilly and mountainous terrain, thus requiring many
structural works including 3 tunnels and 7 bridges. The upgrading of the road requires traffic
capacity expansion, a dual carriageway including man-made structures in difficult topographic and
geological conditions. The carriageway will be of concrete pavement. Civil works will be carried out
under one lot.
(b)    Sub-component 1.2. Construction supervision and quality assurance services (Estimated
Cost: US$5.5 million).
Component 2: Institutional strengthening (Estimated Cost US$2.0 million)
(a)    Sub-component 2.1. ITS Capacity Strengthening (Estimated Cost: US$1.0 million). The
objective of this sub-component is to strengthen the capacity of the ITS Division to identify and
manage ITS systems applications to enhance the Division's capacity to monitor traffic and road
conditions along the corridor and those sections of regional roads with higher traffic intensity and
provide real-time information to road users and public through RD's website and other
communication channels. This sub-component will build on the first ITS Strategy that is under
preparation under the Fourth EWHIP financing.
(b)    Sub-component 2.2. Technical support to MESD to develop and implement a logistics
strategy (Estimated Cost: US$1.0 million). The objective is to assist MESD in implementing a
national logistics strategy, which is expected to provide an enabling environment to enhance private
sector participation, eliminate non-tariff barriers and provide a conducive regulatory framework to
support trade and attract transit traffic.
Component 3: Preparation of designs and supporting studies for future projects for the development
of the East-West Highway (Estimated Cost US$3.50 million)
The objective of this component is to finance the review of the feasibility study, the preparation of
the detailed engineering design and relevant safeguard documents of the section between Km 8 and
Km 24 east of the Rikoti Tunnel. This section is one of the priority sections identified by the
feasibility study Zemo-Osiauri to Argveta will be part of the East West highway corridor and, thus,
requires similar design standards and solutions to the sections already developed in the past projects.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Upgrading of the highway in the section covered by East West Highway Corridor Improvement
Project (EWHCIP) requires re-alignment of considerable parts of the existing carriageway and
constructing of two new lanes in this new alignment. It will pass through rural areas where
environmental pollution is insignificant. No polluting or noise-intensive industries exist in the region
Page 2 of 12


﻿nowadays. Part of the landscape around the highway corridor is under the forest cover, while the rest
of the area is heavily transformed and land is either cultivated or degraded. There are no designated
protected areas in the vicinity of the Project site, however the highway corridor is positioned close to
a popular health resort of Surami. The corridor are crossed by a couple of small rivers and a few
O
U         streams.
Potential social impact that construction works may entail in terms of land acquisition and
resettlement is considered to be moderate. The assessment is based on the findings of feasibility
studies, detailed design which is underway, field visit and discussions held. Given delays with
completion of detailed design, the RAP preparation has not started yet though the consulting firm
hired to prepare/develop RAP has already done some desk work and some preliminary data on the
potential land take and affected people is available. Though no land survey work or mapping has
been initiated yet, based on desk review of available cadaster data, it is estimated that some 500 land
plots (400 private and 100 state-owned) will be affected. The Project would affect 1000 persons in
350 households for the loss of agricultural land (90 households could be severely affected with more
that 10 percent of their land to be taken). No physical or economic displacement is expected under
the Project though based on the ongoing detailed design though it is not certain as the RoW for the
last four km of the section has not been defined yet, however, it is likely that four summer/vacation
houses will be affected.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
Vera Dugandzic (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The Project will finance the upgrading of large scale
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                transport infrastructure, most part of which will be built
along a new alignment. It may therefore have significant
and irreversible impacts. The project is thus classified as
environmental Category A. It required a detailed
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA). A
four lane carriageway will be constructed in a difficult
terrain, passing through hills, mountains, and gorges in
between. Several bridges and double-tube tunnels will
have to be built. It is expected that the main
environmental impacts at the construction phase will
come from clearing of the right-of-way; establishment/
operation of work camps and temporary access roads; and
earth works, including extraction of material. Temporary
and final disposal of excess material and waste in a proper
manner will take much effort. Selected alternative of the
road alignment avoids most valuable forest stands of the
area with an acknowledged recreational function, however
several kilometers will pass through forested lands and
will require removal of trees. Operation phase impacts are
likely to include generation of runoff from the
carriageway and noise disturbance to fauna. ESIA
explored all potential impacts of the Project and provided
Page 3 of 12


﻿detailed environmental mitigation and monitoring plans.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          Construction of the re-aligned highway will require
4.04                               creation of a new Right-of-Way, which will pass through
some forested areas. However, according to findings of
the ESIA, most part of the affected plots carry artificial
plantations of coniferous species which do not represent
natural habitats. Highway alignment bypasses tree
plantations in the area where it is valued for recreational
purposes.
River crossings are few and short. Affected rivers
Suramula and Kakalatkhevi are narrow and small, which
allows to avoid placement of piers or other parts of
infrastructure within the water stream. No significant
impacts on aquatic ecosystems are expected.
Overall, no functional damage to natural or otherwise
valuable ecosystems is likely neither at the construction
nor at the operation phase of the Project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes         Minimizing impacts on forests was an important criterion
for the selection of an alignment for the new section of the
highway. Construction of operation of the highway in the
chosen RoW will not cause fragmentation or other
significant damage to natural forest ecosystems. Impact
on an artificial coniferous plantation is also minimal as it
does not touch parts of the stand which are valued for
recreation. OP/BP 4.36 is triggered, because construction
of the highway will require de-listing of some area from
the State Forest Fund. Compensatory tree planting plan
will be developed and implemented based on the ratio of
three planted trees for each one removed.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes         Project implementation is not expected to negatively
Resources OP/BP 4.11                affect any known physical cultural resources. However,
the portion of the highway to be constructed along a new
alignment carries the potential of encountering chance
finds in the course of earth works, which have happened
in several past projects in neighboring locations. Hence
likelihood of encountering chance finds in Zemo Osiauri
to Chumateleti section of the highway is higher than the
country-wide average. The policy is triggered to have
adequate arrangements in place for handling such
situations.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Page 4 of 12


﻿Involuntary Resettlement Yes        OP 4.12 is triggered as the planned construction works in
OP/BP 4.12                          upgrading the existing two-lane highway to four-lane dual
carriageway road will require land acquisition. Potential
social impact that construction works may entail in terms
of land acquisition and resettlement is considered to be
moderate. The assessment is based on the findings of
feasibility studies, detailed design which is underway,
field visit and discussions held. Though no land survey
work or mapping has been initiated yet, based on desk
review of available cadaster data, it is estimated that some
500 land plots (400 private and 100 state-owned) will be
affected. The Project would affect some 1000 persons in
350 households for the loss of agricultural land (90
households could be severely due to loss of more than 10
percent of their productive land). No physical or
economic displacement is expected under the Project,
however, four summer/vacation houses might be affected
though it is not certain yet as the RoW for the last four km
has not been defined yet.
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
developed, approved and disclosed on the Ministry
website on May 18, 2015 and InfoShop on May 26, 2015.
Joint ESIA and RPF public consultations were held in
Khashuri municipality on May 25, 2015 and Tbilisi on
May 27, 2015. The RPF document will serve as a guiding
instrument in implementing involuntary resettlement. It
sets out objectives; principles; compensation entitlements;
legal framework; consultation procedures; grievance
redress mechanisms; monitoring and financing provisions.
As was the practice with RPFs/RAPs developed to date,
social inclusion measures to address special needs of the
women, vulnerable families and marginalized
communities will be incorporated as well as guidelines for
prior and informed consultation with the respective
municipalities/communities, grievance redress,
information disclosure and monitoring and evaluation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No       The selected alignment of the Highway section between
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                Zemo Osiauri and Chumateleti allows to avoid alteration
of Suramula river bed or any other impact on waterways
that might result in measurable impacts on the quantity
and/or quality of water stream.
Page 5 of 12


﻿Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The EWHCIP will support the construction of a 14 km of two-lane dual carriageway new section
of the East West Highway Corridor between Zemo Osiauri and Chumateleti settlements. The
Project was classified as environmental Category A. Environmental risks are high, because the
highway alignment passes through a difficult terrain comprising of steep hills, deep gorges, and
two small rivers. Selected alternative of the highway alignment avoids most valuable forest stands
of the area with an acknowledged recreational function however several kilometers will pass
through non-commercial coniferous forest plantation and will require removal of trees. The main
environmental impacts at the construction phase will come from clearing of the RoW;
establishment/operation of work camps and temporary access roads; massive earth works, and
extraction of material. Temporary and final disposal of excess material and waste in a proper
manner will take much effort. Operation phase impacts are likely to include increased noise levels
and subsequent disturbance of local population and fauna as well as generation of a potentially
polluted runoff from the carriageway.
Environmental impacts of the construction phase will come from cleaning of the right-of-way
(RoW), establishment / operation of works camps and temporary access roads, operation/servicing
of construction vehicles and machinery, earth works, works in the waterway and sourcing of
construction materials. The results of the ESIA show that majority of the potential environmental
impacts of the EWHCIP can be effectively mitigated through adherence to good construction
practice and the measures prescribed in the EMP.
0
Clearing of RoW along the new alignment of the bypass will imply de-listing of some forested
land from the State Forest Fund and removal of vegetation, including cutting of trees. Loss of
vegetation will be kept to the possible minimum. Precise record of removed trees will be kept
based on an inventory to be produced as part of de-listing procedure and compensatory tree
planting will be implemented at a ratio of 1:3 within the highway corridor. Selection of species for
planting will be based on the natural composition of local flora.
Road construction will require sourcing of large amounts of natural construction materials. Works
provider may purchase material from licensed companies only or obtain an own license for
borrowing. Due to weakness of the national legislation, which does not require environmental
assessment and permitting for any type of mining, ensuring sound environmental practice in
material extraction will require close supervision by RD to ensure adherence to EMP requirements
alongside the regular State control from the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources
Protection on the adherence to the terms of license.
Strict adherence to the design parameters are expected to be sufficient for preventing major
erosion that may influence safety of the highway operation. Based on the experience from the
implementation of previous EWHIPs, landscaping, compacting, and stabilizing of slopes shall be
included in the bill of quantities and performing of these tasks should be closely monitored by
Page 6 of 12


﻿technical supervisor of works. Threats of surface water pollution from carriageway drainage as
well as from road accidents involving liquid and powder cargo vehicles will be addressed to the
extent possible through engineering solutions. Provision of adequate road safety measures is
included in the EWHCIP.
Social impact is expected to be moderate. The selection of the most suitable alignment of highway
section from Zemo Osiauri to Chumateleti does minimize potential adverse social impact. Though
no land survey work or mapping has been initiated yet, based on desk review of available cadaster
data, it is estimated that some 500 land plots (400 private and 100 state-owned) will be affected.
The Project would affect 1000 persons in 350 households for the loss of agricultural land (90
households could be severely affected due to loss of more than 10 percent of their productive
land). Operation of the highway is not expected to expose local population to unacceptable levels
of noise and automobile emissions. According to the ESIA report, no specific measures are
required to control these potential impacts in the short to medium term perspective. If significant
increase of traffic in long term causes nuisance to population in the highway corridor, RD shall
consider installation of noise barriers and/or take other mitigation measures as required.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Majority of EWHCIP's environmental impacts are expected at the construction stage. Long term
impacts will be limited to certain alteration of landscape due to re-routing of the Highway,
borrowing for construction materials, and permanent disposal of excess material. With proper
application of mitigation measures - such as reinstatement and greening of slopes, terracing and
greening of borrowing sites and compensatory tree planting, visual impacts on the landscape will
be minimized to the extent possible. Placing the carriageway through tunnels in areas of complex
and sensitive landscapes instead of constructing of additional bridges - is a design solution which
also contributes to minimizing long term negative impacts of the Highway operation.
Traffic related noise modeling carried out for operation stage of the Project showed that noise
level in the residential areas will not exceed allowable limits.
Water and soil pollution impacts will be typical for the operation of a highway and will be
addressed by arrangement and proper operation of drainage and drain filtration systems, and
organized management of solid waste in the Highway corridor.
Automobile emissions will certainly increase locally for the area through which the new alignment
of the highway will pass. However this will have no impact on ambient air quality in a short to
medium term. In a longer run, overall traffic increase on the East West Highway is expected.
Meanwhile Georgia is likely to strengthen regulations and control on the age and condition of
automobile fleet and fuel quality, which may balance environmental impacts of increased traffic in
future.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Much consideration was given to the analysis of alternative alignments of the East-West Highway
within the section connecting Zemo Osiauri to Chumateleti. Options were compared on various
merits, including financial, economic, engineering, and social and environmental. Reducing a need
for involuntary resettlement, especially keeping down the volume of physical displacement, was
one of key criteria use in the analysis. In the last 4km of the subject section of the Highway,
considered alternatives included the one which would predominantly follow the existing two-lane
Page 7 of 12


﻿road but require significant alteration of a river bed in order to allow placement of two additional
carriageways, and another alignment which would divert from the existing road and pass through
several tunnels. Despite higher costs of this second alternative, it was chosen due to considerably
lesser environmental impacts as well as because of attainability of a higher safety of transportation.
o
As stated, in terms of minimizing land acquisition and resettlement, due considerations is being
given during the design to minimize the adverse impacts as was the case with the past and ongoing
EWHIPs. Under this Corridor Project, efforts have been put to incorporate best engineering
solution in avoiding the impact to business and residential houses. Specifically, the route selected
would bypass a big local cemetery as to avoid any potential resistance on the part of local
population.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A full scale Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) of the Project was carried out
and an Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was produced with a set of the proposed
mitigation measures and monitoring indicators. The ESIA report describes the role of RD in
overseeing adherence of construction works to the recommended mitigation measures. Before
commencement of works, the selected works contractor will be asked to develop and agree with
RD the waste management (including spoil disposal), traffic management, and other specific plans
listed in technical specification for bidders. The works contractor will also develop and agree with
the client a plan of greening and landscape reinstatement at a relevant stage of contract
implementation.
RD, in the capacity of the Project implementing entity, will have an overall responsibility for
environmental and social performance under the Project. This mandate obligates RD to ensure
that: (i) national legislation and the Bank policies on environmental protection are adhered to; (ii)
consultation with the public, as needed, takes place; (iii) information is disclosed to the public, as
needed; and (iv) information on environmental issues which may arise in the course of Project
implementation are shared with the Bank. The Environment and Resettlement Unit (ERU) within
the RD will be responsible for all safeguards issues related to highway development and operation.
ERU staffing meets basic requirement for RD's in-house capacity for managing environmental
O
and social aspects of its operation, however ensuring due application of safeguards during large-
scale construction works, like those to be financed from the proceeds of EWHCIP, will require
supplemental effort to be provided through highly qualified international consultant services.
Therefore, prior to commencement of works, RD will hire a consultant company to provide
technical control and quality assurance of civil works. Environmental and social monitoring will
be an integral part of the consultant's assignment and information on the compliance with EMP
will be included into the supervisor's regular reporting to RD.
RD will have an overall responsibility for applying due environmental diligence. This will include
ensuring quality of the supervision consultant's performance, site inspections, timely response to
any issues identified by the consultant or by RD inspectors, and record keeping on all
environmental aspects of the Project implementation. RD has a special unit mandated to oversee
environmental and social aspects of RD's activities RD will maintain the safeguards unit and
further strengthen it for the purposes of the Project implementation, although the function of the
unit is not project-specific and will be retained beyond its life as part of RD's general institutional
development. RD has a long experience and decent track record of applying World Bank's
safeguard policies to various types of works on the road infrastructure ranging from the
Page 8 of 12


﻿rehabilitation of rural roads to the construction of four-lane section of the highway. Environmental
performance under Bank-financed projects has been varying from moderately satisfactory to
satisfactory, only episodically dropping to moderately unsatisfactory. Environmental compliance
problems being periodically encountered under various road projects are pretty similar and relate
O
to temporary and final disposal of construction waste and excess material, as well as to
stabilization and reinstatement of slopes affected during earth works. EMP prepared for EWHCIP
carries detailed plans for applying mitigation measures against these potential risks and for
monitoring their outcomes.
Department of Environment Protection Oversight of the Ministry of Environment and Natural
Resources Protection will undertake control over the implementation of terms and conditions of an
environmental permit to be issued for works on the Highway and of material extraction license(s)
to be obtained by works providers.
The improvement of the East-West Highway aims at minimizing the need of interventions during
its operation and maintenance. Ensuring safe and good environmental performance will be a high
priority at the operations stage and will comply with the requirements of the national legislation
and the best international practices. RD, through an outsourcing arrangement, will permanently
maintain and, in a longer term, improve greening along the RoW. Storm water drainage system
will be maintained to exclude waterlogging on road surface and shoulders. In the vicinity of
surface water bodies, storm water chambers will be installed to accumulate drained water and
allow sedimentation prior to release. No direct discharge will be allowed from the drainage system
to rivers and streams. Regular collection of solid waste along the highway will be organized by
contractor identified by the RD. Emergency road maintenance unit of RD will perform rapid
response to any road accidents, including those involving cargo vehicles to ensure prompt
treatment of any accidental spillages and clean-up of debris. State technical control of the East-
West Highway operation through regular oversight and inspection by RD will be provided.
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed, approved and disclosed. The RPF
document will serve as a guiding instrument in implementing involuntary resettlement. It sets out
objectives; principles; compensation entitlements; legal framework; consultation procedures;
grievance redress mechanisms; monitoring and financing provisions. Given delays with
completion of detailed design, the preparation of Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has not started
a          yet. The route of the first 10 km has been agreed upon with the exact right of way almost defined.
It is expected that the remaining 4km will be defined by the end of June. With this time line, RAP
completion is expected in September 2015. The RAP will provide a detailed description of
compensation and rehabilitation measures in compliance with policies and measures set out in the
RPF document.
Land acquisition and resettlement processes under the ongoing EWHIPs have been fully
implemented in line with the Georgian laws and regulations of the Bank's OP 4. 12 on Involuntary
Resettlement. To date, all policy requirements to restore livelihoods of the project affected people
and effect and complete compensations measures are being met adequately and timely. As of
2012, two social safeguards consultants are working in the RD (one at central level and one based
in the field) which is contributing good RAPs implementation and timely issuance of compliance
and progress reports in line with legal covenants.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Page 9 of 12


﻿MRDI and RD under it, municipalities and residents of the settlements located along the project
section of the highway, transit passengers, tourists, businesses moving cargo along the highway,
and potential investors dependent on the transportation through the highway will benefit from the
Project implementation.
The Bank policies and the Georgian legislation require meaningful public participation and
involvement in the process of the Environmental Impact Assessment and environmental
management planning. The initial environmental overview of the EWHCIP was carried out at the
*          early stage of its preparation. The Project stakeholders were consulted on the scope of the ESIA
and its methodology. The consultation meeting was held on December 11, 2014 and was attended
by the representatives of the local government and the project-affected communities. The second
round of consultations was held after disclosure of the draft ESIA and RPF documents. Joint ESIA
and RPF consultations were held in RD's office in Tbilisi on May 27, 2015 and on May 25, 2015
in Khashuri municipality to ensure meaningful participation of local stakeholders and Project-
affected people. Upon incorporation of the received feedback, the ESIA report was finalized and
the minutes of both consultation meetings were attached to it prior to re-disclosure. The RPF has
been developed, approved and disclosed on the Ministry website on May 18, 2015 and InfoShop
on May 26, 2015. RAP completion is expected in September 2015. The RAP will provide a
detailed description of compensation and rehabilitation measures in compliance with policies and
measures set out in the RPF document.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                            11-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         15-May-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  15-May-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
O
Georgia                                                15-May-2015
Comments: Public consultation meetings on draft ESIA report were held in Khashuri
O
municipality near the highway corridor on May 25, 2015, and in capital city of
Tbilisi on May 27, 2015.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                            14-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         26-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Georgia                                                18-May-2015
Comments: Public consultation meetings on draft RPF were held in Khashuri municipality near
the highway corridor on May 25, 2015, and in capital city of Tbilisi on May 27,
2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 10 of 12


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X]  No[    NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes[X]  No[   NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
Page 11 of 12


﻿III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mustapha Benmaamar
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:  Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                 Date: 04-Jun-2015
O
Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                Date: 04-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


