                                 The World Bank
                                 INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN URBAN PRIMARY SCHOOLS (KIAT
                                 Guru Urban Pilot)




                                                 Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                               Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                            Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2018 | Report No: ISDSC24457




                         May 09, 2018                                                                                         Page 1 of 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN URBAN PRIMARY SCHOOLS (KIAT
                                 Guru Urban Pilot)



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category   Country
                                                             INDONESIA: IMPROVING
                                                             TEACHER PERFORMANCE
                                                                                          B - Partial Assessment
                           P167216                           AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN                                 Indonesia
                                                                                          (B)
                                                             URBAN PRIMARY SCHOOLS
                                                             (KIAT Guru Urban Pilot)
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                   Investment Project
                           Dewi Susanti, Javier Luque                                     GSUID
                                                                                                                   Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                  1.20
                           Total Financing                                                                                                     1.20
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                      1.20
                                 Indonesia - Program for Community Empowerment                                                                 1.20


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve teacher performance on student learning activities in pilot
                           schools.

                           C. Project Description
                           A key principle to the intervention design of KIAT Guru Urban pilot is the scalability of the mechanism for
                           nation-wide policy implementation. In addition, MoEC wants to utilize the KIAT Guru Urban pilot to test a
                           new teacher performance evaluation. In line with the Civil Servant Law, MoEC needs to align the way
                           teachers have been evaluated, from using the Penilaian Kinerja Guru (Teacher Performance Evaluation/ PKG),
                           which mainly focuses on teacher competence, to using the Penilaian Prestasi Kerja (Work Performance


                         May 09, 2018                                                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN URBAN PRIMARY SCHOOLS (KIAT
                                 Guru Urban Pilot)




                           Evaluation/ PPK), which covers performance indicators of teachers as civil servants. In line with the
                           Government Regulation 19/ 2017 on Teachers, the PPK needs to include five key domain activities (hereafter
                           5M): planning, implementing, training and guiding, evaluating, and conducting additional assignments (such
                           as being a vice principal, librarian, counselor, etc.).

                           Consultations with MoEC, BAPPENAS, and MoF have narrowed down the formula to tie payment of TPG with
                           teacher performance that directly contribute to student learning. The teacher performance indicators
                           selected for the KIAT Guru Urban pilot will be derived from a long list of the PKG list of indicators and the
                           KIAT Guru Remote pilot score card indicators for evaluation teacher service performance. This long list of
                           indicators was suggested and approved by the MoEC. Through technical workshops to be hosted by the
                           MoEC and involving teacher representatives in April and June 2018, the PKG and KIAT Guru Remote
                           indicators will be mapped against the 5M, and shortlisted based on teacher activities and behaviors that are
                           directly supportive of students’ learning. In addition to mapping out the specific indicators, the evaluators
Public Disclosure Copy




                           need to be agreed upon as well, including supervisors, principals, other teachers, and School Committee
                           members (including parents).

                           The KIAT Guru Urban pilot will test three intervention groups (see table below) to identify the most effective
                           way to evaluate teacher performance in primary schools in urban settings. The first intervention group
                           represents a classical top-down approach from the national level to the local level in which all relevant
                           parameters are set at the national level. This intervention group will be the easiest for a national scale-up
                           since it involves an implementation mechanism that is highly standardized. The second and third intervention
                           groups consider local (school-level) approaches to setting evaluation standards. While the second
                           intervention group has evaluation standards being determined by education providers (principal, teachers)
                           alone, the third intervention group involves in addition the local school committee to ensure the
                           participation of and monitoring by education users. The three intervention groups were developed based on
                           extensive consultations with MoEC, and were approved on November 21st, 2017.

                                                                                                                     Number of
                           Groups       Description
                                                                                                                     Schools
                                        Indicators, weights, indicator specifications, evaluators, and weights of
                           1                                                                                         70
                                        evaluator assessment are determined at the national level
                                        Indicators, weights, indicator specifications, evaluators, and weights of
                           2            evaluator assessment are determined at the school level, by principals and   70
                                        teachers
                                        Indicators, weights, indicator specifications, evaluators, and weights of
                           3            evaluator assessment are determined at the school level, by principals and   70
                                        teachers and school committee
                           4            No intervention                                                              70

                           A total of 280 primary schools will be randomly assigned to one of the following four groups. Pilot
                           interventions will be implemented in Groups (1), (2), and (3). Group (4) is a business-as-usual group where no

                         May 09, 2018                                                                                            Page 3 of 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN URBAN PRIMARY SCHOOLS (KIAT
                                 Guru Urban Pilot)




                           intervention will be implemented, but where evaluation data will be collected to identify changes against
                           schools where the government policies are implemented as usual. Changes in student learning outcomes
                           between baseline and endline constitutes the main outcome indicator to assess whether and which
                           intervention group has shown the best results. In addition, the cost-effectiveness of each intervention arm
                           will be evaluated. The World Bank will conduct an Analytical Services and Advisory (ASA) that accompanies
                           the pilot (P167281), which aims to provide advice for pilot intervention and evaluation designs, to evaluate
                           the impact of the pilot interventions, and to provide policy recommendations to GoI. Further information on
                           this ASA and its link to this project is provided in the attached draft Integrated Project Concept Note (PCN).

                           The implementation of the intervention groups will be conducted as much as possible using the government
                           system within the education sector. This project will implement the three intervention groups. The Grant
                           Recipient will: (a) provide the district/ municipality governments with technical assistance to coordinate the
                           socialization and closing events; (b) provide by-demand technical assistance to district/ municipality
Public Disclosure Copy




                           governments and schools on the administration of the teacher performance assessment and the payment of
                           TPG based on performance evaluation; (c) conduct qualitative documentation and spot-check monitoring of
                           randomly selected pilot schools throughout the duration of the project implementation timeline; and (d)
                           provide on-demand supports on the utilization of the project's Management Information System
                           and complaint handling and redress mechanism by the stakeholders. In addition, the Grant Recipient will
                           administer the payment of grant for the 210 pilot schools to conduct socialization and evaluation meetings,
                           and administer the teacher performance scores in schools.

                           The Project Components consist of:

                                1.   Technical Assistance to district/ municipality governments.
                                2.   Implementation of socialization and closing events.
                                3.   Monitoring of implementation by district/ municipality governments and schools.
                                4.   Project management.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will be implemented in 210 urban primary schools in three districts/municipalities. This project is
                          part of a Technical Assistance (TA) provided to the MoEC. The project will not finance any physical
                          investments, population displacement or land acquisition. All TA activities, recommendations and advice
                          provided through the support from this project are not expected to generate environmental and social
                          implications. In areas where there are communities with Indigenous Peoples (IPs) characteristics as required
                          in the OP 4.10, the TA team/ project staff at the district education offices will provide support to ensure that


                         May 09, 2018                                                                                               Page 4 of 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN URBAN PRIMARY SCHOOLS (KIAT
                                 Guru Urban Pilot)




                          consultations with parents led by the schools are inclusive and accessible. Such procedures will be further
                          elaborated in the Project’s Operational Manual (POM) to be developed during the project preparation. When
                          the MoEC and the pilot district/ municipality governments undertake broader engagement for the urban
                          pilot, civil society organizations including groups representing IPs will be consulted in line with OP 4.10.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The Grant Recipient has not been identified. To support the implementation of the KIAT Guru Urban Pilot,
                          the World Bank will engage a Grant Recipient to implement the RETF to provide, among others, operational
                          supports to ensure that the interventions can be implemented on time and on budget, and meet the World
                          Bank’s fiduciary, procurement, safeguard, and other operational requirements. The Task Team have
                          shortlisted two potential Grant Recipient candidates (from an initial list of seven), both of them have
Public Disclosure Copy




                          received grants from the World Bank. The Bank’s safeguards specialists will review the project manuals to
                          ensure that they adhere to the World Bank’s environmental and social safeguards policies. Prior to project
                          implementation, the Grant Recipient will provide training to project staff and facilitators on relevant World
                          Bank’s safeguards and child protection policies where applicable.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Fajar Argo Djati, Social Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?             Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes                The project will not finance any civil works
                                                                                                and therefore will not have any potential
                                                                                                environmental impacts.

                                                                                                The Technical Assistance (TA) under
                                                                                                Component 1 is intended to provide GoI
                                                                                                with technical inputs on several
                                                                                                intervention designs, along with the tools
                                                                                                to assess teacher performance and the
                                                                                                mechanisms to do so within the school and
                                                                                                government existing system. None of the
                                                                                                TA activities, recommendations and advice
                                                                                                relate to physical construction or
                                                                                                generation of downstream environmental
                                                                                                impact. Based on the World Bank Interim

                         May 09, 2018                                                                                                 Page 5 of 7
                                 The World Bank
                                 INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN URBAN PRIMARY SCHOOLS (KIAT
                                 Guru Urban Pilot)



                                                                                         Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard
                                                                                         Policies to Technical Assistance (TA)
                                                                                         Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and
                                                                                         Trust Funds Administered by the Bank
                                                                                         January 2014, this is grouped as Type 1
                                                                                         (Building/Strengthening Client Capacity).
                                                                                         Therefore, safeguard instrument would not
                                                                                         be necessary. The project is category B and
                                                                                         triggers OP 4.01 (because OP 4.10 is
                                                                                         triggered).
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                         No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11     No
                                                                                         The project covers up to 210 primary
                                                                                         schools in three districts/ municipalities
                                                                                         where there could be presence of
                                                                                         communities who meet the criteria of
                                                                                         Indigenous Peoples as per-OP 4.10. The TA
                                                                                         team/ project staff at the district/
                                                                                         municipality will provide support to the
                                                                                         target schools to enable meaningful
                                                                                         engagement with parents as well as ensure
                                                                                         that information about the project is
                                                                                         accessible for all, including Indigenous
                                                                                         Peoples who may present different needs
                                                                                         with regards to access to information and
                                                                                         engagement approaches. The project
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              Yes                 progress reports submitted to the World
                                                                                         Bank will provide explanation of how such
                                                                                         engagement has been implemented,
                                                                                         including constraints and remedial
                                                                                         measures that will need to be addressed
                                                                                         during project implementation by the
                                                                                         target schools with support from the Grant
                                                                                         Recipient.

                                                                                         It is expected that when the MoEC and the
                                                                                         pilot district/ municipality governments
                                                                                         undertake broader engagement for the
                                                                                         urban pilot, civil society organizations
                                                                                         including groups representing IPs will be
                                                                                         consulted in line with OP 4.10.

                         May 09, 2018                                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                                   The World Bank
                                   INDONESIA: IMPROVING TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY IN URBAN PRIMARY SCHOOLS (KIAT
                                   Guru Urban Pilot)




                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                           No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Team Leader(s):                                  Dewi Susanti

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Surhid P. Gautam                                  04-May-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Kevin A Tomlinson                                 07-May-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         May 09, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
