                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR18201
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                                        Project ID:           P128919
                            Project Name:      Zhengzhou Urban Rail Project (P128919)
                            Task Team          Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          24-Mar-2014                                  Estimated   23-Dec-2014
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI02                                        Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:           Urban Transport (100%)
                            Theme:            City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      3089.41                 Total Bank Financing:                                250.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                          2839.41
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                              250.00
                              Total                                                                                             3089.41
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description
                           The project would support the development of Line 3 of the Zhengzhou urban rail system from Xin


                                                                                Page 1 of 11
                         Liu Lu Station to Hang Hai Dong Lu Station. The project consists the following four components:

                         Component 1: Construction of Line 3. This component includes all construction activities for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Zhengzhou Urban Rail Line 3 (about 25.2 km). Line 3 will connect the city center of Zhengzhou
                         with the northwest and southeast development areas. It will start from the Line 3 parking yard,
                         located nearby the Provincial Sports Center, go through Xin Liu Lu Station in the northwest corner
                         of the city, run down along Nanyang Road to Erqi Plaza in the city center, then move east along the
                         West-East Street and Zhengbian Road towards Bo Xue Lu Station, turn south onto Chenyang Road
                         towards Hang Hai Dong Lu Station in the southeast corner of the city, and end at the Line 3 depot,
                         located east of the G4 Expressway. Line 3 includes 21 stations, which will all be located
                         underground and connected by tunnels. The Line 3 depot for maintenance and stabling will be
                         located above ground at one end of Line 3 in southeast Zhengzhou, and the parking yard will be
                         located above ground at the other end of Line 3 in northwest Zhengzhou. Six interchange stations to
                         be constructed by 2019 will provide convenient interchange with other urban rail lines. This line is
                         fully self-standing and not dependent on future extensions, which may take place after 2020. The
                         Bank loan will support the construction of five stations and five tunnels in between, which are
                         located at the southeast end of the line.

                         Component 2: Equipment for Line 3. This component includes all the equipment necessary to the
                         successful operation of Line 3, such as rolling stock, power supply, control system, signaling system,
                         communication system, monitoring system, fare collection system, safety and security system,
                         ventilation and air conditioning system, water supply, sewerage and fire protection system, and
                         station auxiliary equipment.

                         Component 3: Design, Construction Management and Technical Assistance. This component
                         includes (i) activities for design and preparation of the project; (ii) activities for construction
                         management and quality assurance; and (iii) technical assistance and capacity building to relevant
                         staff in Zhengzhou Municipality and URC. The Bank loan will support the technical assistance and
                         capacity building activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Safeguards and Other Construction Costs. This component will include the land
                         acquisition and resettlement costs, construction site preparation (environmental mitigation measures)
                         as well as other project related construction costs such as engineering insurance, work safety
                         assurance, inspection and acceptance, and project cost estimation. This component will be 100%
                         financed by the local counterpart funding.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in Zhengzhou City, capital city of Henan Province in central China.
                         Zhengzhou is located in the transition zone between the North China Plain and the easternmost range
                         of the Qinling Mountains. The proposed Zhengzhou Urban Rail Line 3 is located in the urban built-
                         up area of Zhengzhou which is located in the east side of the flat land area. The entire 25.2 km line
                         will be underground.

                         The proposed project passes through densely populated urban areas including the core city center and
                         connects several major commercial areas. The line will pass nearby or underneath some cultural
                         relics including Shang Dynasty City Wall Relics, Erqi Tower, and Zhengzhou Wen Temple and Peng
                         Xiangqian Ancestral Temple among others.



                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                         According to its topographic feature and geotechnical properties, the project area can be divided into
                         two categories: Zone A (K0+0.000~K23+200) is part of the alluvial plain of the Yellow River; Zone
                         B (K23+200~K31+350.000) is known as an aeolian dune microrelief of the alluvial plain of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Yellow River. Zhengzhou has a temperate continental climate, with cool, dry winters and hot, humid
                         summers. The annual mean temperature is 14.9 Â°C, the monthly average temperature ranges from
                         0.3 Â°C in January to 27.8 Â°C in July. Average annual precipitation is 640 mm and most of the
                         rainfall occurs in summer.

                         The groundwater within the region along the line are mainly of three types: perched ground water,
                         quaternary loose rock type hole water and bedrock crevice water. The quaternary loose rock type
                         hole water forms the majority of groundwater. The groundwater is mainly supplied from surface
                         waters (including Jinshui River, Xionger River, Chaohe River) with limited impact from artificial
                         exploitation.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jun Zeng (GSU06)
                         Yiren Feng (GEN2A)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            OP4.01 is triggered due to the scale of tunnel and stations
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      construction, waste disposal and potential environmental
                                                                    and social impacts from construction and operations in the
                                                                    urban context.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             Given the urban context, and as confirmed by site visits,
                         4.04                                       the project will not affect any natural habitats or critical
                                                                    natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             The project will not cause conversion or degradation of
                                                                    natural forests.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or
                                                                    have any impact on pest management practice.
                         Physical Cultural           Yes            The proposed Line 3 rail project will pass nearby or pass
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                       underneath some cultural relics including Shang Dynasty
                                                                    City Wall Relics, Erqi Tower, and Zhengzhou Wen
                                                                    Temple and Peng Xiangqian Ancestral Temple among
                                                                    others. Therefore, there is a potential risk of impact from
                                                                    tunnel excavation during construction and vibration
                                                                    during operation. The PCR policy is therefore triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             The Social Specialist visited the project area to conduct a
                         BP 4.10                                    screening to determine whether ethnic minority peoples
                                                                    are present in, or have collective attachment to, the project
                                                                    area. A small Hui district is located in the city center of
                                                                    Zhengzhou. The Hui people is an officially recognized
                                                                    national minority and include all historic muslim
                                                                    communities in People's Republic of China not included
                                                                    in China's other Muslim groups. Hui people speak
                                                                    Chinese, do not have their own traditional language and
                                                                    are mainly entrepreneurs in Zhengzhou. The project will


                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                                                        be constructed within the downtown of Zhengzhou City
                                                        and no indigenous people groups as defined in Bank?s
                                                        OP4.10 have been identified within the project area. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Social Specialist concluded that no indigenous people
                                                        groups as defined in Bank?s OP4.10 is present in, or have
                                                        collective attachment to the project area. Therefore, this
                                                        policy is not triggered.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Based on the site visit and primary project alignment, land
                         OP/BP 4.12                     taking caused by the project construction will be
                                                        unavoidable. The main involuntary resettlement impact
                                                        will include urban house demolition, removal of shops/
                                                        restaurant and other public facilities. Therefore, the
                                                        Bank➢❨ s Social Safeguards policy on Involuntary
                                                        Resettlement is triggered and a Resettlement Action Plan
                                                        has been prepared by the client in both English and
                                                        Chinese, and an experienced consultant was hired to assist
                                                        the RAP preparation. The RAP covers all resettlement
                                                        impacts caused by the Line 3 according to feasibility
                                                        study report. According to the Resettlement Action Plan
                                                        prepared in 2014, among the 21 stations of Zhengzhou
                                                        Rail Transit Line 3 Phase I project, 11 stations would
                                                        involve house expropriation; a total area of 101,760m2 of
                                                        various buildings would be expropriated.

                                                        During the launch mission on April 27 2015, it was
                                                        reported preliminary design showed a significant change
                                                        of the total area of buildings to be demolished compared
                                                        with that in the RAP during feasibility study stage. To
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        comply with Bank Policy, a supplementary RAP was
                                                        required for Zhengzhou PMO to submit to the Bank.

                                                        After optimization and adjustments made by the
                                                        preliminary design institute to the route and station
                                                        design, the total area of houses to be demolished in the
                                                        project is changed to 183,222.27m2 covered in
                                                        Supplementary RAP, which is 60,499m2 less than the
                                                        area reported on April 27, 2015, and 81,462 m2 more than
                                                        that in the RAP prepared in the feasibility study stage.

                                                        The Supplementary RAP was public disclosed locally and
                                                        in Infoshop on 20 March 2016. During the preparation of
                                                        this supplementary RAP, the Zhengzhou PMO had
                                                        organized the series of information publicly by or to the
                                                        design organization, resettlement consulting agencies,
                                                        housing expropriation and compensation offices in
                                                        different districts, sub-street resettlement offices and
                                                        affected populations, and consulted with organizations,



                                                         Page 4 of 11
                                                                        offices and populations regarding on the compensation
                                                                        standards, resettlement housing and mitigation measures
                                                                        etc proposed in the Supplementary RAP. And the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        supplementary RAP had integrated with these feedback
                                                                        comments according the public consultation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No              The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
                            4.37                                        of any dams as defined under this policy.
                            Projects on International   No              The project is not located in any international waterways
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        as defined under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed        No              The project is not located in any known disputed areas as
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                            defined under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                As a public transport oriented project, the project will bring significant net positive
                              environmental benefits through the promotion of mass public transportation, reduction of traffic
                              congestion and consequent reduction of vehicle emissions and improvement of overall quality of
                              life in the Zhengzhou Metropolitan Area.

                             The potential negative environmental and social impacts related to the project will occur mainly
                             during the construction phase. These potential impacts include: disruption of traffic; reduced
                             accessibility to business and non-motorized vehicle/pedestrian access around metro stations during
                             construction; construction accidents linked in particular to ground water and geological risk;
                             potential damage to surrounding buildings and physical cultural sites; improper transportation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             disposal of spoil material, potential water pollution, dust, vibration, noise nuisance during
                             construction; and land acquisition and demolition of structures like houses or enterprises . Other
                             impacts during operation include noise and vibration, odor and water pollution, potential
                             inadequate aesthetics integration, and waste management from rail operation facilities. The
                             relevant mitigation measures were incorporated into the EIA/ESMP.

                             The project has significant social benefits and is an integral part of the public transportation
                             system of the city. The project is expected to benefit the local communities by enhancing the
                             options for affordable, safe and fast public transportation in the vicinity of the project line. All
                             stations will have a universal accessibility design with barrier free passage for wheelchairs,
                             including at least one elevator per station, and guidance on sidewalks and in station for blind
                             people.

                             According to the recent updates from Supplementary RAP, the project will have social impacts
                             related to the need for land acquisition and demolition of a number of structures like houses or
                             enterprises. About 767 people from 239 families will be affected by the acquisition of 786mu of
                             collective owned land; about 1,893 people from 650 families will be affected by the demolition of
                             44,977 m2 of private houses; and about 3,045 employees from 83 enterprises, institutes and small
                             shops will be affected by the demolition of 138,245 m2 of structures.




                                                                         Page 5 of 11
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The proposed project supports the development of a major urban rail line as part of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Zhengzhou urban rail network. The future development of the rail network will have significant
                           impacts on Zhengzhou, leading to more compact and transit-oriented urban development
                           accompanied by land use change. The project is mainly laid along the urban main roads of
                           Zhengzhou except for its extremities located in the periurban area of Zhengzhou. The construction
                           of Line 3 is expected to be accompanied by a speed up in the urbanization development process
                           and gradual changes in land use along the line. The main change will be a conversion from
                           farmland and forest land in the extremities of the line into land used for residential, commercial
                           and educational purpose, and a gradual densification of land use around the 21 stations along the
                           line, especially along the Nanyang Road.
                           After the project is put into operation, it is expected to attract a large volume of passengers, and
                           reduce some of the traffic on roads along the alignment, compared to a situation without project.
                           The project will be accompanied by some adjustments in the public transport routes, leveraging
                           the new line. The preparation and implementation of reasonable bus-rail integral program will
                           facilitate the use of Line 3 by the public, enhance public traffic utilization rate in Zhengzhou and
                           finally improve overall urban traffic.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The project has been subject to intense analysis of alternative options including a project-no
                           project scenarios, various options for rail line alignments, location of stations and construction
                           methods, as well as consideration of different engineering technology alternatives.

                           During the design phase, the EA teams worked closely with project planners/ owners and the
                           feasibility study teams to compare and evaluate alternatives. The EA identified, evaluated and
                           compared various options for alignment selection, station location selection, and construction
                           method selection, and optimal alternatives were selected based on the avoidance of (or least
Public Disclosure Copy




                           adverse) social and environmental impacts, as well as other engineering technology alternatives,
                           and financial considerations for least cost solutions. A ➢❨ no project➢❨ scenario was also
                           considered as an alternative. Adequate engineering measures have been designed to mitigate the
                           expected impacts, including noise barriers, vibration reduction equipment, intensive greening plan,
                           landscape design for stations, and parking/depot site.

                           As a result, the alignment, station location and construction method were optimized so as to reduce
                           the land acquisition, decrease construction risks, minimize resettlement, avoid environmental and
                           cultural sensitive sites, reduce disruption of traffic and increase the accessibility and convenience
                           of public transport transfer, integrate with the overall public transport plan, and with less cost.
                           Further optimization will be conducted during preliminary design and detailed design.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            The project is classified as a Category A project as per OP4.01, due to the scale of tunnel
                           construction, waste disposal and potential environmental and social impacts from construction and
                           operation in an urban context. Environment Assessment (EA) reports were prepared in accordance
                           with relevant national laws, regulations, and technical guidelines and standards applicable to the
                           project, as well as the World Bank Safeguards Policies. The reports include (a) an EA Executive
                           Summary, (b) an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), and (c) an Environmental and Social


                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                         Management Plan (ESMP). The EA reports have been prepared, incorporating the Bank?s
                         comments, and found to be satisfactory.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The potential environmental and social impacts of the proposed project are thoroughly addressed
                         in the EIA report, and necessary mitigation measures have been developed in the ESMP. It is
                         concluded that these adverse environmental and social impact can be adequately avoided,
                         minimized and mitigated with good management practice and mitigation measures as developed in
                         EIA/ESMP. The main conclusions of impact and mitigation measures are summarized as follows:

                         Construction Phase. To address the potential adverse impacts as mentioned above, preventive and
                         mitigation measures during the construction phase have been developed in the ESMP to
                         adequately avoid, minimize and mitigate these adverse environmental and social impacts. These
                         impacts will be avoided, minimized or mitigated by the following measures, including (but not
                         limited to): implementation of city procedures for traffic diversion and utility relocation;
                         coordination with the police department; provision of prior notice through public media; proper
                         fencing of the construction site for safety; setup of temporary access roads; public consultation
                         throughout the construction period to address public concerns and improve construction activities;
                         proper management of wastes; use of low noise equipment and construction technologies; careful
                         scheduling of construction activities near sensitive sites; installation of a temporary noise
                         reduction facility at sensitive sites; restricting night-time construction; and requiring prior public
                         notice, as well as night-time construction permit from the city Environmental Protection Bureau,
                         for activities that need continuous construction during the night. Further, shield tunneling and
                         cover-and-cut methods will be used for tunnels and most of the stations to minimize noise and
                         vibration impacts, and measures will be taken for air and wastewater pollutant control, as well as a
                         risks assessment and Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) measures.

                         Operations Phase. To address potential impacts during the operations phase, mitigation measures
                         that will be adopted include (but are not limited to) the following. For the land use change,
                         Zhengzhou city has mature institutions and procedures to manage the land development to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         that land development induced from the rail network is in line with urban master plan and
                         conducted in an orderly and legal process. For the noise-sensitive sites, noise barriers will be
                         installed, and ventilation shafts will be installed with low noise equipment and silencers and will
                         be located at least 15 meters from nearby residential areas. For vibration sensitive sites, vibration-
                         reduction facilities will be installed. Measures for air quality, wastewater and solid wastes have
                         also been formulated.

                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11. The proposed Line 3 rail project will pass nearby or pass
                         underneath some cultural relics including Shang Dynasty City Wall Relics, ErqiTower , and
                         Zhengzhou Wen Temple and Peng Xiangqian Ancestral Temple among others. Therefore, there is
                         a potential risk of impact from tunnel excavation during construction and vibration during
                         operation. Adequate site survey and consultation with the relevant cultural relic bureau was
                         conducted during EA preparation to ensure all the relevant cultural relics along the rail are
                         identified, and the potential impacts were carefully addressed through project design, selection of
                         alignment and construction technologies, good construction management including monitoring of
                         settlement, and other mitigation measures, to ensure all the relevant cultural relics along the rail
                         are identified, and mitigation measures are incorporated into the design, construction and
                         operation appropriately. Procedures for cultural findings will include provisions and procedures
                         stipulated in the Cultural Property Law and will be included in bidding documents and contracts.



                                                                    Page 7 of 11
                         A stand-alone ESMP has been developed that describes the policies, applicable environmental
                         standards, environmental management organization and responsibilities, mitigation measures,
                         capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of ESMP implementation. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ESMP measures were developed in consistency with WBG EHS Guidelines. ESMP measures will
                         be incorporated into bidding documents and contracts in order to ensure effective implementation.

                         The Zhengzhou Urban Rail Company (ZURC) has been established to manage the construction
                         and operation of the proposed urban rail system in Zhengzhou. Environmental management is
                         built into the overall management setup in the company, and the construction of line 1 and 2 has
                         demonstrated successful environmental management performance in terms of construction site
                         management, traffic diversion, and provision of access to public, safety, dust control, spoil
                         material disposal, information disclosure and public consultation. As the project implementing
                         agency, ZURC is responsible for overall environmental and social management during
                         construction. Internal environmental management involves three parties, i.e. the project owner,
                         supervision institutes including engineering supervision and risk management supervision, and
                         contractors. The contractors are crucial for the implementation of the various environmental
                         protection measures specified in the ESMP. Consultants will provide timely professional services
                         in particular on the ESMP implementation, for design and risk management. Meanwhile, the
                         project will be supervised and inspected by national, provincial and municipal environmental
                         authorities, as well as by supervision missions from the World Bank. ZURC will also carry over
                         its responsibilities in environmental management during operational stage. The main
                         responsibilities include public environmental awareness, implementation of ESMP in operational
                         phase, maintenance of environmental facilities such sewage/wastewater treatment, vibration and
                         noise control.

                         To ensure effective implementation of the ESMP, environmental training will be provided to staff
                         involved in the project management, engineering supervision, and construction workers. The
                         training during construction phase will be conducted before commencement of the construction
                         and focus on: (1) national and local regulations on environmental protection; (2) good
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management practice related to minimize environmental impact; (3) related requirements of
                         environment, health and, safety (EHS); and (4) environmental mitigation measures included in the
                         ESMP. During operation stage, the ZURC will incorporate environmental protection into its
                         management system.

                         Following the relevant Chinese laws, regulations and World Bank OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                         Resettlement, the Zhengzhou PMO has prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) to address
                         involuntary resettlement impacts caused by project construction. A Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (RPF) was also prepared for components that might change their locations during
                         project implementation. The resettlement planning work was carried out by the line agencies under
                         the guidance of a team from Wuhan University with prior experience in resettlement planning for
                         World Bank financed Projects. Planning work included project impact inventory surveys, social
                         economic surveys and consultations over resettlement and livelihood rehabilitation measures. For
                         Project Affected Persons (PAPs) affected by collective land acquisition, cash compensation will be
                         arranged. Land acquisition compensation will include land compensation, a resettlement subsidy,
                         and compensation for standing crops. For PAPs affected by house demolition, the options of cash
                         compensation and house property exchange scheme have been arranged. The compensation rates
                         for structures and public facilities are determined based on their full replacement costs. The
                         affected enterprises, institutes and shops will be compensated at full replacement cost and the
                         business losses caused by demolition will be compensated as well.

                                                                  Page 8 of 11
                           In addition, a Supplementary Resettlement Action Plan was prepared and submitted in March
                           2016 to cover the increased resettlement impacts during preliminary design stage and ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consistent compensation plan and mitigation measures for PAPs endorsed and can be
                           implemented.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Two rounds of public consultation were conducted during the EA preparation. The first round
                           was conducted from April to December 2012 through meetings, field interviews and questionnaire
                           surveys among project-affected people, local residential and village committees, schools and
                           hospitals, and through a telephone hotline. The main concerns raised by the public are resettlement
                           compensation, information disclosure, disturbance of traffic, night time construction noise etc. All
                           these concerns were addressed in the RAP and EIA/ESMP.

                           The second round of public consultation was conducted in August 2013 after the draft EIA report
                           had been prepared. During the consultation, the key findings of draft EIA report and proposed
                           mitigation measures were explained, as well as the responses to the questions raised from the first
                           round consultation. The majority of those consulted expressed strong support for the project.

                           Information about the project was disclosed following both the domestic and Bank requirements.
                           The availability of the EA reports, and how to access to them, was announced in a local major
                           newspaper (DongFangJingBo Newspaper) on July 8, 2013. The EA reports were disclosed on the
                           Zhengzhou Government Website (http://www.zzdrc.gov.cn) on May 17, 2012 and August 19,
                           2013, respectively, and the EA reports were disclosed in the World Bank?s Infoshop on January
                           29, 2014.

                           The RAP and RPF were disclosed to local people via Zhengzhou Government Website and
                           ZURC?s website on January 28, 2014; and the English versions of the documents were disclosed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on the World Bank?s Infoshop on January 29, 2014.

                           The Supplementary RAP was publicly disclosed locally and in Infoshop on March 20, 2016 (with
                           a finalized version on May 6, 2016). During the preparation of this supplementary RAP, the
                           Zhengzhou PMO organized a series of public information sharing sessions through the design
                           organization, resettlement consulting agencies, housing expropriation and compensation offices in
                           different districts, sub-street resettlement offices with the affected populations, and consulted with
                           organizations, offices and populations regarding the compensation standards, resettlement housing
                           and mitigation measures etc proposed in the Supplementary RAP. The supplementary RAP
                           integrates feedback received during public consultation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           16-Jan-2014
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        29-Jan-2014
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive           14-Mar-2014
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                                                      Page 9 of 11
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            19-Aug-2013
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Jan-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Jan-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            28-Jan-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gerald Paul Ollivier
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                              Date: 12-May-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                            Date: 16-May-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
