                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC15701

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Central African Republic        Project ID:       P157923
                            Project Name:        Local connectivity emergency project
                            Team Leader(s):      Marc Marie Francois Navelet Noualhier
                            Estimated Date       31-Mar-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GTIDR                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Sub-national government administration (10%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads
                                                 and Highways (90%)
                            Theme(s):            Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (100%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 4.9                             Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              State and Peace Building Fund                                                                  4.9
                            Environment        B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Proposed PDO is to reconnect the rural population of the Northeast part of CAR to urban
                           centers, social services, and local markets by rehabilitating the Ndélé – Ouadda road corridor.

                           Re-connecting the isolated Eastern Region of CAR with the rest of the country by re-opening a key
                           intra-regional road will contribute to the following higher-level objectives: (a) the long term
                           prevention of the de facto partition of the country; (b) the re-establishment of territorial management
                           and security by the central government; and (c) the re-establishment of basic road asset management
                           in the areas of intervention in partnership with communities supported by other World Bank
                           interventions in the area. Ultimately, these should contribute to the reconciliation and stabilization
                           efforts by providing concrete services and a space for state-citizens constructive interactions.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed pilot project design, components and activities are as follows:

                           Road connectivity works. This component covers the financing of the planned spot improvement
                         type of road works, design studies and basic supervision of the works. The proposed project will
                         focus on re-opening the Ouadda - Pata - Ndélé road corridor (about 230 km) by focusing on the spot
                         improvement of about 65 km of non-contiguous stretches along the corridor to re-establish a basic all
Public Disclosure Copy




                         weather level of service. The planned spot improvement type of works, will require the capacity to
                         work autonomously in a difficult environment, which means that a frontier type of construction
                         approach, such as using force account, may need to be used to reinstate territorial connectivity. Based
                         on the LONDO Project activities carried out in Ndélé, this component may also include Labor
                         Intensive Works (LIW), thus contribute to jobs creation and support to vulnerable communities. The
                         type of works involved is not gender-discriminatory. The project is expected to incrementally attract
                         women. Should women’s participation remain low, the beneficiary selection mechanism would allow
                         enough flexibility to ensure more women are included.

                         At present, the area covered by the proposed pilot is not benefitting from any donor-funded program
                         despite its strategic relevance and potential humanitarian impact if connectivity is re-established.

                         Community participation and capacity building. This component will ensure the proposed project
                         promotes inclusive local governance. More specifically, the component will carry rapid development
                         assessment at the level of communities and municipalities, where the road goes through. This
                         assessment will involve local authorities (district and municipal territorial administration, traditional
                         leaders) to gather necessary data for successful implementation such as: (a) spot improvement
                         identification; (b) de facto and de jure local governance arrangements; (c) security; (d) social
                         dynamics and cohesion; and (e) local economy and logistics data relevant to the planned road works.
                         The rapid assessment will solve the issue of lack of information of the situation in the ground outside
                         Bangui, and ensure successful implementation of the project.

                         Furthermore, the component will support inclusive engagement with the local stakeholders by: (a)
                         facilitating open and inclusive selection of beneficiary for the LIW and social communication around
                         the progress; (b) facilitating the re-establishment of basic road maintenance responsibilities and
                         financing at the local level, including local administrative, traditional and community leaders, private
Public Disclosure Copy




                         firms implemented in the area if any, and central administration; and (c) using the LONDO
                         Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) implemented by the Agence d'Exécution des Travaux
                         d'Intérêt Public en Centrafrique (AGETIP-CAF) .

                         Finally, the proposed project will use the experience from the LONDO Project which tested district
                         level rapid assessment, is piloting community maintenance, and has already implemented LIW in the
                         Ndélé area. The proposed project will also learn from the experience of the “4ème parallèle” road,
                         which is privately maintained by logging companies, and replicate and adapt if there are firms active
                         in the areas.

                         Project Management. This component covers activities related to the implementation of the project
                         activities in a very challenging logistical and operational context. As such, the Project will strengthen
                         the UN/WBG coordinated effort for FCS, which is a WBG corporate priority. The Team is already in
                         contact with the WBG’s FCS CCSA (GCFDR) in order to explore further collaboration with the UN
                         Department of Peacekeeping Operations (DPKO).

                         In addition, the proposed project activities will complement existing WBG projects, namely the: (a)
                         Emergency Public Services Response Project; (b) Emergency Urban Infrastructure Project; (c)
                         LONDO Project; and (d) the CEMAC TTFP.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project is located in the Northeast area of CAR, along the existing Rural Road (RR – Route
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Rurale) 21 Ouadda – Boungou – Pata – Ndélé. The proposed works activities will remain confined to
                           the current right-of-way/alignment of the RR. Therefore, the anticipated adverse impacts should be
                           limited to vegetation clearing, dusts, soil erosion due to borrow pits, injuries, and poor construction-
                           related waste management. However, appropriate measures may be put in place to monitor/control
                           any movement of bush meat along the corridor.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           In CAR, the Borrower’ Institutional Capacity to manage safeguards has been developed thanks to
                           several Bank-financed projects. The ongoing regional CEMAC TTF Project produced important
                           benefits in terms of institutional strengthening of the key CAR institutions involved in safeguards. As
                           such, that Project includes an Environmental & Social component implemented under the umbrella
                           of the Direction of the Road Environment Protection of the Ministry of Public Works, and in
                           connection with that Project’s PIU. Therefore, the Borrower is familiar with the WBG safeguards
                           policies, and has relevant Safeguard Management experience with Environmental Assessment.
                           Capacity to manage social safeguard aspects will be assessed during the preparation of the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
                           Medou Lo (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              This policy is triggered since the project
                           BP 4.01                                               activities for re-opening and maintenance of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 roads have the potential for some localized
                                                                                 environmental adverse impacts. These include
                                                                                 vegetation clearing, dusts, soil erosion due to
                                                                                 borrow area, injuries, and poor construction-
                                                                                 related waste management.
                                                                                 As the proposed project is processed through
                                                                                 OP 10.00 Para 12, the preparation of the
                                                                                 environmental and social assessment documents
                                                                                 is deferred to the implementation stage. Project
                                                                                 documents will include an action plan and a
                                                                                 timetable agreed with the Borrower, for the
                                                                                 preparation of an ESMP for the reopening of the
                                                                                 Ouadda-Pata-Ndélé road corridor and the basic
                                                                                 maintenance activities to ensure basic
                                                                                 sustainability and all-year traffic on the re-
                                                                                 opened road corridor. The ESMP will be
                                                                                 prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed as soon
                                                                                 as possible during project implementation, and
                                                                                 no later than three months after effectiveness
                                                                                 and prior to the commencement of works.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The policy is not triggered given that project
                                                                                 activities should not result in loss, conversion or
                                                                                 degradation of natural habitats or critical natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 habitats as defined by the policy.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               This policy is not triggered as the project’s
                                                                                 activities are not expected to impact the welfare
                                                                                 of forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               The project does not involve pest management
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      Yes              The project is not expected to have an impact on
                           BP 4.11                                               physical cultural resources. However, in light
                                                                                 of possible chance-Finds the policy is triggered
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No               Indigenous People (Ba’Aka) are present in the
                                                                                 country but not directly in the project areas
                                                                                 (primary and secondary roads network and peri-
                                                                                 urban areas).
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       Yes              This policy is triggered in case there is a need
                           4.12                                                  for minor re-alignments or removal of structures
                                                                                 along the existing Right of Way (ROW) for the
                                                                                 proposed road works. An action plan will be
                                                                                 agreed with the Borrower, and included in the
                                                                                 project document, for the preparation of an RPF
                                                                                 and/or RAP as the case may be.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No                   There are no dam-related activities in the project
                           Projects on International        No                   There are no activities related to international
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                  waters in the project
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                   The Project is not located in a disputed area as
Public Disclosure Copy




                           7.60                                                  defined by the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                                i. Explanation
                                   An appraisal stage ISDS is required as it will detail the appropriate Safeguards action plan nece
                                ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                   29-Jan-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              The proposed project - designed to support social and economic recovery as well as facilitating
                              peacebuilding - is processed under Operational Policy (OP) 2.30 (Development Cooperation and
                              Conflict), OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies), and paragraph 12 (Situations of
                              Urgent Need of Assistance) of OP 10.00 (Investment Project Financing), and the proposed
                              operation benefits from condensed procedures, deferral of environmental and social requirements,
                              and streamlined fiduciary procedures. OP 7.30 (Dealings with De Facto Governments) was
                              triggered on March 25, 2013 and remains in effect.

                              An ESMP will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in-country and in the Infoshop, no later
                               than three months after project effectiveness and prior to the commencement of civil works. An
                               action plan will be agreed with the borrower and will be included in the Project Paper.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Marc Marie Francois Navelet Noualhier
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 06-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Fabio Galli (PMGR)                                           Date: 06-Nov-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
