                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC16444

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Myanmar                        Project ID:      P158724
                            Project Name:        Survey on Household Living Conditions
                            Team Leader(s):      Thomas Danielewitz,Reena Chandu Badiani-Magnusson
                            Estimated Date       05-Apr-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GPV02                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (100%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    0.57                       Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                               0.57
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve the Central Statistical Organization of Myanmar’s capacity to produce and analyze
                           quality household survey data.
                           C. Project Description
                           Currently several government survey in Myanmar cover the same topics. The HIES last conducted
                           by CSO in 2012, the IHLCA last conducted by the Planning Department (PD) in 2009/10 and the
                           MPLCS conducted under the supervision of the CSO and PD in 2015. These three surveys cover
                           many similar topics and can effectively be combined to avoid duplication. The precise scope of this
                           combined survey is still to be defined. As a next step, the CSO will organize a technical committee
                           drawing its membership from relevant government stakeholders and development partners.

                           Development Partners support for the new survey will be a collaborative effort by primarily World
                           Bank and UNDP. In preparation for the survey, a clear set of activities have been identified which
                           will strengthen household survey capacity and systems of the CSO. The project will support a series
                           of activities aimed at supporting the CSO’s implementation of a large-scale integrated household
                           survey in 2016/17. The support to the survey will be given in collaboration with UNDP, who have
                         supported the previous IHCLA surveys in 2004/05 and 2009/10. The World Bank support through
                         the TFSCB funding will be focused on strengthening necessary functions of the CSO to prepare and
                         implement the survey through a series of technical assistance engagement. UNDP will focus its
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support on the implementation of the survey itself. The following activities are foreseen under the
                         support.

                         Develop integrated survey instrument, drawing upon good practice from previous household
                         expenditure and living standards measurement surveys in Myanmar. For the new survey to meet the
                         objectives of the HIES and IHLCS surveys, it will be important to design a survey instrument which
                         meets the functionality of the three surveys, while ensuring, to the extent possible, comparability
                         with the past instruments. Moreover, in the context of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
                         and changing national demands, it is a need to ensure that the survey will collect data on new
                         indicators. In addition to modules needed for consumption based poverty estimates, the instrument
                         will include a broad set of modules relevant to multiple sectors and aimed at gaining a better
                         understanding of the root causes of poverty in its many dimensions, potentially including the
                         measurement of income. To ensure that an efficient survey instrument meets its multiple demands, it
                         is foreseen that considerable TA will be needed to help in the design, field piloting and quality
                         assurance of the questionnaire, through consultative processes with all relevant stakeholders. The TA
                         will be delivered through a combination of national and international survey expertise.

                         Past household surveys in Myanmar have suffered from weak sampling design due to the lack of an
                         appropriate sample frame. A key component of the World Bank’s work in preparing the MPLCS was
                         to produce a new master sample frame based on the 2014 Census, which has since been used by
                         multiple national surveys in the country. The master sample frame was constructed through technical
                         assistance given to the Department of Population (DoP) who carried out the Census data collection
                         and processing. The HIES sampling frame is based on administrative population counts, which
                         differs from the recent Population Census in the size of the population and shares across states and
                         regions. In the current context, where the Government is seeking to strengthen the CSO coordination
                         and its implementation role in household survey conduct, it will be important that the CSO builds
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity to draw samples for household surveys and to maintain a master sample frame. Therefore,
                         the World Bank is proposing to strengthen sampling capacity in the CSO, which will ensure that the
                         future survey will have an efficient and representative sample and ensure coordination of sample
                         designs across surveys. A series of hands-on trainings will ensure that CSO can draw and maintain
                         precise and effective samples for household surveys in the country.

                         Data Processing - establish systems and capacity for data processing. An important function for the
                         CSO is to strengthen its data processing systems and facilities. The CSO does currently not have
                         modern data processing system, and had predominantly relied on Access databases and manual data
                         cleaning processing methods, equipment and procedures. A recent business survey used CSPro for
                         data entry, with enhanced procedures for checking data entry errors. The data entry program was
                         however established by external actors, the capacity to do so does not currently reside within the
                         CSO. The project will therefore seek to upgrade equipment, technical know-how and software for
                         survey data processing. In particular, the project will seek to establish a data processing system with
                         Census and Survey Processing System (CSPro) for entering, editing, tab           ulating, and
                         disseminating survey data. Furthermore, depending on CSO needs and interest, the project will
                         consider to establish basic capacity for Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) systems
                         with the World Bank’s CAPI software,Survey Solutions. While reliance on CAPI for the
                         forthcoming survey may not be feasible right away, the CSO is likely to conduct surveys based on
                         such platforms in the medium term, so establishing basic capacity for such systems will be important.
                           Professional survey staff - establish and train professional cadre of survey staff. Past large scale
                           surveys in Myanmar have been characterized by very short enumeration periods requiring a large
Public Disclosure Copy




                           number of enumerators and field supervisors, often temporarily assigning government staff from
                           their normal jobs to conduct temporary field work with limited training. Township supervisors
                           received two days of training in Nay Pyi Taw on the HIES. The training covered the objectives of the
                           survey, sampling methodology, the role of the supervisor and detailed explanation of the HIES
                           questionnaire. Although the topics coverage of this training was wide, the duration of the training
                           would have limited the depth of coverage for each topic. For the forthcoming survey, there will be a
                           greater focus on a smaller set of professional survey supervisors and on training enumerators who
                           will enumerate the survey over a longer time period. Such a structure will require longer overall
                           field times for the survey, but will ensure that quality is high and consistent across the country. The
                           precise size and nature of the survey team will depend on the sample size of the survey, as well as the
                           length of the questionnaire. The survey capacity will be established through a combination of
                           national TA from experienced survey firms and experts, as well as international TA.

                           Analysis - strengthen household survey analysis. The CSO presently has limited survey data analysis
                           capacity and experience. A final component of the project will therefore to strengthen micro-data
                           analysis skills. Such training will build on joint analysis and training already being conducted in
                           analysis of existing data, including the MPLCS. The past HIES survey has been underutilized due to
                           limited analysis capacity of the CSO, and the first stage of this component will focus on analysis of
                           existing data sets. Once data from the pilot activities of the forthcoming survey, as well as data from
                           survey itself is, available this component will focus on integrated poverty analysis based on the new
                           survey with the focus of rapidly and accurately producing the final reports and disseminating the
                           survey data.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           None of the safeguard policies of the World Bank or Government of Myanmar will be triggered by
Public Disclosure Copy




                           this project. However, the recipient-executed activities will planned and executed after careful
                           consultations with all relevant stakeholders including but not limited to indigenous peoples in as far
                           as indigenous peoples will be affected by the survey. This implies among other things that the
                           survey sample and survey instruments are developed in consultation with concerned stakeholders and
                           their inputs be reflected in the final products.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Waraporn Hirunwatsiri (GEN02)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               An environmental assessment in accordance
                           BP 4.01                                               with OP/BP 4.01 will not be required. No civil
                                                                                 works will be financed by the project. Project
                                                                                 activities will consist of survey design, piloting
                                                                                 of the survey instrument, interviews, data
                                                                capture and editing, tabulation and
                                                                dissemination of aggregated statistical
                                                                information (and possibly anonymized micro-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                data). The survey results will be used to inform
                                                                policy makers, social research and public
                                                                discourse as well as development partners about
                                                                the state and trend of household welfare and
                                                                living conditions in Myanmar as well as feed
                                                                into the system of national accounts and
                                                                calculations of the consumer price index. The
                                                                project activities are very unlikely to have any
                                                                potential negative impact on the environment or
                                                                social or cultural resources including on matters
                                                                relating to indigenous peoples (see below).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No
                         BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   The survey and sampling approach is not
                                                                designed to capture the living conditions of
                                                                groups of indigenous peoples; to do so would
                                                                likely be technically infeasible given the current
                                                                survey aim. The survey has three principle aims,
                                                                notably to (i) measure household wellbeing and
                                                                living conditions in general for people living in
                                                                the territory of Myanmar, (ii) to provide
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                information for national accounts and (iii) to
                                                                provide information used for calculation of a
                                                                consumer price index. A representative sample
                                                                will be drawn to this effect. The sample strategy
                                                                has not yet been proposed, nor has it been
                                                                decided whether certain sub-groups of the
                                                                population should be subject to special
                                                                consideration during the sampling stage. The
                                                                World Bank recommends that consultations on
                                                                the design of the survey instrument and the field
                                                                work protocol is conducted with all relevant
                                                                stakeholders, including but not limited to groups
                                                                representing indigenous peoples, in as far as
                                                                indigenous peoples will be affected by the
                                                                survey.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No
                         4.12
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No
                           Projects on International        No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Thomas Danielewitz,Reena Chandu Badiani-Magnusson
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                           Date: 23-Feb-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Salman Zaidi (PMGR)                                          Date: 23-Feb-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
