                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA16144
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Sep-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bhutan                             Project ID:   P155513
                            Project Name:      Food Security and Agriculture Productivity Project (P155513)
                            Task Team          Winston Dawes,Mohammad Imtiaz Akhtar Alvi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated                                   Estimated     30-Dec-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFA06                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         9.33           Total Bank Financing:       0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                   1.10
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                               8.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                        0.23
                              Total                                                                                      9.33
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase agricultural productivity and enhance
                           access to markets for farmers in selected geogs in south-west Bhutan. The project supports the
                           RGoB➢❨ s efforts to reduce rural poverty, food insecurity, and high levels of malnutrition increase
                           resilience to climate change through climate smart agricultural productivity enhancement for food
                           security and nutrition, and increasing farmer➢❨ s access to local and export markets. The project
                           seeks to address multiple problems faced byfarmers and rural households through a set of integrated,
                           consolidated, area-specific interventions that respond to local constraints, potentials and

                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         opportunities. The project will reach out to 10,400 farmer households and will facilitate the
                         formation and strengthening of 300 new and existing Farmer Groups (FGs) om 24 geogs across 5
                         dzongkags. Additionally, Additionally, through improved homegrown school feeding programs, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project will target 3,000 school children in 16 schools located in 11 gewogs in 4 dzongkhags.
                         3. Project Description
                         A.      Project Components

                         Component 1: Strengthening Farmer and Producer Groups

                         The objective of this component is to strengthen farmers➢❨ and producers➢❨ groups, so they are
                         better able to implement and sustain project interventions. This will involve:
                         ➢❨¢ Farmer Group Strengthening and Formation: The project will facilitate the formation and
                         strengthening of 300 new and existing Farmer Groups (FGs) in identifying and participating in
                         project supported activities for increased productivity and enhanced market access. It will include
                         capacity building of FGs on farm business management, provide TOTs to RNR officers and
                         Community Resource Persons (CRPs), etc.
                         ➢❨¢ Strengthening Producer Groups: The project will also support the formation of 30 Producer
                         Groups (PGs). PGs will take a cluster based approach and be organized into a business enterprise
                         capitalizing on opportunities for product aggregation, value addition and marketing in promising
                         value chains.
                         In an effort to ensure that the agricultural production and household income increases, encouraged
                         through the project, also contribute to improved nutrition - activities will focus on raising awareness
                         for dietary diversity and nutrition among farming communities, especially women of reproductive
                         age, youth, and school children. Raising awareness on nutrition will be addressed through capacity
                         building of farmer groups in conjunction with other training activities. The project will actively
                         promote nutrition awareness among the targeted population through a Behavior Change and
                         Communications (BCC) approach using the Farmer Groups (FGs) as an entry point.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Enhancing Farmer Productivity

                         The objective of this component is to improve agricultural productivity vital for improving food
                         security and nutrition. This component will promote climate smart agriculture through: (a)
                         productivity enhancement of rice, vegetables, pulses, and potatoes for improved food security and
                         nutrition, and (b) productivity enhancement of key high value crops such as spices (specifically large
                         cardamom and ginger), vegetables, and citrus for local and export markets. The approach under this
                         component is holistic and area-specific, providing an integrated package of interventions based on
                         relevant farming systems and specific crops appropriate to the priorities of the farmers, farming
                         systems, and overall production potential in the selected area.

                         Based on this approach the component will focus on three key areas of intervention:

                         ➢❨¢ Water Use Efficiency: Four irrigation systems have been identified to irrigate 1346 acres
                         (545 ha) of land for the production and productivity increase of selected crops in the irrigated
                         command area. As per farmers➢❨ demand, the project will develop an additional 250 acres (100 ha)
                         of land through provision of micro-irrigation (sprinkler, drip) schemes for improved horticulture and
                         cash crops. Further, four Water User Associations (WUAs) and about twenty water user groups will
                         be formed and strengthened in improved agronomic practices, water use efficiency, and in the


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         operation and maintenance of irrigation systems.

                         ➢❨¢ Improved Farm Management and Technical & Institutional Capacity Building: To support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         farmers in adopting improved farm management practices, farmer groups will be provided with
                         training and extension services and necessary technical assistance in response to priority farming and
                         production needs of the farmers. Institutional strengthening support will also be provided to select
                         agricultural institutions to sustain the investments being made by the project and to ensure that the
                         farmers increasing demand for quality agri inputs is adequately addressed.

                         ➢❨¢ Improved Agri-Inputs and Technologies: In order for farm productivity and production
                         levels to increase in selected areas, farmer groups will be provided with agri-inputs and farming
                         technologies such as small farm machineries and equipment (on a cost sharing basis with an
                         established criteria), electric fencing, greenhouses, quality and disease-free seeds, and improved
                         planting materials ➢❨ based on the specific needs of the farmers. Some of these inputs will be
                         provided on a cost-sharing basis. The package of agri-inputs provided will be specific to the needs of
                         targeted groups and project areas. The use of improved farm and climate smart technologies for
                         increasing the productivity of staple and high value crops will also be promoted. As the migration of
                         male youth has resulted in a significantly increased work burden for women in farming activities, the
                         project will focus specifically on female farmers in the provision of small farm machineries.

                         Component 3: Enhancing Access to Markets

                         This component aims to promote value chains for select high value nutrient-rich crops and enhance
                         linkages to domestic and export markets. Activities under this component will include strengthening
                         local producer-consumer linkages; and establishing productive relationships with public and private
                         market players, school meal programs, and exporters. The overall commodity selection strategy will
                         follow the ➢❨ One Gewog Three Product (OTGP)➢❨ approach of MoAF that focuses on top three
                         commodities as per the current production scale. Sub-components under this project include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.1     Post-harvest and Market Infrastructure Support: The component will support training (ToTs,
                         CRP training, and training of farmers by CRPs), exposure visits, and the provision of appropriate
                         technologies (based on the cost sharing policy of DOA). Producer groups will be provided training in
                         entrepreneurship, business planning, book keeping, accounting, etc. Support will also be provided to
                         five food processing groups for preparation, packaging and marketing of hygienically safe, nutritious
                         food to domestic markets. Additionally, five farm shops will be supported as a pilot to develop these
                         shops into commercially viable model enterprises.

                         3.2       Linkages to Domestic and Export Markets: This component will provide support to DAMC
                         to review and upgrade the current system into a user-friendly agri market information system that
                         producers and other stakeholders can easily access through various technologies (computer, mobiles,
                         etc.). In addition to supporting the DAMC portal, knowledge sharing, and enhanced interactions and
                         linkages amongst local producers, middle men, traders, and agri markets will be strengthened
                         through the use of mobile technology where possible.
                         The component will also: (i) facilitate knowledge and information exchange between producer
                         groups, traders, exporters and key stakeholders for maximizing foreign exchange returns, (ii) inform
                         exporters about international trade practices, trade negotiation, etc. and (iii) link them with producers
                         and intermediaries for efficient value chain functioning.
                         As part of the effort to strengthen the school mean program, the project will develop capacity of: (i)


                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                         producer groups in establishing partnerships with schools and accessing local markets to sell their
                         produce, as needed, (ii) schools to improve school menus based on the crop calendar to help the PGs
                         plan supplies accordingly, (iii) school cooks to make use of seasonal foods and increase nutrient
Public Disclosure Copy




                         retention, and (iv) arrange exposure visits to successful home-grown school feeding programs.

                         Component 4: Project Management
                         This component will support all aspects of project management. This will include: (i) Management
                         and Coordination, (ii) Monitoring and Evaluation, (iii) Technical Assistance, and (iv) Grievance
                         Redressal System. The expected outcome of this component is an effective and transparent project
                         management system.

                         4. Project Location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis:

                         The project will be located in five of the poorest rural dzongkhags in south-west Bhutan, namely
                         Ckukha, Dagana, Haa, Samste, and Sarpang, that border Northeast India. The area is also located
                         near to the Siliguri pass, which is a focal area for a series of investments to open trade in the
                         Northeastern corridor between Bangladesh, Bhutan, India, and Nepal. The project is expected to
                         directly benefit approximately 10,400 household beneficiaries in 24 geogs in the 5 above-mentioned
                         dzongkhags through integrated interventions in agriculture sector. Additionally, through improved
                         homegrown school feeding programmes, the project will target 3,000 school children in 16 schools
                         located in 11 geogs in 4 dzongkhags.

                         In some of these dzongkhags, two of the Bank-funded agricultural productivity projects➢❨ the
                         Decentralized Rural Development Project (DRDP) and the Remote Rural Communities Development
                         Project (RRCDP) are/were also operating. Experience from these projects suggests that long-term,
                         irreversible and large-scale environmental and social risks are minimal, if any. Most of the impacts
                         relate to effects on livelihoods due to land acquisition, use of pesticide and chemical fertilizer, over
                         withdrawal or misuse of irrigation water.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            While the project is designed to provide opportunities for
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      an overall positive impact, some interventions/activities
                                                                     may have adverse environmental impacts. The key
                                                                     environmental issues that will need to be addressed by the
                                                                     project are: (i) land slide/soil erosion; (ii) over-extraction
                                                                     or misuse of irrigation water; (iii) soil degradation; (iv)
                                                                     pesticide-related health and safety issues; (v) water
                                                                     pollution, and (v) workers and community health safety
                                                                     and sanitation.

                                                                     The project is classified as a ?Category B? under OP/BP


                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                                                        4.01 with a partial assessment as the impacts are likely to
                                                        be small-scale, site specific with no irreversible impacts
                                                        and mitigation measures can be designed more readily.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        The implementing agencies will prepare an
                                                        Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                        (ESMF) which will be supported by an assessment of
                                                        environmental practices of currently on-going RRCDP,
                                                        institutional capacity assessment, some limited
                                                        environmental baseline, as well as guidelines to carry-out
                                                        sub-project specific environmental assessment,
                                                        consultations, prepare site specific EMP, costing, review
                                                        process, implementation, and monitoring.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    The project will not implement any agricultural activities
                         4.04                           inside the Protected Areas (wildlife sanctuaries, national
                                                        parks, etc). The infrastructure activities will be small
                                                        scale. It is highly unlikely that any natural habitats formed
                                                        largely by native plant and animal species would undergo
                                                        transformation of use or would be affected or modified
                                                        with support from the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   Project will not implement any activities inside in the
                                                        forest or protected forests or no forestry activities are
                                                        envisaged in the project. However, some activities such
                                                        as irrigation schemes, market infrastructure development
                                                        may involve some clearing of vegetation. Hence the
                                                        policy is triggered. The ESMF will address any issues
                                                        related to forest.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    The project is expected to have minor use of nationally
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        approved pesticides and there are no significant issues of
                                                        pest management and pesticide use to be addressed in the
                                                        sub-projects. The procurement and distribution of
                                                        pesticides in Bhutan is well controlled through a
                                                        centralized system and there will be no procurement of
                                                        pesticides classified as Class Ia, Ib and II by WHO.
                                                        However, in anticipation of higher yields, farmers could
                                                        expand the use of chemical fertilizers, and pesticides more
                                                        than what is recommended. Since the proposed GAFSP
                                                        project is expected to promote sustainable production
                                                        practices as a part of project design, the above issues are
                                                        not considered to be critical in the project. However, as a
                                                        matter of precaution to address any potential and
                                                        unforeseen issues of pest and pesticide management, OP
                                                        4.09 has been triggered. The ESMF will provide
                                                        guidelines on safe use of agrochemicals and promotion of
                                                        green agriculture technologies such as: (i) Integrated Pest
                                                        Management (IPM); (ii) balanced fertilizer use to reduce
                                                        the dependence on fertilizers; and (iii) composting.



                                                         Page 5 of 10
                            Physical Cultural           No             The project would not impact any physical and cultural
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             There are no known indigenous groups in the country.
                            BP 4.10                                    However, particular attention will be given to concerns of
                                                                       vulnerable groups including, women, poor, marginal
                                                                       farmers and youths.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               Irrigation development and farm mechanization might
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 require land acquisition that could potentially have
                                                                       impacts on livelihoods. However, due to the size and
                                                                       linear nature of these activities, these impacts are
                                                                       envisaged to be minimal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project will not construct or rehabilitate dams larger
                            4.37                                       than 10 meters in height.
                            Projects on International   Yes
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             Not triggered because the project dzongkhags are not
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           located in any internationally disputed areas

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts by supporting
                              sustainable use of land and other resources by rural communities, and helping them achieve higher
                              incomes through enhanced agricultural productivity and improved marketing. The project is
                              classified as a ➢❨ Category B➢❨ under OP/BP 4.01 with a partial assessment as the impacts are
Public Disclosure Copy




                              likely to be small-scale, site specific with no irreversible impacts and mitigation measures can be
                              designed more readily. Considering the nature and magnitude of potential environmental impacts
                              from relatively limited scale irrigation and market access interventions, the FSAPP is classified as
                              category ➢❨ B➢❨ project. The environmental safeguard policies triggered are Environmental
                              Assessment (OP4.01) and Forest (OP 4.36). However, as a matter of precaution to address any
                              potential and unforeseen issues of pest and pesticide management, OP 4.09 has been triggered.
                              The International Waterways policy (OP 7.50) has also been triggered as raw water for irrigation
                              from the existing streams will be withdrawn, stored and distributed to the agricultural fields.

                             Likewise, given that investments would be small, localized nature, significant adverse social
                             impacts are not envisaged under the project. However, the proposed investments under the project
                             will have their footings on the ground and will need land and hence OP 4.12 on Involuntary
                             Resettlement has been triggered. However, the land needs are expected to be small in quantity and
                             the impacts of such marginal. No involuntary resettlement is envisaged under the project and land
                             acquisition, if any, will be small-scale and to the extent possible, land will be acquired through
                             voluntary land donation or will make use of public lands or those already under the ownership of
                             project beneficiaries.

                             The project interventions are expected to be pro-poor and have a substantial focus on the capacity
                             building of farmers and producer groups through technical skills development, group formation

                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                           and operations, business development trainings, and market orientation. Specific interventions to
                           support women involve measures for ensuring their participation in project activities, their
                           representation in farmer groups and involvement in decision making, and support for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mechanization at the farm level to improve productivity, and reduce the burden of labor on
                           women.

                           While the project designed to provide opportunities for an overall positive impact, some activities
                           may have adverse social and environmental impacts, including risks of women and other
                           vulnerable groups not being adequately consulted, informed about the project, or excluded from
                           project benefits. An ESMF has been prepared to address key environmental and social issues such
                           as: (i) land slide/soil erosion; (ii) over-extraction or misuse of irrigation water; (iii) soil
                           degradation; (iv) pesticide-related health and safety issues; (v) water pollution, (vi) impacts due to
                           land acquisition, (vii) inclusion of gender and vulnerable groups, and (vii) workers and community
                           health safety and sanitation. Activities that would require mitigation action may include
                           construction of irrigation system, market system development, etc. The ESMF has also provided a
                           list of Environment and Social Code of Practices to enhance environmental and social benefits of
                           the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No highly significant long term direct impact is expected from the project. Further, the nature of
                           the types of investments to be supported by the project suggests that there will be minimum
                           cumulative social and environmental adverse impacts. Further, the screening process described in
                           the Environmental and Social Management Framework prepared for the project will eliminate
                           sites that may result in any serious impacts. A negative list of attributes has also been provided in
                           the ESMF.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The primary focus of the project is agricultural productivity. The sub-projects that will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           supported through the project will be determined once the selection process has been completed by
                           the PMU. Hence, no project alternatives were considered at this stage. However, the
                           environmental and social management process suggested in the ESMF include options for
                           environmental and social mitigation and environmental and social code of practices for designing
                           and implementation of the sub-projects in order to avoid or minimize adverse impacts at the
                           grassroots-level planning stage. Agricultural production and irrigation focused activities that
                           would lead to significant adverse impacts will not be supported during project implementation and
                           a negative list of activities will be included in the ESMF.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           RGoB has prepared a consolidated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                           for the project in order to screen/ assess, use appropriate mitigations, and manage any
                           environmental and social issues resulting from the small-scale interventions spread far and wide
                           across the five dzongkhags. The ESMF requires sub-project activities to be screened, and if
                           required, an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Environmental and Social
                           Code of Practices, Gender Development Plan and Vulnerable Community Development Plan,
                           Resettlement Action Plan (if applicable) be prepared for all proposed interventions. Also,
                           obtaining ➢❨ No Objection letter➢❨ from competent agency, is also required. The ESMF also
                           includes specific guidelines for monitoring and evaluation of safeguards compliance, and


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                           guidelines for public consultations.

                           Project management would continue to be the responsibility of the existing implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           agency, the Ministry of Agriculture and Forest (MoAF). This project is designed and will be
                           implemented using the same approach of RRCDP for environmental and social safeguards.
                           Because of prior experience of working with Bank financed project, MoAF is familiar with the
                           Bank's safeguard policies. However, MoAF still needs capacity improvement with regard to
                           environmental and social management and to comply with Bank's safeguards requirements since
                           the new project would incorporate new activities that are concentrated more on nutrition, market
                           facilitation and value addition for sustainability.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include beneficiary households, communities/ users, geog, chiog,
                           dzongkhag, and MoAF. Local-level consultations were carried out with primary stakeholders,
                           specifically the local communities, Geog Tshogde (GT) members and farmers. The consultations
                           with local communities involved group discussions and household interviews. During the field
                           consultation, special attention was given to women and vulnerable people.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Apr-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bhutan                                                           14-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Apr-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bhutan                                                           14-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   NA
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Bhutan                                                           01-Apr-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.



                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Winston Dawes,Mohammad Imtiaz Akhtar Alvi
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Shobha Shetty (PMGR)              Date: 04-Nov-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
