                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC12463

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Sep-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                         Project ID:       P153544
                            Project Name:      Mekong Delta Integrated Climate Resilience and Sustainable Livelihoods
                                               Project (P153544)
                            Task Team          Anjali Acharya,Binh Thang Cao,Greg J. Browder
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       11-Jan-2016                        Estimated         29-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEN02                               Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (40%), Public administration-
                                               Water, sanitation and flood protection (20%), General water, sanitation and
                                               flood protection sector (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (10%), Rural services and infrastructure (10%),
                                               Climate change (40%), Environmental policies and institu tions (15%), Water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               resource management (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    330.00                     Total Bank Financing:        300.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           30.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                 300.00
                              Total                                                                       330.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           18.    The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen institutional
                           coordination and planning across the Mekong Delta, and improve resilience of people’s livelihoods
                         and assets to climate change in selected vulnerable sub-regions. This will be achieved through (i)
                         strengthening information and decision support systems; (ii) reinforcing institutional coordination,
                         planning and capacity; and (iii) identifying and financing ‘low-regret’ (*) investments (structural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and non-structural) adopting an integrated “landscape” approach, in three key sub-regions of the
                         Mekong Delta.
                         (*) The UK Climate Change Impacts Programme (UKCIP) defines ‘low regret’ actions as “adaptive
                         measures for which the associated costs are relatively low and for which the benefits, although
                         primarily realized under projected future climate changes, may be relatively large”.
                         C. Project Description
                         Background: Water and land management in the Delta have been guided by the 1993 Mekong Delta
                         Master Plan (supported by the Dutch government) which focused on developing water control
                         infrastructure to maximize rice production for national food self-sufficiency. This 1993 Delta Plan
                         succeeded in dramatically increasing rice production and enabling Vietnam to become one of the
                         world’s largest rice exports. This was achieved through a massive expansion of agricultural water
                         control infrastructure that focused on two objectives: i) controlling flooding to allow for a third rice
                         crop in the wet season; and ii) bringing freshwater into coastal areas that naturally experienced high
                         levels of saline water intrusion during the dry season. This agricultural water control infrastructure
                         was coupled with improvements in the canal navigation network system to facilitate the transport of
                         rice out of the Delta. In the last 15 years there has also been a dramatic increase of shrimp production
                         along the coastline.

                         Although Vietnam has succeeded spectacularly in increasing food production in the Delta, this
                         success has generated a set of long-term sustainability challenges including: i) increased flooding in
                         some areas due to high levels of flood protection for agricultural areas; ii) loss of the environmentally
                         important coastal mangrove belt; and iii) increased salinity intrusion in coastal areas due to higher
                         levels of dry season water abstractions for irrigation. These environmental problems are compounded
                         by predicted climate changes which will increase wet season flows and decrease dry season flows
                         from the Mekong River into the Delta. Upstream hydro-power reservoirs will also impact flows into
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Delta, particularly the flows of sediment and nutrients. Finally, the national policy of maximizing
                         rice production for national food security in Vietnam is slowly being relaxed and the policy is being
                         adjusted to towards a more market-driven mechanism to allow farmers to maximize incomes.

                         These environmental and economic changes promoted the Vietnam government, again with Dutch
                         assistance, to formulate the 2013 Mekong Delta Plan which aims to ensure the “safe, prosperous, and
                         both economically and environmentally sustainable and climate proof development of the Mekong
                         Delta.” The goal of the proposed project is help operationalize the 2013 Mekong Delta Plan (MDP)
                         and each of the project components specially responds the strategy and recommends in the Plan. The
                         maps below provide a summary of the key environmental issues and the provinces in the Delta.

                         Component 1: Knowledge Management, Planning, and Institutions: The MDP emphasized the
                         importance of improving institutional performance and emphasizing that land and water issues
                         require cross-provincial boundary solutions and overall Delta management. This components
                         supports this approach by: i) creating a knowledge management platform for the Delta; ii) updating
                         and deepening the 2013 Mekong Delta plan; iii) developing Delta-wide cross-sectoral planning and
                         coordination mechanisms; and iv) strengthening provincial environmental agencies.

                         Component 2: Upper Delta Environmental Zone (An Giang/Dong Thap/Kien Giang Provinces) This
                         area is characterized by natural occurring deep floods in the wet season. The development an
                         extensive agricultural flood control system has shifted the flood waters to other areas in the Delta and
                         also reduced the beneficial effects of flooding including replenishing soil fertility, groundwater
                         recharge, and sustaining aquatic eco-systems. The primary objective of this component is to protect
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and/or reclaim the benefits of controlled flooding while increasing rural incomes and protecting high
                         value assets. This will consist of: i) modifying water and agricultural infrastructure to allow for more
                         controlled and beneficial flooding in rural areas and offer new agricultural/aquaculture alternatives;
                         ii) providing support to farmers so they have alternatives to the wet season rice crop, including
                         aquaculture; iii) constructing flood control infrastructure for select high value assets such as towns
                         and orchards; and iv) facilitating agricultural water use efficiency in the dry season.

                         Component 3: Delta Estuary Environmental Zone (Soc Trang, Tra Vinh, and Ben Tre Provinces):
                         The Mekong River divides into 9 tributaries which flow into the East Sea through the Estuary zone.
                         This area is naturally characterized by low flows during the dry season which allow saline water to
                         extend upwards of 100 km inland. Over the past twenty years, closed freshwater systems designed
                         for rice production have been developed in this area consisting of large polders ringed by dikes and
                         with sluice gates to control saline water intrusion. The long-term sustainability of this strategy is
                         questionable due to reduced dry season water availability and sea-level rise. In addition, farmers are
                         rapidly converting to more profitable shrimp farms along the coast, often accompanied by destruction
                         of mangrove forests.

                         This component aims to address the challenges related to salinity intrusion, coastal erosion,
                         sustainable aquaculture and improved livelihoods for communities living in the coastal areas. This
                         will consist of: i) construction of coastal defenses consisting of combinations of embankments and
                         costal mangrove belts; ii) modification of water and agricultural infrastructure along the coastal zone
                         to allow flexibility for sustainable aquaculture activities; iii) support to farmers to transition to more
                         sustainable brackish water activities such as mangrove-shrimp, rice-shrimp, and other aquaculture
                         activities; and iv) supporting climate smart agriculture by facilitating water use efficiency in the dry
                         season.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Component 4: Delta Peninsula Environmental Zone (Ca Mau and Bac Lieu): In contrast to the
                         adjacent estuary zone, there are no tributaries of the Mekong river flowing through the peninsula and
                         historically the peninsula was covered by dense mangroves sustained by localized rainfall. In recent
                         decades, there has been an explosion of shrimp farming along the coast which relies heavily on
                         groundwater abstraction to maintain the proper salinity level. The over-abstraction of groundwater
                         has resulted in significant land subsidence. The natural mangrove forest has been significantly
                         reduced, although there are still significant protected mangrove zones. An extensive canal network
                         has also been developed to bring freshwater from the Mekong River into the peninsula to allow rice
                         production.

                         This component aims to address the challenges related to coastal erosion, groundwater management,
                         sustainable aquaculture, and improved livelihoods for communities living in the coastal and river
                         mouth areas. This will consist of: i) construction of coastal defenses consisting of combinations of
                         embankments and costal mangrove belts; ii) modification of water control infrastructure along the
                         coastal zone to allow flexibility for sustainable aquaculture activities; iv) control of groundwater
                         abstraction for agricultural/aquaculture and development of freshwater supplies for domestic use; v)
                         support to farmers to practice more sustainable brackish water activities such as mangrove-shrimp
                         and other aquaculture activities; and vi) supporting climate smart agriculture by facilitating water use
                         efficiency.
                         Component 5: Project Management for MARD, MONRE, and Provincial Departments.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The Mekong Delta population has been identified one of the most vulnerable to the impacts of
                         climate change. Agriculture and aquaculture is likely to be affected by changes in freshwater supply
                         due to salinity intrusion, flooding, increasing tropical cyclone intensity, and increasing temperatures.
                         Domestic freshwater supply is expected to become less reliable due to erratic rainfall and salinity
                         intrusion into groundwater resources. Marine fisheries, particularly coral reef fisheries, are expected
                         to be impacted by sea-level rise, warmer oceans, and ocean acidification associated with rising
                         atmospheric and ocean CO2 concentrations. Coastal infrastructures are exposed increased tropical
                         storm intensity, long-term sea-level rise, and sudden-onset fluvial and coastal flooding. In addition,
                         changes in fishing and farming practices, (heavier use of pesticides and fertilizers) and increasing
                         industrialization and river traffic has led to a deterioration in air, surface and groundwater quality.
                         Poor construction practices and intensified land use has led to increased mangrove deforestation,
                         resulting in increased coastal erosion and increased vulnerability to natural disasters.

                         All three project components described below fall within the Mekong Delta. The Mekong Delta is
                         characterized by the tropical monsoon climate, although cold air from Siberia and China occasionally
                         penetrates the Mekong Delta. The general circulation is dominated by two monsoon flows: the
                         northeast in winter and southwest one in summer periods. The southwest monsoon or the rainy
                         season, normally affects the basin from mid-May to early October and the northeast monsoon occurs
                         in the dry season from early November to mid-March. In the Mekong Delta, the rainfall has clear
                         temporal and spatial distribution patterns. In the south-west area of the Delta (including Ca Mau and
                         Soc Trang) the rainfall (of 2400 mm) has historically been much higher than that (1200 mm) in the
                         coastal area of the East Sea (an area that includes Dong Thap).

                         Component 2: Upper Delta Environmental Zone (An Giang/Dong Thap/Kien Giang Provinces) This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         area is characterized by natural occurring deep floods in the wet season. The development an
                         extensive agricultural flood control system has shifted the flood waters to other areas in the Delta and
                         also reduced the beneficial effects of flooding which historically included replenishment of soil
                         fertility, groundwater recharge, and the preservation of aquatic eco-systems. In An Giang Province, a
                         large bird sanctuary exists at Tra Su, which is also home to Tra Su Forest. With an area of 850ha, Tra
                         Su Forest is home to 70 species of birds including two rare species of birds recorded in Vietnam's
                         Red Book: Mycteria leucocephala and Anhinga melanogaster. Tràm Chim National Park is a
                         national park in Dong Thap Province. This national park was created to protect several rare birds, in
                         particular the Sarus Crane (Grus antigone), a species listed in the IUCN Red Book. In Kien Giang, U
                         Minh Thuong National Park contains over 243 plant species and has a rich mammalian population,
                         including hairy-nosed otters and fishing cats. A total of 187 birds have been recorded here, including
                         the oriental darter, spot-billed pelican, black-headed ibis, glossy ibis, greater spotted eagle and Asian
                         golden weaver. There are also a total of 39 amphibian species and 34 species of fish in the park.

                         Component 3: Delta Estuary Environmental Zone (Soc Trang, Tra Vinh, and Ben Tre Provinces):
                         The Mekong River divides into 9 tributaries which flow into the East Sea through the Estuary zone.
                         This area is naturally characterized by low flows during the dry season which allow saline water to
                         extend upwards of 100 km inland. Over the past twenty years, closed freshwater systems designed
                         for rice production have been developed in this area consisting of large polders ringed by dikes and
                         with sluice gates to control saline water intrusion. The long-term sustainability of this strategy is
                         questionable due to reduced dry season water availability and sea-level rise. In addition, farmers are
                         rapidly converting to more profitable shrimp farms along the coast, often accompanied by destruction
                         of mangrove forests. In Tra Vinh, bird sanctuaries are located Tra Cu, Chua Huang, and Duyen Hai.
                         Duyen Hai is also host to the Duyen Hải Power Station- a complex of under-construction 2x 622
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MW coal-fired power plants located in Mu U Hamlet, Dan Thanh Commune. This plant will have
                         serious negative implications for local flora, fauna, aquafauna, and avifauna, as well as potentially
                         affecting groundwater and air quality, resulting in a deleterious impact on livelihood of local
                         fishermen and farmers. In Ben Tre, Thanh Phu is an important nature reserve of 4,510 ha, comprising
                         a strict protection area of 1,788 ha, a very critical coastal protection area of 949 ha, and a scientific
                         research area of 1,773 ha. Thanh Phu Nature Reserve comprises a narrow strip of coastline between
                         two of the mouths of the Mekong River: the Co Chien and Ham Luong estuaries. As is the case with
                         other sites on the eastern coastline of the Mekong Delta, Thanh Phu Nature Reserve is strongly
                         affected by erosion as well as accretion. Ben Tre also contains a planted mangrove forest at Bao
                         Thuan, and a large bird sanctuary at Ham Vo.

                         Component 4: Delta Peninsula Environmental Zone (Ca Mau and Bac Lieu): In contrast to the
                         adjacent estuary zone, there are no tributaries of the Mekong river flowing through the peninsula and
                         historically the peninsula was covered by dense mangroves sustained by localized rainfall. In recent
                         decades, there has been an explosion of shrimp farming along the coast which relies heavily on
                         groundwater abstraction to maintain the proper salinity level. The over-abstraction of groundwater
                         has resulted in significant land subsidence. The natural mangrove forest has been significantly
                         reduced, although there are still significant protected mangrove zones, particularly at Dam Roi. The
                         Mui Ca Mau Park is home 60 species of upper plants, up to 26 mangrove tree species and two
                         species of double mangrove and “quao” tree that are listed in Vietnam's Red Book. The Bac Lieu
                         Bird Sanctuary is notable for its 50-odd species of bird, including a large population of white herons.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         12.      The Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) is responsible for land,
                         water resources, mineral resources, geology, environment, hydrometeorology, climate change,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         surveying and mapping, management of the islands and the sea. MONRE has a reasonable level of
                         skilled technical specialists, particularly in Hanoi, and this capacity is supplemented by research
                         performed at research agencies and academic institutions. However, specifically relating to
                         safeguards application and compliance, MONRE has more limited operational experience –which
                         will need to be strengthened through institutional strengthening and targeted training programs under
                         this proposed project.

                         13.       The Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Development (MARD) is responsible for rural
                         development and the governance, promotion and nurturing of agriculture and the agriculture
                         industry. The purview of the Ministry includes forestry, aquaculture, irrigation and the salt industry;
                         it is also involved in water management and flood control. MARD has considerable experience in
                         implementation of World Bank-financed projects, and has good capacity in terms of compliance with
                         safeguards policies.

                         14.      Aside from these national level institutions, the provincial and district authorities will be
                         responsible for implementation and monitoring of specific environment and social management
                         activities. These provinces have been engaged in various Bank projects so relevant departments do
                         have familiarity with Bank requirements. However, the project will include relevant technical
                         assistance and training to PPMU staff and relevant provincial and district officers responsible for
                         implementing and monitoring the social and environment related activities and studies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ha Thi Van Nguyen (GEN02)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Nghi Quy Nguyen (GSURR)
                           Pierre Arnoux (GSU02)
                           Son Van Nguyen (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment    Yes        The overall environmental impacts from the
                           OP/BP 4.01                             proposed activities are expected to be largely
                                                                  positive, and those that will result in negative
                                                                  environmental impacts, through the construction of
                                                                  civil works, or changes of ecological flow, will be
                                                                  mitigated. Structural and non-structural investments
                                                                  to build resilience of communities to climate change
                                                                  and associated risks will be financed through this
                                                                  project. Potential investments to increase mangrove
                                                                  cover will enhance ecological restoration and help
                                                                  reduce coastal erosion. Climate-smart agriculture
                                                                  practices and cropping supported by this project will
                                                                  lead to reduced greenhouse gas emissions. Structural
                                                                  measures may also help to address saline intrusion
                                                                  and manage flood risks.

                                                                  Construction-related impacts. Given the existence of
                                                                  unexploded ordnances in the Mekong Delta, a mine
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                  clearance program must be undertaken prior to the
                                                                  start of civil works, and all workers undertaking
                                                                  dredging must operate with appropriate protective
                                                                  measures, including sandbagging of cranes, etc. The
                                                                  Borrower should also refer to the World Bank Group
                                                                  Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines, which,
                                                                  as well as sector-specific guidelines, provides
                                                                  guidance on best practice occupational and
                                                                  community health and safety procedures:. Any
                                                                  dredged material must be tested for Acid Sulfate
                                                                  Soil, and be treated and safely disposed of.

                                                                  The Project is proposed as category A for
                                                                  Environmental Assessment due to its cumulative
                                                                  impacts, spatial extent, its focus on adaptive delta
                                                                  management, and civil works largely carried out
                                                                  under Components 2, 3 and 4.

                                                                  The social and environmental impacts of the various
                                                                  sub-projects will be determined by the screening
                         process for environmental and social impacts. This
                         process will be delineated in the framework
                         safeguard documents that will serve a guideline for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the preparation of sub-project Environmental
                         Assessments for those sub-projects not definitively
                         identified prior to Project appraisal. The task team
                         proposes four “volumes” for appraisal as follows:

                         •        Volume 1: Regional Environmental
                         Assessment
                         •        Volume 2: Regional Social Assessment
                         •        Volume 3: Project Environmental and Social
                         Management Framework (ESMF)
                         •        Volume 4: Sub-Project Level Environmental
                         and Social Impact Assessments (ESIAs); out of a
                         total loan amount of $300 million, it is expected that
                         around $100 million of investments will be prepared
                         for appraisal.

                         A. Volume 1: Regional Environmental Assessment
                         (REA)

                         This will be based primarily on the 2013 Mekong
                         Delta Plan vision, which lays out a long-term vision
                         and strategy for the Delta taking into account climate
                         change and other factors. The project objective is to
                         help operationalize the Mekong Delta Plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Prior to project identification, the Bank contracted,
                         utilizing WPP funds, an Australian firm
                         (International Center of Environmental Management-
                         ICEM) to under a Technical Assistance (TA)
                         assignment entitled “Developing Long-Term
                         Adaptation Tools for the Mekong Delta.” The scope
                         of this assignment is as follows:

                         “DELTA Tools combine Mekong Basin future
                         simulations of hydrological regimes for the Mekong
                         Delta based on four key drivers of change; climate,
                         hydropower development, land use change and sea
                         level rise to determine the threats to the delta from
                         key issues such as flood depth, extent and duration,
                         saline intrusion and erosion. These geophysical
                         changes are then overlaid onto the socio-economic
                         projections for the delta to determine delta metrics;
                         risks to rice production, agriculture and aquaculture
                         as well as impacts on infrastructure and natural
                         systems. These metrics provide the basis in which
                         proposed investment decisions and scenarios from
                         the Mekong Delta Plan can be assessed for their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         adaptability and resilience to future climate
                         projections.”

                         For the REA (i.e. Volume 1), the proposed approach
                         is to combine information from the Mekong Delta
                         Plan and the ICEM products, to present the overall
                         context, rationale, and approach for the project. The
                         Ministry of Natural Resources and the Environment
                         (MONRE) will be the lead agency for the REA and
                         the Bank is planning to contract ICEM to help advise
                         MONRE in the preparation of the REA.

                         The task team does not feel that a separate or stand-
                         alone SESA and/or Cumulative Impact Assessment
                         (CIA) is needed in this case. Rather the REA will
                         document and present previous strategic
                         environmental work, which looks at cumulative
                         impacts, from the 2013 Mekong Delta Plan and the
                         ICEM work. It is important to note also that the
                         proposed (2020) Mekong Delta Plan Update in
                         Component 1 will significantly expand the previous
                         strategic environmental work and will inherently and
                         organically address cumulative impacts at the
                         regional level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Volume 2: Regional Social Assessment (RSA)

                         The RSA will present the general socio-economic
                         context for the project, describe and geo-reference
                         poverty and ethnic minority issues, and most
                         importantly examine the social and economic
                         dynamics of the agriculture/aquaculture practice
                         transitions contemplated under the project.

                         The concept of Delta climate resiliency has been at
                         the forefront of Vietnamese and Development
                         Partner activities in recent years and there are
                         numerous examples of small-scale pilots
                         demonstrating innovative agricultural/aquaculture
                         practices. The project will provide the financing to
                         help provide the infrastructure to scale up these
                         innovations, but their ultimate success depends on
                         the ability of communities and households to
                         transition to new practices that both economically
                         and financially sustainable. Some of these key
                         transitions are:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •      From Triple Rice to Rice-Aquaculture
                         •      From Double Rice to Rice-Aquaculture
                         •      Growing Floating Rice in Wet Season
                         •      From Intensive Shrimp to Mangrove/
                         Aquaculture (Shrimp)
                         •      From Rice to Mangrove/Shrimp (Shrimp)

                         Many of these livelihood transitions are already well-
                         understood and documented at the pilot scale. The
                         Bank task team has contracted IUCN-Vietnam to
                         help review and document the socio-dynamics of
                         transitions to more climate resilient agricultural/
                         aquaculture activities these “transition models” will
                         then be incorporated into the RSA and will help
                         guide the formulation of specific subprojects in terms
                         of the social and economic dynamics.

                         MARD will be responsible developing the RSA, with
                         the support of the IUCN (contracted by the Bank)
                         and individual social specialist consultant.

                         C. Volume 3: Environmental and Social
                         Management Framework

                         The goal is identify at least $100 million worth of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments by appraisal out of a total estimated loan
                         amount of $300 million. Thus an ESMF will need to
                         be formulated to guide the subproject specific ESIAs
                         that will developed during project implementation.
                         The main body of the ESMF document will provide
                         the overall screening process and safeguard guidance
                         for the project, and the specific framework policies
                         will be included as annexes, including the
                         Resettlement Policy Framework, Ethnic Minorities
                         Development Framework, Pest Management
                         Framework, etc.

                         Fortunately, MARD has worked on a number of
                         similar projects in the Mekong Delta, such as the
                         Mekong Delta Water Resources Management Project
                         (Approved in 2011) and the Sustainable Agriculture
                         Transition Project (Board Approval in 2015), that
                         can be easily adapted to fit the needs of the project.
                                                             D. Volume 4: Subproject Environmental and Social
                                                             Impact Assessments (ESIA) and Environmental
                                                             Management Plans
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             It is expected that around $100 million of
                                                             investments will be identified prior to appraisal. By
                                                             July 2015 the specific subprojects should be
                                                             confirmed allowing for the preparation of feasibility
                                                             studies/ESIAs. It is expected that there will be
                                                             between 5 and 10 subprojects, most if not all of the
                                                             subprojects will be at the Category B level of
                                                             impacts. According to the national environmental
                                                             assessment regulation, Decree No. 18/2015/ND-CP
                                                             dated 14/2/2015, the subprojects under Component 1,
                                                             2, 3, and 4 may be subject to preparation of ESIA or
                                                             environmental protection plan (EPP). As per Bank’s
                                                             requirements, all the Category A subprojects need to
                                                             prepare a full ESIA. For Category B subprojects,
                                                             depending on the type of subproject and the nature
                                                             and magnitude of the impacts, an EMP or a simple
                                                             environmental code of practice (ECOP) may be
                                                             sufficient.

                                                             All the safeguards instruments prepared during
                                                             project preparation are subject to prior review and
                                                             approval by the Bank. By project appraisal, public
                                                             consultation and disclosure of the safeguards
                                                             instruments will be completed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Hydrological impacts impacting natural habitats.
                                                             Certain proposed project activities would impact the
                                                             ecological flow of the rivers in the Mekong Delta,
                                                             impacting aquatic flora and fauna. Hydrological
                                                             modeling will be undertaken to limit seasonal
                                                             impacts on aquatic fauna insofar as possible.
                                                             Changes in the ecological flow of the Mekong River
                                                             may result due to the installation of sluice gates and
                                                             other flood/salinity control measures; leading to a
                                                             reduction in the diversity and quantity of fish
                                                             populations. Fish species in the Mekong Delta are
                                                             threatened by overfishing and loss of habitat and
                                                             spawning sites due to changes to the river, including
                                                             canalization of river banks etc. Efforts will be taken
                                                             to limit impacts on aquatic fauna, for example,
                                                             through the placement of fish ladders at sluice gates.

                                                             Tra Vinh and other locales: Changes in the
                                                             ecological flow of the Mekong River will take place
                         as a result of the installation of and erosion control
                         measures (such as the balanced island and ring dykes
                         and embankment protection). This may result in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         changes in the diversity and quantity of fish
                         populations and other marine life and mitigation
                         measures will be proposed to limit these, based on
                         hydrological modeling.

                         In the case of the beach in Tra Vinh adjacent to the
                         under-construction Duyen Hai Thermal Power Plant
                         --- 2x 622 MW sub-critical coal-fired units will be
                         installed for Phase I of this project, the jetty built for
                         the coal terminal will have impacts on hydrological
                         flows in the project area. Residents in the area have
                         already claimed that construction of the plant has
                         resulted in soil loss and erosion. The positioning and
                         design of the marine outfall from the cooling water
                         recirculation system of the plant is a valid concern
                         depending on the temperature differential at the edge
                         of the mixing zone. If it is too high, this will have an
                         effect on marine life in the area, and may impact
                         livelihoods of fishermen in the area, as well as
                         having detrimental effects on the marine ecosystem.
                         However, neither the Power Plant nor its associated
                         facilities are supported by the project. The Power
                         Plant is located on the coastal area about 70 km
                         downstream of the proposed sluice gate subproject.
                         These factors will be taken into consideration when
Public Disclosure Copy




                         designing any climate resilience or livelihood
                         restoration subprojects in the vicinity of the plant.

                         Care will be taken to ensure that subprojects do not
                         take place in, or in close proximity to natural
                         reserves and wildlife and bird sanctuaries. These
                         include the following:

                         In An Giang Province, a large bird sanctuary exists at
                         Tra Su, which is also home to Tra Su Forest. With an
                         area of 850ha, Tra Su Forest is home to 70 species of
                         birds including two rare species of birds recorded in
                         Vietnam's Red Book: Mycteria leucocephala and
                         Anhinga melanogaster. Tràm Chim National Park is
                         a national park in Dong Thap Province. This national
                         park was created to protect several rare birds, in
                         particular the Sarus Crane (Grus antigone), a species
                         listed in the IUCN Red Book. In Kien Giang, U
                         Minh Thuong National Park contains over 243 plant
                         species and has a rich mammalian population,
                         including hairy-nosed otters and fishing cats. A total
                         of 187 birds have been recorded here, including the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         oriental darter, spot-billed pelican, black-headed ibis,
                         glossy ibis, greater spotted eagle and Asian golden
                         weaver. There are also a total of 39 amphibian
                         species and 34 species of fish in the park.

                         In Tra Vinh, bird sanctuaries are located Tra Cu,
                         Chua Huang, and Duyen Hai. Duyen Hai is also host
                         to the Duyen Hải Power Station- a complex of under-
                         construction 2x 622 MW coal-fired power plants
                         located in Mu U Hamlet, Dan Thanh Commune. This
                         plant will have serious negative implications for
                         local flora, fauna, aquafauna, and avifauna, as well as
                         potentially affecting groundwater and air quality,
                         resulting in a deleterious impact on livelihood of
                         local fishermen and farmers. In Ben Tre, Thanh Phu
                         is an important nature reserve of 4,510 ha,
                         comprising a strict protection area of 1,788 ha, a very
                         critical coastal protection area of 949 ha, and a
                         scientific research area of 1,773 ha. Thanh Phu
                         Nature Reserve comprises a narrow strip of coastline
                         between two of the mouths of the Mekong River: the
                         Co Chien and Ham Luong estuaries. As is the case
                         with other sites on the eastern coastline of the
                         Mekong Delta, Thanh Phu Nature Reserve is
                         strongly affected by erosion as well as accretion. Ben
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Tre also contains a planted mangrove forest at Bao
                         Thuan, and a large bird sanctuary at Ham Vo.

                         The Mui Ca Mau Park is home 60 species of upper
                         plants, up to 26 mangrove tree species and two
                         species of double mangrove and “quao” tree that are
                         listed in Vietnam's Red Book. The Bac Lieu Bird
                         Sanctuary is notable for its 50-odd species of bird,
                         including a large population of white herons

                         Wetlands/Biodiversity impacts. Dong Thap: It is
                         suggested that a wetland in Gao Giang be developed
                         as a water reservoir to provide fresh water for
                         aquaculture, and also to serve as an ecotourism site.
                         Mitigation measures must be in place to protect or
                         rehabilitate the melaleuca forests and species in the
                         wetlands, especially during construction.

                         Ca Mau: There was a suggestion that rainwater
                                                         harvesting be undertaken through the building of a
                                                         reservoir in the Mui Ca Mau National Park. This
                                                         RAMSAR site is habitat to 93 bird species; 26
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         species of mammal; 43 types of reptiles; 9 amphibian
                                                         species; 139 fish species, and 24 shrimp species. It is
                                                         reported that these include gray-foot pelicans,
                                                         Chinese white stork, large-spotted civet, otter,
                                                         turtles-teeth, black-back box turtles, and three-ledge
                                                         tortoise. The Park comprises the largest land area of
                                                         intertidal mudflats and mangroves in the South. The
                                                         Park is home 60 species of upper plants, up to 26
                                                         mangrove tree species and two species of double
                                                         mangrove and “quao” tree that are listed in
                                                         Vietnam’s Red Book. Given the associated
                                                         infrastructure requirements (water treatment plant,
                                                         pipelines, pumping stations, etc.) it is recommended
                                                         that further detail study be conducted to determine
                                                         the level of impact on the natural projected area. The
                                                         Bank does not support project that would involve
                                                         significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                         habitats, which include National Park as one of the
                                                         categories.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36        Yes   Coastal protection/restoration aims to restore coastal
                                                         landscapes to enhance resilience of inland farming
                                                         systems, reduce vulnerability to the impacts of sea-
                                                         level rise and coastal erosion. Activities may include
                                                         mangrove reforestation in targeted areas. Forest
                                                         Management Plans will be prepared for all mangrove
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         reforestation undertaken as part of the Project, and
                                                         for any sub-projects that may affect the indigo
                                                         forests. There are indigo forests in Ca Mau, Kien
                                                         Giang, An Giang, and Dong Thap.
                                                         As noted above, It is suggested that a wetland in Gao
                                                         Giong in Dong Thap Province, be developed as a
                                                         water reservoir to provide fresh water for
                                                         aquaculture, and also to serve as an ecotourism site.
                                                         Mitigation measures must be in place to protect or
                                                         rehabilitate the melaleuca forests and species in the
                                                         wetlands, especially during construction.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   Yes   Potential increased use of pesticides, and pollution
                                                         and disease from shrimp farming. Dong Thap:
                                                         proposed farming of giant freshwater prawn with in a
                                                         40,000 ha area to include Tam Nong, Thanh Binh,
                                                         Cao Lanh, Lap Vo, and Hong Ngu. This could lead
                                                         to increased pollution load in soil and water from the
                                                         expansion of extensive/intensive shrimp farming
                                                         leading to increased use of antibiotics [and
                                                             pesticides]. Other locales: The use of pesticides and
                                                             fertilizer on vegetables grown as an additional source
                                                             of revenue under the adoption of floating rice
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             cultivation or alternate crops such as, for example,
                                                             mango, longan, and mandarin along the Song Tien
                                                             River. Since the changes in agricultural practices will
                                                             lead to use of pesticides (and fertilizer), albeit
                                                             reduced and sustainably managed, an integrated pest
                                                             management policy will be adopted, and a Pest
                                                             Management Framework will be appended to the
                                                             ESMF based on the existing Framework prepared
                                                             under the Mekong Delta Water Resources
                                                             Management for Rural Development Project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   It is not expected that the projects will necessitate the
                         OP/BP 4.11                          relocation of cultural, historic, or religious
                                                             monuments, or graves. Should this be unavoidable,
                                                             all effort will be made to limit impacts on such sites.
                                                             In such a case, a PCR management Plan will be
                                                             prepared in consultation with local stakeholders and
                                                             religious/cultural authorities. Since the project
                                                             includes dredging and excavation activities, which
                                                             may result in chance finds, chance find procedures
                                                             will be included in contracts and EMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes   The project will entail multiple subprojects in a large
                         4.10                                geographical area of Mekong Delta Region where
                                                             ethnic minority communities (Cham and Khmer) are
                                                             likely to be present. The application of OP 4.10 at the
                                                             subproject level will be identified on a case by case
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             basis with support from early screening exercises.
                                                             Once the policy application is confirmed, MARD
                                                             will conduct social assessments (SA) – at subproject
                                                             level as part of subproject Environmental and Social
                                                             Impact Assessment (ESIAs) - to confirm if affected
                                                             ethnic minorities (EMs) provide their broad support
                                                             to the project, including by: (i) identifying potential
                                                             benefits and negative impacts of the project; (ii)
                                                             defining the recommendations (including mitigation
                                                             measures) to ensure free, prior and informed
                                                             consultations with the EMs (especially, their
                                                             participation in the project design and monitoring
                                                             during the implementation phase); and (iii) defining
                                                             the measures required to provide culturally
                                                             appropriate benefits (e.g. tailored information
                                                             disclosure, consultation, and community support
                                                             activities). By appraisal, Ethnic Minority
                                                             Development Plans (EMDP) of relevant subproject
                                                             (s) will be prepared under Volume 4: Subproject
                                                              ESIA Reports. The EMDPs will include a summary
                                                              of the SA, consultations, the scope of impacts and
                                                              mitigation measures, activities for the enhancement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              of project implementing agencies and estimated costs
                                                              for the Plan. In addition, as part of ESMF, MARD
                                                              will also develop an Ethnic Minority Planning
                                                              Framework (EMPF), guiding the preparation of
                                                              individual EMDPs for subprojects identified during
                                                              the project implementation (under Volume 3: ESMF
                                                              and Supporting Frameworks).
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   Project activities are likely to involve some land
                         BP 4.12                              acquisition resulting in physical land take and
                                                              impacts on livelihoods and resources. At this stage,
                                                              this may occur in components 2 3 and 4. It may be
                                                              necessary to compensate local communities for lost
                                                              homes, immovable assets, and/or lost revenues/
                                                              livelihoods as a result of any flood control/ saline
                                                              intrusion measures or changes in fishing and farming
                                                              practices and/or changes in cropping. Additional
                                                              assistance to farmers who may have changes in their
                                                              current livelihoods may also be needed, and is being
                                                              identified through a social analysis.
                                                              The RSA and subproject ESIAs will be the initial
                                                              instruments that will determine the scope of these
                                                              impacts. By appraisal, MARD will prepare: (i)
                                                              individual Resettlement Plans (RPs) for subprojects
                                                              with known impacts and location (under Volume 4:
                                                              Subproject ESIA Reports) ; and (ii) a Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of
                                                              RPs for investments identified during project
                                                              implementation (under Volume 3: ESMF and
                                                              Supporting Frameworks). The RPF and RPs will
                                                              include the measures to ensure that displaced people
                                                              are: (i) informed about the options regarding
                                                              resettlement; (ii) consulted and offered alternative
                                                              resettlement choices; and (iii) provided with effective
                                                              compensation and livelihood restoration. The RPF
                                                              and RPs will also include guidance on screening and
                                                              policy application implication for potentially linked
                                                              activities. Impacts on livelihoods will also be
                                                              addressed through the Environment and Social
                                                              Management Framework for the project. These
                                                              Frameworks will identify specific procedures that
                                                              will need to be followed once smaller sub projects
                                                              are identified.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      Yes   Safety issues based on flood retention structures.
                                                              Given that no flood retention structure will be higher
                                                                                                                        than 10 meters, the team will agree on appropriate
                                                                                                                        safety measures with the Borrower and to ensure the
                                                                                                                        involvement of qualified engineers, and will confirm
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        that the environmental assessment (EAs) for each
                                                                                                                        subproject have determined that there would be no
                                                                                                                        risk or negligible risk of significant adverse impacts
                                                                                                                        due to potential failure of the structure to local
                                                                                                                        communities and assets, including assets to be
                                                                                                                        financed as part of the proposed Project.
                                 Projects on International                                   Yes                        Since the project is located in the Mekong Delta, and
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   may include flood retention and fisheries sub-
                                                                                                                        projects that may have an impact on upstream
                                                                                                                        riparians, OP 7.50 – International Waterways - is
                                                                                                                        triggered, and notifications to riparian states will be
                                                                                                                        made [or a waiver will be sought] prior to the
                                                                                                                        approval of the Project.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      OP 7.60 is not triggered because none of the
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                proposed project sites are in a Disputed Area.
                                                                                                                        Screening will be undertaken to ensure any
                                                                                                                        additional sites proposed lie outside a Disputed Area
                                                                                                                        as defined by OP 7.60.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      All the project draft safeguard instruments including REA, RSA, ESMF, RPF, EMPF, subproject
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      ESIAs, EMPs, RPs, and EMDPs will be completed and disclosed locally and at the InfoShop by
                                      December 2015.

                                      All the safeguards instruments prepared during project preparation will be completed by appraisal
                                      in January 2016 with subsequent final disclosure locally at the project sites and the InfoShop.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anjali Acharya,Binh Thang Cao,Greg J. Browder
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 03-Nov-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                    Date: 09-Nov-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
