INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCI 144
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Rwanda                     Project ID:   P150844
Project Name:    RW-Urban Development Project (P150844)
Task Team        Meskerem Brhane,Jonas Ingemann Parby
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Jan-2016                Estimated     29-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU13                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Urban Transport (20%), Sub-national government administration (50%),
General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%), Wa ter supply
(10%)
Theme(s):        City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (30%), Urban planning and
housing policy (15%), Urban services and housing for the poo r (40%),
Municipal governance and institution building (15%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      85.00             Total Bank Financing:    85.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                      85.00
Total                                                            85.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to support urban management for the delivery of basic services
and to promote local economic development in selected urban centers.
C. Project Description


﻿The project supports Rwanda's six secondary cities to improve access to services, build the capacity
of districts for urban management, and spur local economic development. District capacity building
will be in relation to functions that they actually perform ("learning by doing"); they will be held to
account (by citizens and national government) and will be rewarded for the performance of these
functions. Key elements of the project would include the following but will be further elaborated and
refined during the project preparation process (US$ 85m total project cost):
0
Component 1: Improving urban management for basic services in the six secondary cities (US$70m)
*       This component will support provision of basic infrastructure in the 6 secondary cities to enhance
living conditions for residents and also support local economic development. The funds for the
investments will be allocated through annual Urban Development Grants consisting of two elements:
an unconditional formula (e.g., percent urban population and urban area) and performance criteria.
An independent entity will carry out annual assessments and a baseline will be established during
preparation. The grant will be phased in order to ensure that there is full uptake of the performance
requirements. The grant will be in addition to existing GOR grants and transfers, and will be
specifically targeted to finance investments in urban areas of the districts. Assuming a phased
introduction of the grant, each district would receive around 1 Im US$ in total (or about 180$ per
capita) over 5 years, or about 37$ per capita per year. The Assessment, operational and fund
disbursement procedures will be closely aligned with the existing government grant mechanisms.
Component 2: Modeling Inclusive Urbanization in Nyarugenge District of Kigali (US$1 0m)
This component will support the upgrading of the Nyarugenge District and in particular Agatare
neighborhood in the City of Kigali. This site is located within the Central Business District and
comprises an 80 hectare informal settlement site and is home to 3,000 households. The upgrading of
the site is to serve as a model for community based urban regeneration that can be scaled up to other
parts of Kigali and to secondary towns. A learning-by-doing approach will be adopted to identify the
most appropriate approach for upgrading in the Rwandan context and these lessons will be shared
and disseminated among key stakeholders, especially district leaders with the hopes of scaling it up.
O
Q)      Component 3: Technical support for implementing some aspects of the National Urbanization
Strategy (US$2.5 m)
This component will include three subcomponents: (i) support to local economic development; (ii)
capacity building for urban management; and (iii) enabling coordinated urban planning.
3.1 Support to local economic development: This component will finance TA for the six secondary
cities to facilitate the implementation of local economic development plans. This could include: (a)
TA to One Stop Centers and the Business Development Units to meet their existing and additional
responsibilities to help accelerate permit and lic ensing times for infrastructure, land, construction
and private sector registration and growth, and (b) advisory support and training to districts to
conduct detailed economic feasibility studies for their potential LED focused investment projects.
This would also include direct technical support for district officials to design better updates to and
next set of LED plans, taking into account budgeting, staffing and other implementation strategies.
Additional TA areas being considered include design and implementation of business or market
centers and integration of local economic development and urban planning principles. If any of the
identified TA activities under Component 3.1 should trigger safeguard policies, the necessary
safeguards documents will be prepared prior to project appraisal.
3.2 Capacity Building for urban management: Technical Assistance will be provided to the six


﻿Districts to enable them to improve their performance as measured through the criteria for allocating
Urban Development Grants (e.g., planning, managing local finances - such as asset management,
O&M, budget execution - and project management). This will be delivered through a combination of
coaching, training and peer-to-peer learning.
o
3.3 Developing information systems for coordinated planning and strategic decision making: The
project will support a geodata platform that integrates GIS data that are currently scattered across a
number of national agencies and district governments in order to better integrate information on all
municipal infrastructure services. This will allow for better coordination in service delivery/
infrastructure investment. The project will also ensure that the portal will be shared across key
national and local actors operating in the urban sector. This national system will be rolled out to the
six districts and training will be provided in the analysis and use of GIS data for local level decision
making. This GIS will also be complemented with a system for collecting and curating data on
urbanization (e.g., data on demand and supply of housing; employment in urban areas; number of off
farm jobs created etc - all data that are expected to be tracked under the government's EPDRS2).
Component 4: Project management support (US$2.5 m)
Support will be provided to the implementing agencies at national (Ministry of Infrastructure,
Rwanda Housing Authority and Local Development Agency) and District levels on project
management, including for the recruitment of staff as needed (e.g. engineers, financial management,
procurement, social and environmental safeguards specialists). The districts may also be provided
with technical assistance for managing and supervising infrastructure works.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will include a number of infrastructure activities, such as construction of secondary
urban roads, drainage, medium to small scale water and sanitation facilities, small scale solid waste
management interventions, street lighting, etc. Based on the initial screening, field visits and
interviews with the project stakeholders, the proposed activities will potentially trigger WB OP 4.01
- Environmental Assessment, OP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources and OP 4.04 - Natural
Habitats. The policy on Natural Habitats may be relevant to the project, as several of the secondary
cities are located in proximity to lakes, rivers and wetlands, which may require specific design and/or
mitigation measures. The exact scope of the project interventions, and environmental risks relevant
to the project will be confirmed during preparation stage.
On social safeguards, the project interventions will trigger World Bank Operation Policy on
Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12 although field visits suggest that the social and environmental
impacts will neither be large scale or irreversible. There is a risk that informal settlement upgrading
in secondary cities and Kigali may result in displacement of households and expropriation of land.
Hence every effort will be made to avoid, minimize and/or manage the displacement and
expropriation through: (i) flexibility in applying construction standards with the appropriate authority
where permitted; and (ii) applying an active community participatory planning, implementation and
maintenance process for neighborhood improvement. This approach not only strengthens the social
capital within the community but also ensures ownership and sustainability of the investments. For
the construction of potential urban infrastructure in the secondary cities, while the land requirements
are minimal, expropriation of land from private owners will potentially pose a funding challenge for
some of the District governments. The Bank team recommends a cost-benefit analysis of the urban
infrastructure when planning and prioritizing for these investments.


﻿E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Current capacity to manage the social and environmental impacts of the project preparation and
implementation is not sufficient both at MININFRA/RHA and the District levels.
0
On social safeguards, some districts are including CSOs as implementers of the District
development Plans through formal agreements to fill the capacity gap. The Bank team is cognizant of
the structural and staffing change at the national and district levels to strengthen the decentralization
a      process. The project will require that Districts, when assessing their need for expertise, identify a
social development expert to manage the social impacts of investments (these could be sourced from
CSOs on a competitive basis as part of regular procurement process). The Project Management Unit
should include a full time Social Development Expert and an assigned budget to provide technical
assistance to the districts in strengthening their capacity to manage the environmental and social
impacts of the urban investments.
In the new structure of district staffing, District Units will continue to include an environmental
specialist, who will need to take on responsibilities, among other duties, for environmental
management in the Urban Development Project investments. District Units will continue to include
an environmental specialist, who will need to take on responsibilities, among other duties, for
environmental management in the Urban Development Project investments. Such responsibilities
include (1) collaboration with the project engineers and with the PMU to contribute to environmental
sustainability of the project designs, and (2) environmental due diligence, e.g. oversight of timely
ESIA/ESMP development, disclosure and implementation, monitoring and auditing of the
subprojects. At the national level, the Mission recommends that the Project Management Unit
includes a full time Environmental Expert with an assigned budget to provide technical assistance to
the Districts in strengthening their capacity to manage the environmental impacts of the urban
investments.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Svetlana Khvostova (GENDR)
Yasmin Tayyab (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will include a number of infrastructure
OP/BP 4.01                              activities, such as construction of secondary urban
roads, drainage, medium to small scale water and
sanitation facilities, small scale solid waste
management interventions, street lighting, etc. Based
on the initial screening, field visits and interviews
with the project stakeholders the project is assigned
EA Category B as the proposed projects will have
environmental and social impacts, which are
expected to be reversible and limited to the project
site. The project will prepare ESMF and ESIA/EMP
for any of the investments identified during project
preparation. The ESMF (and ESIAs) will be


﻿consulted upon and publicly disclosed in Rwanda
and in the World Bank InfoShop prior to project
appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         The policy on Natural Habitats may be relevant to
the project, as several of the secondary cities are
located in proximity to lakes, rivers and wetlands,
which may require specific design and/or mitigation
measures. The exact scope of the project
interventions, and environmental risks relevant to the
project will be confirmed during preparation stage.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        The policy is triggered since the project works will
OP/BP 4.11                              include excavations, demolition, movement of earth,
and potentially other environmental changes.
However, there are no known physical cultural
resources identified in the vicinity of proposed
project sites during screening. The ESMF will
include a chance finds procedure to be incorporated
into subproject EMPs, once these will be identified.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes       The policy is triggered due to identified potential
BP 4.12                                 investments in informal settlement upgrading in
secondary cities and Kigali, which may result in
displacement of households and expropriation of
land. Hence every effort will be made to avoid,
minimize and/or manage the displacement and
expropriation through: (i) flexibility in applying
construction standards with the appropriate authority
where permitted; and (ii) applying an active
community participatory planning, implementation
and maintenance process for neighborhood
improvement. The project will prepare an RPF, and
RAPs for any of the investments identified during
project preparation. The RPF (and, if applicable
RAPs) will be consulted upon and publicly disclosed
in Rwanda and in the World Bank InfoShop prior to
project appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50


﻿Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2015
O
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Safeguards documents can be prepared when the first draft of the feasibility study is ready
(October 2015). The ESMF and RPF will be prepared from August to December 2015. Site
specific RAPs and EMPs will be prepared as soon as final investments for Y1 for the Urban
Development Grant have been determined (November 2015).
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Meskerem Brhane,Jonas Ingemann Parby
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 13-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Sameh Naguib Wahba (PMGR)                 Date: 13-Aug-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


