INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12564
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Niger                      Project ID:   P153420
Project Name:    Climate Smart Agriculture Support Project (P153420)
Task Team        Amadou Ba,Vikas Choudhary
Leader(s):
Estimated        30-Nov-2015                Estimated     26-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFA01                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Irrigation and drainage (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
(35%), Crops (35%), Animal production (10%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
support (20%), Rural markets (20%), Climate change (20%), Rural policies and
institutions (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     111.00             Total Bank Financing:   111.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     111.00
Total                                                           111.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
19.    The proposed development objective is to increase agricultural productivity and enhance
drought resilience of agro-pastoral systems in the targeted communities and households in Niger.
C. Project Description


﻿Component I: Scaling up Climate Smart Agriculture (CSA) practices (USD 63 million)
The aim of this component is to support farmers implement climate smart agriculture practices and
technologies. The component is composed of three sub-components:
O
Sub-component #1.1. Building sustainable seed system and Scaling up CSA innovations
(USD 23 million)
Most Nigerien farmers practice low-input agriculture. Despite the frequency of droughts, the
adoption rate of improved and drought-tolerant seeds is very low. For example, improved seeds
produced in 2011 cover only 2.88% of the area planted in 2012. Over the years, ICRISAT has
generated several crop varieties suitable to the agro-climatic conditions of the Sahel. The project will
support the Niger improved seed industry through: (i) strengthening the capacity of INRAN's
agronomic research centers in the production of foundation seed; (ii) support to community-based
seed production systems and to private sector companies operating in the seed production; (iii)
construction of storage and packaging infrastructure; (iv) promoting the use of selected seeds; (v)
strengthening of seed associations and inter-professional organizations; (vi) support for innovative
mechanisms of seed marketing; and (vii) strengthening seed policy and institutional support to the
national seed control and certification agency. Based on the results of FAO's study entitled "Etude
sur la s6curit6 semencire au Niger", the selected seeds (drought tolerant seeds and nutrition-
enhancing seeds) will include millet, sorghum, rice, cowpeas and women preferred crops (sesame,
okra and sorrel). Infrastructure provision will favor construction models preferred by women.
The project will support the scaling up of CSA innovations developed by ICRISAT and INRAN.
This will be through improving technical skills of FO' members including women groups in CSA
technologies, strengthening their organizational and managerial capacities, setting up a demand
driven mechanism to ensure that farmers are receiving and implementing integrated CSA packages
for better productivity and resilience to drought.
Sub-component #1.2 Sustainable Land and Water Management (SLWM) (USD 25 million)
Based on demand driven mechanism, and using CAP3 review and approval process, the project will
O
Q)      support SLWM activities that directly or indirectly improve the productivity of the agricultural
resource base, household's resilience and reduce GHG emissions in selected watersheds. Three
types of interventions will be considered and implemented in an integrated manner: (1) sustainable
land management, (2) agro-forestry systems and (3) small scale irrigation development.
Sustainable land management is expected to improve water infiltration, reduce erosion and silting,
and restoration of degraded lands. Activities that will be financed under this sub-compo nent will
include: rock or earth bunds, benches, half-moons, alone or in combination with small irrigation
downstream in the watershed, etc. These land husbandry practices are well known throughout the
Sahel, and in Niger in particular. Their implementation is expected to be initiated early in project
execution.
Agroforestry systems: As part of a strategy based on scaling up of technologies developed by ICRAF
in the Sahel region, the Project will support the use of trees and shrubs as part of agricultural
systems. Agroforestry remains the most important source for carbon sequestration in Niger. Although
Niger has, re-greened around 5 million hectares (mainly in Maradi an Zinder region) in 20 years, the
project will address some challenges such as broader dissemination of agroforestry systems,
availability of relevant agro-forestry species etc., which could contribute to scaling up proven
initiatives in a larger geographical area. By supporting the agro-forestry systems, the project will


﻿also contribute to maintain/improve soil fertility, prevent soil erosion, facilitates water infiltration,
contribute to carbon sequestration, and reduces the impacts of extreme weather. The Agroforestry
activities will also help diversify income sources and provides energy and often fodder for livestock.
O
Small scale irrigation: The project would support the following actions contributing to the growth of
small scale irrigation, favoring low-cost and resilient systems possibly including: (i) water harvesting
infrastructure on farms (weirs, small dams, ponds, etc.) and groundwater mobilization infrastructure
(wells and boreholes); (ii) setting-up of an upgraded and adapted agricultural water management
(managerial) system, (iii) infrastructure for delivering water to plots; and (iv) support for the
dissemination of sustainable pumping technologies such as solar pump that will contribute to GHG
emission reduction, and water saving technologies such as drip irrigation.
The design of this sub-component will be carried out to ensure that the implementation modality
benefit both women and men.
Sub-component #1.3: Sustainable mixed crop-livestock systems (USD 15 million)
Agro-pastoral and mixed crop-livestock systems are dominant in the selected Departments . If
pastoralists occupy the Northern part of Niger, most of the cattle and small ruminant populations are
actually located in the southern part of the country, where the project will be implemented. Mixed
crop-livestock farming is the dominant production system in this part of the country. Livestock
production critically contributes to the 3 outcomes of CSA:
- Agriculture productivity and food security: animals contribute directly (through meat and
milk output) and indirectly (through fertilization, draft power) to food production and also to income
diversification.
- Adaptation to climate change: livestock represent a diversification assets, a coping
mechanism for households (risk management tool, that contributes to HH resilience), and contribute
to the management of organic matter in soils (through manure), which improves water retention and
drought resistance.
- Mitigation: there is typically a great potential for GHG emission intensity reduction among
low productivity ruminant systems such as those found in the project intervention area. Carbon
sequestration in pastures is a further mitigation pathway.
O
These contributions can be strengthened through interventions that aim at (i) increasing the
a       productivity and management of livestock (e.g. feeding practices, animal health, herd management
and off-take rates), (ii) promoting alternative practices of integrated soil fertility management based
on crop-livestock integration (e.g. manure management, use of crop residues and food by-products)
and modem inputs, and (iii) supporting market access.
Component 2: Strengthening CSA institutions and support services delivery (USD 40 million)
This component aims to increase the capacity of households to better manage agricultural climate
risk. It will mainly support actions aimed at improved access to information for decision-making,
improving access to finance as well as actions to diversify the sources of household income,
according to the needs expressed by the targeted households. The component is composed of three
sub-components.
Sub-component #2.1. Improving producers' access to information and advisory services [for decision
support at the farm level and capacity building] (USD 10 million)
The Project will support the generation and dissemination of hydro-meteorological information and
services, market information, early warning on crop pests, and farm technical and advisory services


﻿through appropriate communication tools (cell phone, radio, and other hardware). It will also finance
the implementation "soft infrastructure" (databases, cyber networks, links with telecommunications)
that will be needed to gather, organize, analyze, and deliver the geospatially relevant decision
support to local agencies and communities
0
The Project will contribute to strengthen national institutions efforts to build a coherent and enabling
policy environment for CSA implementation at the country and local levels. This will be done
through mainstreaming CSA in policies and strategies, collection and processing of climate related
data (including maps and soil fertility analysis) and dissemination of information products related to
climate risk management at central and local levels.
Farmers' organizations (FO) and local communes will be supported to ensure discussions on land use
planning at local level, set up sustainable mechanisms for landscape management with effective
consultation channels involving all the stakeholders.
Sub-component #2.2. Improving access to agriculture finance (USD 15 million)
Limited access to finance, is one of the bottlenecks for farmers in Niger to make necessary on-farm
investments required for adoption and scale-up of agricultural practices leading to climate smart
outcomes. The project will support the development of agriculture finance by: (i) building the
capacity of financial intermediaries; (ii) exploring the use of instruments such as portfolio partial
credit guarantee and/or line of credit to encourage participation of lenders such as commercials banks
and microfinance institutions, in agriculture finance; (iii) identifying and addressing critical
bottlenecks (supply, demand, and delivery issues) that limits agricultural credit flow in Niger. This
component will be implemented within the FISAN (Fonds d'Investissement pour la Securit6
Alimentaire et Nutritionnelle) framework and will be complemented by the upcoming Bank's trust
funded technical assistance for the development agriculture finance which will focus on the creation
of a more conducive legal and regulatory framework.
+Sub-component #2.3 Securing and diversifying household incomes (USD 15 million)
Under this sub-component, the Project will support sub-projects with high potential of employment
for the youth and women groups. Such sub-projects include: (a) animal production through the
construction of fattening units for cattle and sheep fattening, (b) local poultry development through
improved dissemination of adapted habitat and improved breeds, (c) cattle artificial insemination,
and milk collection and processing; (d) improved post-harvest and food storage equipment; (e) agro-
a       processing; (f) fish farming development. The implementation of these activities will be as associated
with nutrition education enhances dietary consumption effects, and potential for consumer demand of
nutritious foods. The Project will ensure that implementation of this sub-component (a) does not
contribute to increased drudgery and burden for women, and (b) will have a direct link with
improving the nutritional outcome of the project population. Overall support under this component
will be developed through a value chain approach that will also address key access to market
constraints.
Component 3: Contingency emergency response*
This component establishes a disaster recovery contingency fund that could be triggered in the event
of a natural disaster affecting the agriculture sector through formal declaration of a national
emergency and upon a formal request from the Government of Niger. In that case, funds from other
project components could be reallocated to Component 3 to finance emergency response
expenditures and meet crises and emergency needs. Implementation of this component will follow
the provisions of the Immediate Response Mechanism Manual (IRM).


﻿* Following an adverse natural event that causes a major disaster affecting the agriculture sector, the
Government of Niger may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support mitigation,
response, recovery and reconstruction. This component would draw resources from unallocated
expenditure categories and/or allow the government to request the Bank to re-categorize and
O
U       reallocate financing from other components to partially cover emergency response and recovery
costs. This component could also be used to channel additional funds should they become available
as a result of an eligible emergency. Disbursements would be made against a positive list of goods,
works, and services required to support mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction needs. All
expenditures under this component, should it be triggered, will be in accordance with paragraph 11
of OP 10.00 Investment Project Financing and will be appraised, reviewed and found to be
acceptable to the Bank before any disbursement is made. Eligible operating costs would include
incremental expenses incurred for efforts arising as a result of the natural disaster. This component
will also be used to channel resources from rapid restructuring of the project to finance emergency
response expenditures and meet crisis and emergency needs under an Immediate Response
Mechanism (IRM).
Component 4 Project Management, monitoring and evaluation (USD 8 million)
The Project will be implemented under the overarching umbrella of the 3N (Nigerien Nourish
Nigerien) Initiative which is also the coordination agency for the different line ministries engaged in
agricultural sector. The relevant line ministries (Ministry of agriculture, Ministry of Livestock etc.)
will be responsible for on the ground implementation along with the appropriate decentralization
structures. This component deals with coordination and monitoring and implementation of the
project and consists of two sub-components:
a.     Project Management:
The purpose of this sub-component is to ensure that the project is implemented efficiently, on time
and in accordance with the Loan Agreement. This would be the responsibility of a Project
Coordination Unit and a small team of experts located at the national, and regional levels. The final
arrangements for project management will be agreed at preparation stage.
O
b.     Project Monitoring and Evaluation:
o       The monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system will be established to collect and process appropriate
information, to verify the output, effects and eventually the impacts of project activities over time.
Baseline information will be collected as part of the preparation process. As part of the monitoring
activities, the project will develop partnership with research/learning institution for the monitoring
benefits generated by climate-smart activities.
The Project will improve technical skills of FO' in CSA approaches, strengthening organizational
and managerial capacities, etc. In collaboration with Ministry of Agriculture and INRAN, farmer's
organizations will organize farmers' field school, demonstration plot, and deploy other mechanisms
for ensuring dissemination and adoption of CSA practices (GHG emission reduction and efficient
irrigation techniques, carbon sequestration techniques, etc.) by farmers.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Potential Intervention Zones: Areas selected for project intervention constitute those with high
potential for increasing agricultural production, highly prone to droughts and taking into account the


﻿areas are sufficient to allow planning and integrating project intervention at scale. Accordingly, the
Project will focus on 10 departments which together account for approximately 46% of Niger's
cowpea (Niebe) production; 40% of Niger's millet, production, 38% of national sorghum production,
and 33% of national groundnut production, the principal cereal crops of the country. At the same
O
U       time, all these 10 departments are highly vulnerable and have experienced more than 5 droughts
between 1980-2009, contributing to aggravating food security situation in these departments as well
as the broader country. In case of severe drought happening to the country, the Project will have the
flexibility to intervene in other regions as part of the contingency emergency response.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
TThere is adequate institutional and regulatory capacity for environmental and social management at
the national level. Given its prior successful experience under the previous agriculture projects
(PRODEX, CAP, WAAPP,.), the National Office for Environmental Studies and Impact Evaluation
(or BEEI the French Acronym for the Bureau d'Evaluation Environnementale et d'Etudes d'Impacts)
of the Ministry of Environment, will work in close collaboration with the PCU, precisely the Social
and Environmental Focal Points (SEFP), to lead in monitoring and overseeing of the implementation
of environmental and social mitigation measures, including the validation of the screening process
for construction activities and genuine consultation of beneficiaries, as well as the technical capacity
building of the district level officers and project beneficiaries, including gender and youth. With
close collaboration with BEEI, the PIU will also ensure that environmental and social monitoring and
evaluation reports are prepared and submitted timely. Notwithstanding the proven existing capacities,
additional capacity building requirements will be addressed in the ESMF, IPMP and RPF and
budgeted for under the project to implement the possible capacity improvement measures. Both the
SEFP and the BEEI will work closely with the World Bank Social and Environmental Safeguards
Specialists to ensure due compliance and capacity strengthening on safeguards.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Boyenge Isasi Dieng (GSU01)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
O
U       Medou Lo (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Project is classified as category B project.
OP/BP 4.01                              As part of the project's aim of improving agricultural
productivity, the project will support the use of
improved agricultural inputs including fertilizers,
improved seeds, irrigation agriculture and pesticides
that will require environmental assessment to ensure
potential adverse effects are mitigated. The project
is expected to be beneficial to the environment given
the aim is to ensure the impact of climate change is
mitigated, adaptation measures implemented and
resilience is built in to the production landscape. The
project will ensure that modem efficient utilization
of pesticide and fertilizer will be introduced and
farmers trained in their applications that will have a


﻿positive impact on the environment compared to the
status quo. Further, a strict control mechanism will
be put in place to avoid potential adverse impacts
such as pollution from agricultural runoffs.
An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by the
borrower given that the exact detailed types and
locations of project activities have not yet been
identified. The ESMF will be consulted upon and
publicly disclosed, both in-country and at the
InfoShop before appraisal. In addition, for
subprojects that are expected to be identified during
preparation, an ESIA will be prepared by appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          In General, the project is not expected to intervene in
any critically natural habitats. However, details of
the exact sites of the proposed investments are yet to
be known. The project is designed to reduce the
impacts of severe climate conditions both on human
and on the natural resources. It will have a positive
footprint since climate smart agriculture presupposes
the existence of healthy eco-system. The ESMF will
include mitigation measures for negative impacts on
natural habitats which will guide the preparation of
ESIA and EMPs for specific investments
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         The project will not support forest exploitation but it
will support reforestation and sustainable
management of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         OP 4.09 is triggered based on project' s activities to
increase agricultural productivity which is expected
to result in increased use of agrochemicals, such as
pesticides. Any use of pesticides will be justified
under the Integrated Pest Management (IPM)
approach that will be promoted by the project. An
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) will be
developed, consulted upon by the borrower and
publicly disclosed thereafter, both in-country and at
the InfoShop before appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         Due to potential impacts on Physical Cultural
OP/BP 4.11                               Resources associated with civil works, the ESMF
will include provisions of "Chance Finds" to ensure
that these aspects will be taken into account in
ESIAs/EMPs to be developed under the ESMFand
will be part of the TOR for contractors .
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no Indigenous Peoples People in the
4.10                                     project area.


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          This policy is triggered because the project
BP 4.12                                    investments may support interventions that could
entail land taking or limiting access to land and other
resources. Since details of the subproject footprints
are still unknown, an RPF will be developed by the
borrower, consulted upon and publicly disclosed,
both in-country and at the InfoShop, before appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            OP 4.37 in triggered since the project small dams
less than 5 meters in height, and do not have dam
safety issues. The potential adverse safety and
security impacts will be addressed through the EA
process and the ESMF will include adequate
measures. For small dams, generic dam safety
measures designed by qualified engineers are usually
adequate.
Projects on International     No           This will be determined during preparation following
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       the identification of the specific rivers that will used
for irrigation agriculture. If OP/BP 7.50 is triggered,
the borrower will be advised to formally notify the
other riparian countries during appraisal and the
Bank team will follow-up on the compliance to this
OP/BP.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          Non applicable
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Oct-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF, IPMP and RPF consistent with Bank Safeguard Policy OP/BP 4.01, OP 4.09 and OP/
BP 4.12 will be prepared and consulted upon by the borrower as due diligence with potential
environmental and social impacts that may arise, land acquisition, involuntary resettlement, loss of
assets and/or restriction to access to legally designated protected areas, and other matters which
may have a negative social impacts in the implementation of project activities. The studies will be
launched in late-May, 2015 for about three months (mid-to-late August, 2015). It is expected that
by September 2015, all the required safeguards documents, including the appraisal stage ISDS and
PAD should be ready.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amadou Ba,Vikas Choudhary
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                   Date: 13-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR)                  Date: 13-Aug-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


