INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14040
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Jul-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Moldova                    Project ID:  P150357
Project Name: Local Roads Improvement Project (P150357)
Task Team       Maria Claudia Pachon,Simon David Ellis
Leader(s):
Estimated       10-Aug-2015                Estimated    08-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO3                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Decentralization (10%), Micro, Small
and Medium Enterprise support (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      80.00            Total Bank Financing:   80.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      15.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                65.00
Total                                                                      80.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to improve accessibility to education, health and market
facilities by providing a safe and sustainable local roads network in selected areas of Moldova.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 6


﻿This local roads program will put more emphasis on building the management capacity of local roads
both at the central and local levels. The proposed project would consist of two components totaling
US$ 80 million.
O
Component A: Rehabilitation and Maintenance of Local Roads Network.This component will
finance the rehabilitation and upgrading of about 300 km of priority Local Roads. The focus will be
to provide road access between villages and the national road network by developing cost-effective,
coherent networks with good connectivity. The works will include rehabilitation and periodic
*        maintenance works and upgrading economically justified roads to a sealed standard. These will be
carried out across the regional road network and in the local road network in the selected raion(s)
using a new and improved system of selection and prioritization of key local road works. An
important part of the component will be road safety works in the proximity of schools and on road
sections within communities. A key objective will be to provide safe access to schools for children
who have been affected by the school consolidation program. This component will finance also
finance supervision and independent technical audits for all civil works activities. Counterpart funds
will be used to finance design works and the implementation of multi-year area wide maintenance
contracts for the improved local roads corridors and connecting access roads.
Component B: Institutional strengthening (US$5 million financed by IBRD and IDA). This
component will finance a program of institutional strengthening to build capacity within the sector
for efficiently and effectively maintaining and improving the regional and local road networks. The
support to government institutions will be focused on building capacity for road network
management in SRA and selected local authorities. This activity will finance a project management
consultant who will support SRA in day to day management of the project but also provide specific
services
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project location is still under consideration and will be defined throughout the project. 28 priority
corridors for over 1,000 km have been identified as potential projects. The project will finance
approximately 300km of local roads in Moldova.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
Jennifer Shkabatur (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Page 2 of 6


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will not finance construction of new roads or their major upgrading - the proposed
activities are essentially road rehabilitation and maintenance within the "Right of Way" (ROW)
areas. Thus expected environmental impacts related to air and water pollution, solid and hazardous
wastes, labor security etc., are expected to be low, site specific and mostly temporarily. The
impact on natural vegetation associated with operating the quarry and borrow areas, and
constructing detour and access road to the borrow material pits and quarry sites, will not be
applicable here - as there will be used the existing borrow/quarry sites which operate based on
necessary licenses and permits.
The project triggers only one WB OPs and specifically OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment as
the project will support a series of activities which will generate some environmental and social
impacts. The OP/BP4.04 on Natural Habitats as well as OP. 4.36 on Forests would not be
triggered as the project will not support any activities which might involve conversion of natural
areas and forests or impacts on them as all project activities will be implemented on ROW.
Similarly, there will be no impact on physical cultural resources as all proposed activities will be
implemented on existing local roads and no expansion of them will be financed.
The project triggers the OP 4.12. Although the proposed civil works will consist of road
rehabilitation and maintenance within existing areas of ROW and no impact on agricultural or
grazing lands is expected, this OP was triggered on a precautionary basis, since some of the roads
that will be rehabilitated have not been selected yet. An RPF was therefore prepared and disclosed
in country and on InfoShop, and consultations were carried out in Chisinau.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Long term impacts of the project are consider positive. The project is designed to improve
accessibility of rural communities to the basic services, and to markets. It will contribute also to
reducing air pollution.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Page 3 of 6


﻿To address specified above potential impacts the project beneficiary prepared an ESMF which
specifies the EA rules and procedures and environmental requirements for the subprojects to be
financed. This document covers the following: national and WB EA rules and procedures;
procedures for environmental screening; guidance for preparing subprojects EMP Checklist for
roads rehabilitation subprojects; possible mitigation measures for different types of sub-projects;
requirements for monitoring and supervision of implementing of EMPs; implementing
arrangements. The ESMF will be integrated into the Project's Operational Manual and will be used
as part of all contracts involving selected subprojects. The subproject EMPs will be also integrated
into the contracts for approved activities, both into specifications and bills of quantities and the
Contractors will be required to include the cost in their financial bids and grant proposals.
The proposed Project will be implemented by the State Road Administration (SRA), being assisted
by a Project Implementation Unit. Its responsibilities would include: procurement, financial
management, contract management, project and program monitoring and evaluation, and
reporting, as well as ensuring that all subprojects are subject to the EA as well as the civil works
are implemented in accordance with the approved EMPs. SRA has extensive experience in
successfully implementing World Bank and other IFIs projects (e.g. WB, EBRD, EIB
implemented and/or roads rehabilitation projects in the country during last decade). It has in its
staff an Environmental Specialist (ES), being responsible for coordination of all project safeguards
issues. Similarly, the PIU will hire an ES which would be responsible for the EMF
implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The ESMF has been disclosed and consulted with all interested parties. The SRA has disseminated
the draft summary EMF to the Ministry of Transportation and Road Industry, of Environment and
Health and other relevant agencies for their review and comments. The full document in English
and its Executive Summary and main supporting tables in Romanian on December 1 and 8, 2104
have been posted on SRA website for its access to wide public (www.asd.md). On December 18,
2014, the SRA organized a public consultation on the draft EMF. After the consultation, draft
document was revised considering inputs from consulted parties. The final EMF was posted on the
SRA website and disclosed in the World Bank Infoshop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           18-Jun-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Moldova                                                  01-Dec-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           21-Jul-2015
Page 4 of 6


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Moldova                                                    15-Apr-2015
Comments: www.asd.md
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maria Claudia Pachon,Simon David Ellis
Page 5 of 6


﻿Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                 Date: 25-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                Date: 27-Jul-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


