INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14865
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Western Africa             Project ID:   P153863
Project Name:    Senegal River Basin Integrated Water Resources Management Project
(P153863)
Task Team        Shelley Mcmillan,Ijeoma Emenanjo
Leader(s):
Estimated        14-Aug-2015                Estimated     23-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO7                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (45%), Public
administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (25%), He alth (20%),
Irrigation and drainage (10%)
Theme(s):        Water resource management (40%), Environmental policies and institutions
(25%), Other communicable diseases (20%), Regional integration (15%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      15.10             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
Free-standing TFs AFR COUNTRY DEPARTMENT, West                   15.10
1
Total                                                            15.10
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        Yes
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objective of the Senegal River Basin Integrated Water Management Project is to


﻿strengthen the capacity of OMVS and local water user associations to improve the environmental
conditions of the Senegal River's water resources.
C. Project Description
The proposed Dutch Trust Fund, which is parallel financing to the Senegal River Basin Multi-
Purpose Water Resources Development (MWRD2), is intended to address some of the issues
identified above (the proliferation of typha, which leads to the clogging of irrigation canals; upstream
erosion; and waterborne disease transmission-particularly schistosomiasis). MWRD2 is the second
a       phase of a 10-year Program. Phase 1 of the program (MWRD 1) has positively impacted the Basin
across the agriculture, health and fisheries sectors. The new activities to be supported under this
project will build upon previous Trust Funds and will be complementary to MWRD2 so as to
mutually reinforce integrated water resources management and development to improve community
livelihoods.
OMVS has previous experience working with the Dutch Government and has successfully
implemented projects supported by two previous Dutch trust funds. The previous Dutch Government
supported project provided institutional support at the regional, national and community levels and
improved knowledge and monitoring and evaluation of water resources. . The previous Dutch
Government supported project also supported: (i) the protection of public health through water
supply reinforced livelihoods; (ii) capacity building for water user associations and irrigation
cooperatives; and, (iii) river and irrigation channel clearance and slope stabilization.
The proposed project has the following components:
Component 1- Upper Basin Sustainable Land Management (US$5.5 million): This component aims
to address the challenge of degradation in the Upper Basin particularly the restoration of the main
headwaters of the Senegal River, the banks of rivers, and the deforested slopes in Guinea and Mali
through the sustainable reversal of the process of deforestation and erosion in T6r6kol6/Kolimbine/
Lac-Magui system (TKLM), north of Kayes. In addition, the river banks protecting Kayes will be
restored, continuing works initiated in the previously Dutch government financed project. This first
component will support the following sub-components:
1.1    Diagnostic studies on deforestation, erosion and sedimentation in the Upper Basin (Guinea
and Mali). The diagnostic studies will be designed to: (i) determine the sensitivity of different
landscapes, in the Upper Basin, to deforestation and erosion due to differences in their
geomorphological, geological, and vegetation attributes; and, (ii) identify high erosion and
deforestation risk areas in order to plan site-specific management interventions.
1.2    The implementation of effective soil and water resource protection strategies. The efficiency
of conservation measures may vary depending on the prevailing deforestation and erosion processes
and controlling factors determined in sub-component 1.1. This sub-component will support the
implementation of the most effective soil, vegetation and water resource protection strategies, in the
Upper Basin, including strategies from the previously Dutch government financed project, such as:
(i) slope stabilization works and reforestation of river banks, and (ii) agroforestry on slopes adjacent
to low-land agricultural areas.
Component 2- Management of Invasive Aquatic Plants in the Delta and the Operationalization of
Water User Associations (WUAs) (US$6.3 million): This component aims to control and manage the
proliferation of typha, to a level where it does not constitute a threat to the ecological balance and to
economic activities the Basin This component also aims to improve access to drinking water and
operationalize WUAs in continuity with the activities from the previously Dutch government


﻿financed project. Specifically, this component will support the following sub-components:
2.1    Completion of a needs assessment on the control of invasive aquatic species in the Delta.
The aim of this sub-component is to conduct a needs assessment to understand and synthesize the
implications of the harvesting of Typha and other invasive plants. The needs assessment proposed
O
U       under sub-component 2.1 will also include a cost benefit analysis (CBA) that will also look at
technical options. Emphasis will be given to understanding externalities, and resulting from the
various economic, market, policy and institutional failures which result in producers, consumers,
investors and traders failing to take account of the costs of invasion when they carry out economic
activities. The CBA will present two frameworks for the analysis of invasive species: one for tracing
the economic causes of invasions, and one for understanding and analyzing the links between
invasive species, ecosystem services and human wellbeing. The needs assessment will ensure that the
activities in subcomponent 2.2 are implemented, in the best way possible, to balance social,
economic and environmental needs and concerns.
2.2   Invasive aquatic plant management: (i) annual inventory of the spatial distribution of the
typha by remote sensing; (ii) cost-recovery plans of typha management and development of
maintenance schedules; (iii) mechanical removal of typha.
2.3   Installation of potable water supply stations in project area villages.
2.4    Training and support to existing WUAs on (i) invasive aquatic plant management; (ii)
organizational management; and, (iii) the management of water stations (including water quality
monitoring and control).
Component 3- Institutional Support for OMVS and National Agencies (US$3.3 million): This
component aims to build the capacity and skills of OMVS and National Cellule staff through training
and the exchange of lessons learned. The component will support the management and
implementation of regional and state level activities. The component will primarily target the OMVS
bodies responsible for implementing the program. The component will also target national technical
services to support the activities of the program based on areas of expertise relevant to this project:
environment, forestry, water resource management, and public health. This sub-component will
support:
3.1    Strengthening the capacity of OMVS and national agencies to lead invasive species
management efforts in the region.
3.2    Strategic management of the Trust Fund.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
*       analysis (if known)
As with MWRD2, the proposed Project involves all the riparian countries (Guinea, Mali, Mauritania
and Senegal) of the Senegal River basin. The Senegal River basin covers a surface area of about
300,000 km2. The high plateau in northern Guinea represent 31,000 km2 (11 percent of the basin),
155,000 km2 are situated in western Mali (53 percent of the basin), 75,500 km2 are in southern
Mauritania (26 percent of the basin) and 27,500 km2 are in northern Senegal (10 percent of the
basin). The basin has three distinct parts: the upper basin, which is mountainous, the valley (itself
divided into high, middle and lower) and the delta, which is a source of biological diversity and
wetlands. Topographical, hydrographic and climatic conditions are very different in these three
regions and seasonal temperature variations are extensive.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The capacity of OMVS and the Member states for environmental and social management has been
strengthened under the previous Trust Fund phases, and in the preparation and implementation of
both MWRD projects. This included building a core group of transboundary environmental


﻿management expertise. For the preparation of MWRD1, OMVS prepared an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Pest and
Pesticide Management Plan (PPMP) in compliance with the requirements of the World Bank
Safeguard Policies. These instruments were updated for use in Senegal River Basin Multi-Purpose
O
U       Water Resources Development (MWRD2; P131323) and will also be used for this project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
Salamata Bal (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project and the parallel financed MWRD2,
OP/BP 4.01                              involves a significant number of civil works and
environmental management activities. The project
will rely on MWRD2 evaluations (ESMF, ESIA,
RPF and PPMP) with regard to the environmental
and social dimensions of the development of
navigation on the Senegal River Basin and the
development of micro-hydro sites etc. The Trust
Fund will also conduct diagnostic studies on the
environmental and social dimensions of the
implementation of soil and water resource protection
strategies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes        Riverbank erosion protection (slope stabilization) is
one of the subproject activities, in this Trust Fund.
This activity could upset the natural balance in the
affected rivers if not done according ecological
principles.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes         Triggered by the reforestation activities to be carried
out in the Upper Basin, a very sensitive ecological
area of the Senegal River.
Pest Management OP 4.09     Yes         Intensification of irrigated agricultural production
might increase the use of pesticides and chemical
fertilizers.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        OP/BP 4.11 is triggered by the feasibility studies for
OP/BP 4.11                              the the civil works activities in the Upper Basin.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP   No           There are no indigenous people in the Senegal River
4.10                                    Basin as defined by OP/BP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ Yes        No physical resettlement is anticipated due to the
BP 4.12                                 nature of the intended rehabilitation works to be
carried out under the various 4.12 subprojects. There
might be a need to compensate for the loss of crops,
trees or property caused by the Upper Basin erosion
management activities. There may also be a


﻿restriction of access to certain fishing grounds or
during certain periods of time.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           None of the activities funded by this project are
relying on dams.
Projects on International    Yes          The governments of the four riparian countries were
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      notified of the International Project through the
OMVS, in which all four countries are represented.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project is not located in a Disputed Area.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Jul-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The project will rely on the MWRD2 evaluations of the environmental and social dimensions of
several interventions (e.g. the rehabilitation of irrigation schemes, micro-hydro development and
the navigation). It has been agreed with OMVS that a Dam Safety and an Environmental and
Social Advisory panel will be established as needed to provide advice on the terms of reference for
the feasibility studies and the environmental and social studies and on these studies themselves.
The Trust Fund will also conduct diagnostic studies on deforestation, erosion and sedimentation in
the Upper Basin (Guinea and Mali).
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Shelley Mcmillan,Ijeoma Emenanjo
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                      Date: 25-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)              Date: 25-Aug-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


