INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15986
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Belarus                    Project ID:  P146997
Project Name: BELARUS PFM MODERNIZATION PROJECT (P146997)
Task Team       Oleksii Balabushko
Leader(s):
Estimated       07-Dec-2015                Estimated    28-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGO15                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General public administration sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      10.00            Total Bank Financing:   10.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
Borrower                                                                    0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      10.00
Total                                                                      10.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To improve policy alignment of the budget, consolidate cash balances, improve budget transparency
and lay foundations for implementation of an Integrated Financial Management Information System
(FMIS)
3. Project Description
This project will support Government's PFM reforms, FMIS design and FMIS implementation as a
Page 1 of4


﻿series of investment projects financed by two IBRD loans. The project will provide Government with
the tools that will enable it to support broader institutional reforms, including changes in
management approach such as greater delegation of authority to decision-makers within agencies and
service delivery units. However, the project does not anticipate that these management reforms will
O
U        take place in the project time frame. Consequently, the project focuses on technical reforms in public
financial management and the broader organizational change management objectives and activities
are limited at this stage. The opportunities for organizational change will be reassessed during
preparation of the second project in the series. The project is expected to achieve the PDO through
improving the Government's ability to plan the budget from a medium term perspective by focusing
on results, improving debt management and enhancing treasury coverage, improving budget
transparency, and creating a basis for implementation of the FMIS.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
NA
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No          The Project does not involve any physical work. The
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Project does not involve activities that could involve
potential significant environmental and social impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The Project does not have any potential significant
4.04                                conversation or degradation of natural habitat.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The Project does not affect forests, forest dependent
communities not will it involve changes in the
management of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The Project does not involve the purchase or use of
significant quantities of pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No          The Project does not affect physical cultural resources.
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No         The Project does not involve any resettlement.
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The Project does not support either construction or
4.37                                rehabilitation of dams or other investments, which rely on
services of existing dams.
Projects on International  No       The Project does not finance activities involving the use
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                or potential pollution of international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No          The Project does not finance activities in disputed areas as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    defined in the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Page 2 of 4


﻿1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is limited to the provision of technical assistance to support reforms to the Public
Financial Management system. It does not trigger World Bank safeguard policies.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
NA
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
NA
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
NA
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
NA
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
Page 3 of 4


﻿III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Oleksii Balabushko
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)              Date: 01-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


