INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14979
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jul-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jun-2015, 06-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P148071
Project Name: Guizhou Tongren Rural Transport Project (P 148071)
Task Team       Holly Krambeck
Leader(s):
Estimated       16-Mar-2015                Estimated    25-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO2                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    231.79             Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
Borrower                                                                   81.79
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     150.00
Total                                                                     231.79
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to improve rural transport connectivity in Dejiang and Sinan
counties.
3. Project Description
Tongren has an unusually challenging natural topography, with 96 percent of its area comprising
mountainous terrain. Although road conditions and connectivity have improved over the last three
Page 1 of 10


﻿decades, the overall transport network service level is still relatively low - by the end of 2012, nearly
69 percent of roads in Tongren were unclassified roads, and only 21 percent of villages in Dejiang
and Sinan counties were connected by classified roads.
O
U         Proposed project components are designed to improve transport connectivity in Dejiang and Sinan
through the upgrading of rural roads and construction and upgrading of small and medium-sized
bridges. The selected project roads have been selected from the Tongren 12th Five Year Plan.
Through these investments, the percentage of paved township roads in Dejiang and Sinan will
increase from 34 percent to 100 percent and from 53 percent to 62 percent, respectively. Also, the
percentage of paved village roads will increase from 34 percent to 46 percent and from 25 percent to
31 percent, respectively.
The sustainability of these activities will be supported through technical assistance activities focused
on maintenance management, transit service and rural road network planning, and project
management.
The Project proposal comprises three components:
Component A: Dejiang Rural Transport (Cost: USD 144.25 million, IBRD Loan: USD 98.73
million). This component includes the upgrading of unclassified rural roads and upgrading and
construction of rural bridges in Deijiag County.
Component B: Sinan Rural Transport (Cost: USD 78.30 million, IBRD Loan: USD 42.03 million).
This component includes the upgrading of existing roads and upgrading and construction of rural
bridges in Sinan County.
Component C: Technical Assistance (Cost: USD 1.00 million, IBRD Loan: USD 1.00 million). This
component includes technical assistance activities to support capacity building and training on rural
road network planning, maintenance, and road safety.
O
U         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
O
The project is located in Dejiang and Sinan counties of Tongren Municipality in Guizhou Province,
southwestern China. The project region is dominated by mountainous terrain, with difficult and
inadequate accessibility to many townships and villages. The proposed Project will upgrade and
renovate existing rural roads and construct medium and small bridges at ford locations of existing
rural roads.
Three environmental and socially sensitive sites are identified near three existing rural roads,
including one nature reserve, one scenic area and one nature heritage (horse-shaped stone). There are
123 family graves to be relocated by the project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Aimin Hao (GSURR)
Peishen Wang (GEN02)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project includes rehabilitation and improvement of
Page 2 of 10


﻿Assessment OP/BP 4.01                existing rural roads and construction of a number of small
and medium bridges on these existing rural roads where
currently pedestrian and vehicles traverse these small
rivers through shallow river beds or simple bridges. The
construction activities will have potential environmental
and social impacts during construction stage, including
soil erosion, material borrow and waste spoil
management, nuisance of dust and noise, wastewater
management, community impact, traffic disturbance and
safety issues, etc. Therefore, this policy is triggered. An
EIA and a stand-alone EMP have been prepared.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          One of the existing rural roads is located within a county-
4.04                                 level nature reserve. The project will also include
construction of bridges over small creeks and rivers.
Therefore, this policy is triggered, and potential impacts
are assessed in the EIA and necessary measures
developed in the EMP.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The rehabilitation and improvement of existing rural
roads will not involve forest sector activities, nor will it
have potential impacts on the health and quality of forest.
Therefore this policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or
have any impact on pest management practice. This
policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural       Yes          There are 123 family graves to be relocated by the project.
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 There is also a horse-shape stone ("stone horse", which is
regarded as a natural heritage site by local communities)
in the vicinity (ca. 20m distance) of one rural road in
Dejiang. Therefore, this policy is triggered. The family
graves are found to be private graves of local villagers
without significant archeological, cultural or
paleontological value, and their relocation is adequately
addressed in the Resettlement Action Plan. Precaution
measures have been developed to avoid potential impacts
on the stone-horse during construction in the EMP. In
addition, chance-find procedures are included in the EMP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The Project will support the construction of rural roads in
BP 4.10                              Dejiang County and Sinan County of Tongren
Municipality, Guizhou Province. In Dejiang the Tujia
ethnic minority accounts for 83.96% of the total county
population. In Sinan, The Project will support the
construction of rural roads in Dejiang County and Sinan
County of Tongren Municipality, Guizhou Province. In
Dejiang the Tujia ethnic minority accounts for 83.96% of
the total county population. In Sinan, Han people
accounts for 49.55% of the total population, and Tujia
Page 3 of 10


﻿ethnic minority is the second largest ethnic group
accounting for 28.34% of the total county population.
According to the Project proposal, the Bank's supported
project will be constructed in the area where Tujia
minority communities are present. In addition, there are
other 17 ethnic groups identified in the project areas.
However, through generations of inter-marriage and
cultural integration, these groups share a common
language and do not have distinct characteristics from the
general population. This is confirmed by consultations
with local Ethnic Minority Affairs Bureaus, discussions
with local minorities, site visits, and a desk review of
relevant documents and materials.
Based on this assessment, it is clear that the Tujia and
other 17 ethnic groups in the Project areas are, for all
intents and purposes, indistinguishable from their Han
neighbors. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Awareness raising among workers from outside will be
conducted to respect local communities' traditions during
constructions.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Land acquisition and structure demolition will be
OP/BP 4.12                           unavoidable for the construction of small bridges and
widening of roads. The predominant proportion of land
acquisition will be waste land on hilly slopes, and this will
not cause negative impacts to local villagers. Donation of
waste land by local communities will be based on
transparent consultation, and local communities will be
informed that they will not be under pressure to donate
land for project construction. The process of voluntary
land donation will be documented in writing. For the
acquisition of arable land and for structure demolition,
compensation will be paid to affected households guided
by the Resettlement Action Plan, which has been prepared
and disclosed locally on March 4 in Sinan and March 9 in
Dejiang. The English translation has be disclosed at
Bank's InfoShop on May 6 2015.
A compensation policy has been formulated which states
that demolition of houses/structures and acquisition of
cultivated land will be compensated based on most recent
national guidelines for compensation standards, namely
"The Guiding Opinions on Improving Compensation and
Resettlement System" and "Implementation Guidance on
Deepening Reform and Intensifying Land Management
by Guizhou Provincial Government." The compensation
policy guiding compensation for land acquisition and
Page 4 of 10


﻿house relocation for activities to be retroactively financed
has been issued by both Sinan and Dejiang county.
Further compensation policies from both counties will be
issued once detailed project design is finalized for
following batches. This will be guided by implementation
of the RAP.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The Project doesn't involve any dams. The policy is not
a4.37 triggered.
Projects on International  No       The Project doesn't involve any international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                The policy is note triggered.
Projects in Disputed    No          The Project is not located in any disputed area. The policy
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    is not triggered.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project includes rehabilitation and improvement of existing rural roads, and construction of a
number of small and medium bridges on these existing rural roads where currently pedestrian and
vehicles traverse these small rivers through shallow river beds or simple bridges. The construction
activities will involve civil works, which will have potential environmental and social impacts
during construction stage, including soil erosion, material borrow and waste spoil management,
nuisance of dust and noise, wastewater management, community impact, traffic disturbance and
safety issues, etc.
In spite of fairly large aggregated civil works, the rehabilitation and improvement of each
individual rural road is rather small in scale, which mainly includes improvement of pavement on
O
)           existing road surfaces with limited widening, where necessary. The environmental impacts of each
individual rural road improvement are site-specific and of temporary in nature, and thus unlikely
to be significant and irreversible. These impacts can readily managed with known mitigation
measures and good construction management. Therefore, the project is classified as a Category B
project.
The project roads will involve a few environmental and social sensitive sites, including:
(1)    Siyetun Nature Reserve in Sinan: the existing Shangguanqing - Langan road (8.4km) is
within the boundary of the Siyetun Nature Reserve, with protected wildlife and forest ecosystems.
Based on EIA findings, due to intensive use of the existing road by local communities, the main
habitats of those protected wildlife are far from the road (over 2km). There are a number of old
trees identified in the vicinity of the road that will be protected during construction. The project
will improve this existing road with pavement (including a medium bridge) and will not lead to
degradation, conversion or additional fragmentation of the natural habitat of the reserve. The
temporary impacts during construction stage can be well managed with good environmental
practice.
(2)    Bailuzhou Scenic Area in Sinan: The proposed Qinglongzui Bridge will cross the Xiaoxi
River, which is located within the boundary of the Bailuzhou Scenic Area. The bridge location has
the normal river bank landscape and is far away from the three scenic spots of the Bailuzhou
Page 5 of 10


﻿Scenic Area. The bridge adopts a one-span scheme crossing the small river and will not touch the
river bed. The bridge will be specially designed to become a scenic spot to enhance the aesthetic
view in the project section of the river. Therefore, the project will not have adverse impacts on the
scenic area, and temporary impacts during construction stage will be well managed with good
O
environmental practice.
(3)    Stone Horse in Dejiang: There is a horse-shaped stone near the Hetou-Dayuan road in
Dejiang. The stone is considered as a natural heritage for the local community. It is about 20m
away from the road. With good construction management (e.g., no blasting, no widening, behavior
education to workers, etc.), the potential adverse impacts from renovation of the existing road can
be adequately avoided and mitigated.
Besides these sensitive sites, other main potential environmental and social impacts of the project
include:
(1)    Potential impacts on rivers: The project includes construction of 30 medium and small
bridges on the existing rural roads, where currently pedestrian and vehicles cross the small creeks/
rivers over the shallow river beds or simple bridges. Construction activities have the potential
impacts of increased soil erosion and sediments into the rivers. Based on EIA findings, these rivers
are basically mountain creeks, dry gullies, seasonable rivers and small rivers. Given the small flow
rate, lack of nutrient sources, these small creeks/rivers are not habitats to support complex aquatic
ecosystem. There is no protected aquatic species, migratory fish or major spawning sites found in
these small rivers. Therefore, these small rivers are not critical habitats. The project bridges are all
small and medium bridges that will have minimal disturbance of the rivers during construction.
With adequate protection and erosion control measures, the temporary impacts of construction can
be properly managed.
(2)    Material borrow and excessive spoil disposal: The project will purchase the cement, sand
and aggregate material from commercial suppliers, therefore, no material borrow sites are needed.
The excessive material will be disposed of at 80 spoil disposal sites identified in the project area.
These disposal sites have been selected following the environmental criteria and avoid
environmental sensitive areas. Measures of disposal and post-reclamation have been developed in
the EMP to ensure proper management of the excessive materials.
(3)    Social impacts: The construction activities will have potential adverse impacts on traffic,
disturbance of daily life of local communities, impacts on utility lines, land acquisition and
resettlement, and nuisance of noise and dust to the local communities.
In terms of social-specific impacts, the project will involve permanent and temporary use of land
for rural roads improvement and building of small bridges. The predominant proportion of land
will be waste land not cultivated, and some arable land will also be taken and some structures will
be demolished to make room for roads and bridges construction. Also, improved roads will
potentially increase speed of vehicles causing traffic safety issues.
In summary, the project activities of rehabilitating and improving the existing rural roads will have
limited environmental and social impacts that are site-specific and of temporary in nature. Such
impacts are unlikely to be large scale, significant and/or irreversible.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There is no major large scale future activities anticipated in the project area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Page 6 of 10


﻿The project is to renovate the existing rural roads by turning the dirt roads to paved roads,
therefore, there is no alternative analysis for road alignments. Alternatives analyses were
conducted for two medium bridges, i.e. bridge scheme options and location options. Final
selection is based on consideration of minimum disturbance on river bed and avoidance of
community impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Safeguards
To address the potential environmental safeguards issues, an EIA and a stand-alone EMP have
been prepared for the project by Guizhou Provincial Academy of Environmental Science, a
licensed EIA institute which has experiences with several Bank projects in Guizhou Province. The
EIA thoroughly addresses the potential adverse environmental and social impacts, based on which
a stand-alone EMP was developed.
The preparation of EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and guidelines,
as well as Bank's safeguards policies and EHS General Guidelines. The EMP specifies the
institutional arrangement of environmental management and supervision, mitigation measures,
capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP implementation. Besides
project-specific mitigation measures for specific sensitive sites/receptors, the EMP also includes a
set of generic Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) for contractors which will be
incorporated into the bidding documents and contracts. The ECOPs draw on the experiences and
lessons learnt from the rural road component of existing Bank financed Guiyang Transport Project
and Guiyang Rural Road Project, and provide a set of generic mitigation measures for each type of
typical road construction/rehabilitation activities, i.e. site construction, site clearing, access roads,
disposal sites, slope stability, backfilling, drainage, bridge and culvert construction, water
pollution and soil erosion control, physical cultural resources, safety and health, public
consultation and social disturbance etc.
For construction and renovating rural roads, Tongren has experience in following well established
environmental assessment and land acquisition and resettlement procedures as per national laws/
regulations. However, this project is the first World Bank lending project in Tongren and the local
government has no prior experience with World Bank safeguard policies. To address this issue, the
PMO retained experienced environmental assessment (EA) and social assessment (SA) consultants
that have worked on previous World Bank projects in Guizhou Province for safeguards
preparation, and will engage environmental and social monitoring consultants to monitor
implementation. The Bank task team has provided environmental training during preparation
missions, and will continue such training in launch workshop and during implementation
supervision.
Tongren PMO will be responsible for overall management of EMP, including hiring external
environmental supervision consultant. The Tongren Project Construction Management Office
(TPCMO) will be responsible for direct management of EMP implementation, including assigning
dedicated environmental staff, ensuring incorporation of EMP measures (ECOPs) into bidding
documents and contracts, engaging supervision engineers and contractors on implementation of
ECOPs. The contractors and supervision engineers will be required to assign qualified
environmental staff to their team to ensure effective implementation of the EMP. Besides on-site
Supervision Engineers, an independent Environmental Supervision Consultant shall be engaged to
Page 7 of 10


﻿help PMOs conduct periodical site supervision and prepare semi-annual environmental report to
the Bank.
Social Safeguards
0
To address potential social safeguards concerns, a Social Assessment and Resettlement Action
Plan have been prepared in accordance with Bank guidelines by Wuhan University, which has
undertaken similar work on Bank projects in Guizhou Province.
The predominant proportion of land acquisition will be waste land on hilly slopes, and this will not
cause negative impact to local villagers. Donation of waste land by local communities will be
based on transparent consultation, and local communities will be informed that they will not be
under pressure to donate land for project construction. The process of voluntary land donation will
be documented in writing. For the acquisition of arable land and for structure demolition,
compensation will be paid to affected households guided by the Resettlement Action Plan, which
has been prepared and disclosed locally in March. The English translation has been disclosed at
Bank's InfoShop on May 6 2015.
A Compensation policy to guide land acquisition and resettlement has been formulated by the
PMO and endorsed by local county governments. The policy states that cultivated land that yields
income and houses/structures demolished will be compensated at the standards stated in the most
recent policy namely "The Guiding Opinions on Improving Compensation and Resettlement
System" and "Implementation Guidance on Deepening Reform and Intensifying Land
Management by Guizhou Provincial Government." Compensation policies will be issued separated
by Sinan and Dejiang county to guide compensation for land acquisition and house relocation. The
policies will be informed by detailed project design and issued before each batch of roads and
bridges is being constructed.
Construction companies will be made aware of negative impact to traffic, and should take
necessary measures to minimize interruptions to traffic. Traffic safety measures such as speed
limits will be taken near villages to reduce traffic accident risks.
Awareness raising to outsiders working in the project areas will be conducted to respect local
commnuities' traditions during constructions.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations
were conducted in the project area following both national environmental and social policies as
well as World Bank policies. Consultations were conducted through a combination of opinion
surveys and public meetings along the transport corridors and the communities around the bus
hubs. Information about the project, potential environmental and social impacts, and planned
mitigation measures were provided to the public during consultation. Main concerns from the
public include adequate compensation for land acquisition and resettlement, traffic disturbance and
accessibility impact during construction, nuisance of noise etc. These concerns were addressed in
the EIA, and necessary mitigation measures were developed in EMP and the project design.
The draft EIA has been locally disclosed on December 11, 2014 in the website of Dejiang and
Sinan county governments, and the final EIA/EMP have been disclosed again on March 27, 2015.
The draft RAP has been locally disclosed at Sinan and Dejiang local newspaper and government
websites on March 4 and 9, 2015. The EIA and EMP were disclosed on InfoShop on April 14,
2015, and the RAP and SA were disclosed on May 6.
Page 8 of 10


﻿B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              13-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    11-Dec-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    09-Mar-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Page 9 of 10


﻿Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Holly Krambeck
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Surhid P. Gautam (SA)                Date: 05-Aug-2015
Practice Manager!      Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                   Date: 06-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


