                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC13446

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jul-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Aug-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Kenya                             Project ID:       P151004
                            Project Name:       Kenya Rural Roads Project (P151004)
                            Task Team           Kavita Sethi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           13-Apr-2016                       Estimated         22-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTI01                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        100.00                Total Bank Financing:            100.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     100.00
                              Total                                                                           100.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           10.     The proposed development objective is to enhance mobility in selected rural areas in support
                           of inclusive agriculture and other livelihoods of local communities in the targeted counties.

                           11.      The PDO is proposed to be achieved through (i) providing improved county roads in targeted
                           and prioritized rural areas, (ii) ensuring that road investments are sustainable through the provision of
                           efficient road maintenance and (iii) strengthening the institutional capacity of the local governance
                           system and the technical entities to plan, maintain and manage the county road networks.
                         C. Project Description
                         3.      Project Components: Based on the outcome of the identification mission, the proposed
                         project would include the following three components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.       Component 1: Rehabilitation of Rural (Secondary and tertiary) Roads. This component
                         would finance rehabilitation works for secondary and rural roads in each of the selected Counties, as
                         well as the related design studies and supervision activities. Roads would have to be prioritized
                         through a credible prioritization process and favor those roads that can bring the greatest benefits in
                         terms of agricultural productivity. A “network approach” will be preferred and road standards will
                         have to be economically justified (for example, through the use of the Roads Economic Decision
                         (RED) model).The total road length that would be supported under this component including the
                         standards to which they would be improved, the method of implementation, as well as the
                         participating counties will be concluded at preparation stage. Where justifiable, appropriate
                         technology such as low-cost sealed roads could be used. The total length of project roads will depend
                         on the technical standards adopted, which will in turn largely depend on the economics. A
                         predominantly low-cost sealed road approach would lower the length of roads to about 300 km
                         whereas construction to gravel sealed standards could increase the coverage to about 1,500 km.
                         Actual allocations would account for road conditions and project readiness in each county.

                         5.       Component 2: Sustainable Road Maintenance mechanisms. This component would support
                         the review of strategic aspects of road maintenance funding and prioritization mechanisms and
                         explore options to strengthen them. While the exact model remains to be developed, the adoption of
                         multi-year performance based maintenance contracts could encourage more reliable maintenance and
                         sustainability of project interventions. Support for training, technical assistance and supervision of
                         pilot maintenance projects funded by Counties with RF allocations will be provided within this
                         component.

                         6.       Component 3: Capacity building and Project Administration. This component would finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutional strengthening activities for the Project at the County and national level as well as project
                         administration costs. Capacity building at the national level to improve sector coordination at the
                         national and county level would be resourced under this component. During the stakeholder
                         consultation workshop on May 19, 2015, it was appropriately suggested that a communication
                         strategy and its implementation will be necessary, especially in view of the multi-stakeholder
                         involvement. This aspect will therefore be added to the component. The proposed Roads Bill is
                         expected to place in more definite terms, the burden of managing rural roads on the Counties, which
                         presently do not have the requisite capacity for this function. The Project will therefore make
                         provision for skills development within the Counties. Road safety is an important aspect even for
                         rural roads and this component will include support towards non-infrastructure elements of road
                         safety such as awareness creation.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         7.      The proposed project would coordinate with the Kenya National Agriculture and Inclusive
                         Growth Project, under preparation, on the selection criteria. The selection criteria could include: (i)
                         agricultural and livestock potential areas, (ii) number of poor people living in rural areas, (iii)
                         condition and extent of rural infrastructure, (iv) willingness of County governments to commit to the
                         project’s objectives/principles particularly with regard to sustainable maintenance, (v) presence of
                         other donors in the Count, and (vi) being part of the marginalized counties of the north and north
                           east. Participation of the County governments and KeRRA in all stages of the process will be
                           essential for ensuring ownership and sustainability of the investments.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           8.       Environmental and social safeguards: The initial scoping of the project interventions
                           suggests that the potential environmental and social impacts will be moderate and largely reversible
                           and site-specific due to the nature of proposed activities. It is proposed that the project is assigned
                           EA Category B. The Bank team noted that the potential project investments in rural roads are likely
                           to trigger the following policies: (a) Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01); (b) Involuntary
                           Resettlement (OP 4.12); and (c) Indigenous People (OP 4.10). During the project preparation, it will
                           be determined if other safeguards policies are applicable to the proposed activities, such as OP 4.04 –
                           Natural Habitats, OP 4.09 – Pest Management, OP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Property and OP 4.36 –
                           Forests. Given the nature of the proposed intervention, with specific subproject designs, and
                           locations unknown at the time of project preparation, the project will most likely take a framework
                           approach to managing safeguards. In the event when exact locations are already known during
                           project preparation, site specific instruments will be prepared. There are three framework reports that
                           will need to be developed by GoK: (a) Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF);
                           (b) Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF); and (c) Vulnerable and Marginalized Group Framework
                           (VMGF). These frameworks will need to cover the types of activities envisioned, identify potential
                           impacts of these activities and propose a screening mechanism and a process of assessment and
                           design of the mitigation measures for investments once they are identified. The scope of these
                           frameworks, the exact implementation arrangements, responsibilities and costs will be identified
                           during project preparation. The ESMF, RPF and the VMGF will require a set of public consultations
                           and disclosure prior to project appraisal. During project implementation, based on the screening,
                           Environmental Assessment (EA), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and VMGP will be developed
                           for individual subprojects. In addition, during preparation, the project will identify the initial
                           investment(s) to be financed in the first year of project implementation. The ESIA and/or RAPs and,
                           if needed, VMGP will be prepared for such investments and publicly disclosed following stakeholder
                           consultations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           9.       KeRRA has prior experience working with World Bank financed projects, however due to
                           the large number of projects implemented by the agency, capacity building will be required to
                           promote successful implementation of safeguards instruments. As part of Component 3, the project
                           will provide technical assistance to develop the government capacity, at both national and county
                           levels, to ensure a sustainable implementation and road maintenance mechanisms are in place. It is
                           envisioned that the implementation team will include an environmental and social development
                           specialists identified within the agency or hired to ensure sufficient coverage of safeguards aspects of
                           the project implementation. In addition, the participating Counties will be requested to identify
                           expertise that could assist implementation of safeguards at the local level.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            The policy is triggered for activities under
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       Component 1 and 2, which will include
                                                                            rehabilitation, widening and maintenance of rural
                                                              roads. The environmental impacts are anticipated to
                                                              be specific to project sites and reversible. As the
                                                              project locations will be identified during project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              implementation, the GOK will prepare an ESMF,
                                                              which will cover the types of activities envisioned,
                                                              identify potential impacts of these activities and
                                                              propose a screening mechanism and a process of
                                                              assessment and design of the mitigation measures for
                                                              investments once they are identified. The scope of
                                                              these frameworks, the exact implementation
                                                              arrangements, responsibilities and costs will be
                                                              identified during project preparation. The ESMF will
                                                              be prepared, consulted upon and publicly disclosed
                                                              prior to project appraisal. If specific investments will
                                                              be identified during project preparation, ESIA(s) will
                                                              be prepared and disclosed before appraisal
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD   The impacts on natural habitats will be identified
                                                              during project preparation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             TBD   The impacts on forests will be identified during
                                                              project preparation
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    The project will not include pest management and no
                                                              pesticides will be purchased under the project.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    TBD   The impacts on Physical Cultural Resources will be
                         OP/BP 4.11                           identified during project preparation. The ESMF will
                                                              include a procedure for management of chance finds
                                                              during construction phase of the subprojects.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       Yes   The project will be implemented in the areas where
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.10                                 Vulnerable and Marginalized Groups are present.
                                                              The project will therefore prepare a VMG
                                                              Framework to guide preparation of group specific
                                                              plans. The Framework will be consulted upon in a
                                                              culturally appropriate manner and will be publicly
                                                              disclosed during project appraisal
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   The project will likely require land acquisition within
                         BP 4.12                              the right of way of the secondary and tertiary roads.
                                                              The extent of resettlement is expected to be moderate
                                                              and will be determined upon identification of the
                                                              subprojects. The GOK will prepare an RPF, which
                                                              will guide the preparation of RAPs, where necessary.
                                                              If specific investments will be identified during
                                                              project preparation, RAP(s) will be prepared and
                                                              disclosed before appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No    The project will not construct dams, not rely on
                                                              dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      N/A
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      N/A
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 28-Apr-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF, RPF and VMGF, and any applicable plans (ESMP, RAP, VMGP) will be disclosed
                                      by April 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kavita Sethi
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                                                                                                    Date: 25-Aug-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (PMGR)                                                                                            Date: 25-Aug-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
