                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA17159
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Philippines                        Project ID:    P153268
                            Project Name:      Access to Sustainable Energy Project (P153268)
                            Task Team          Alan F. Townsend,Roberto La Rocca
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          07-Mar-2016                        Estimated   12-Apr-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEE02                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (80%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Infrastructure services for private sector
                                              development (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      23.24           Total Bank Financing:                    0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                                     20.24
                              Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                       3.00
                              Total                                                                                       23.24
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase household access to solar powered
                           electricity within select electric cooperative service areas.


                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                          3. Project Description
                         The Project, funded largely by the European Union-World Bank Trust Fund Access to Sustainable
                         Energy Project (ASEP), supports solar energy-based electrification and network supply. The Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provides investment support through an Output-Based Aid (OBA) facility, which will be financed by
                         a European Union grant of $20,240,000 (or €18,400,000) and co-financed by a GPOBA grant of
                         $3,000,000. The Project will include two main components and a small pilot, as follows:

                         i.       Component 1: PV Mainstreaming (PVM), which entails rural electrification via solar home
                         systems (SHS) of an estimated 40,500 households within the coverage areas of the participating ECs.
                         Through the contributions of the European Union (EU) and GPOBA, PVM will target ECs seeking to
                         receive grants in the form of a competitively allocated capital subsidy for SHS distribution and
                         installation. Sustainability of the proposed scheme is based on the regulatory framework for SHS,
                         which includes monthly service fees paid by SHS customers;

                         ii.     Component 2: Rural Network Solar (RNS), which aims to increase renewable energy
                         production via small, grid connected solar power plants. It is expected that 14 MW of new
                         renewable energy generation capacity will be brought on-line as a result of the project interventions.
                         A capital subsidy buy-down based on a least-cost, competitive approach is expected to level the
                         playing field for grid connected solar vis-à-vis higher polluting alternatives. The subsidy made
                         available under this component is provided by the EU; and

                         iii.     Component 3: Pre-Paid Metering (PPM) Pilot, which targets commercial efficiency at the
                         EC level through controlled pilots - estimated at 1,000 meters - of PPM systems. This component is
                         closely tied to a PPM analysis that will be done as part of the EU-funded, Bank-executed technical
                         assistance to NEA.

                         All components will be managed by a professional, private sector financial institution, the LGU
                         Guarantee Corporation, which has been providing management services to the DOE’s ECPCG
Public Disclosure Copy




                         program for about a decade. In parallel to the investment support provided under the Project, EU-
                         financed, Bank-executed technical assistance will target institutional strengthening of the DOE
                         family.

                         The Project is classified as category Financial Intermediary (FI) based on: (i) the “on-granting”
                         arrangement envisioned for the OBA facility; and (ii) the implementing agency LGUGC’s past
                         experience in an FI role, such as under the Electric Cooperative System Loss Reduction Project
                         (ECSLRP).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will cover the whole country. Specific locations of the output-based subsidy subprojects
                         have not yet been identified specifically and subsidy allocation will be demand driven. Subproject
                         locations will be in the franchise areas of a subset of the country’s 120 electric cooperatives.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gerardo F. Parco (GEN02)
                         Marivi Amor Jucotan Ladia (GSU02)




                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental           Yes        The project supports the National Electrification
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Administration (NEA) and Department of Energy (DOE)
                                                            efforts to work with the electric cooperatives (ECs) on the
                                                            expansion of electrification and meeting the demand for
                                                            energy in an affordable, equitable and sustainable manner.
                                                            One investment component is to provide subsidies for the
                                                            installation and operation of solar home systems which
                                                            require battery maintenance and, eventually, need proper
                                                            disposal management. Likewise, solar farms may entail
                                                            the clearing of tracts of land to make way for open spaces
                                                            for setting up of the photovoltaic (PV) panels and its
                                                            attendant facilities. Given the potential environmental
                                                            impacts that may be generated need to be addressed, this
                                                            policy is triggered.

                                                            The project is Category FI. The LGUGC will act as a
                                                            financial intermediary in this project. Investments will be
                                                            supported through output-based aid mechanisms, with
                                                            subsidies allocated via competitive mechanisms.
                                                            Safeguard compliance requirements will be clear to all
                                                            bidders as a part of the bid process, which will be
                                                            structured as a competition for subsidy allocation. Sub-
                                                            projects which are ultimately financed will arise from this
                                                            process, making this project a good fit with the FI.

                                                            The Environment and Social Safeguards Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            (ESSF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) of the
                                                            Philippines Renewable Energy Development (PHRED)
                                                            project will be applied in the ASEP. The ESSF has been
                                                            updated to include specific provisions and procedures in
                                                            handling and disposal of used batteries. ASEP will
                                                            finance only products that are quality-certified by
                                                            Lighting Global, which means that only modern, lithium
                                                            ion batteries and LED lights will be financed. Battery
                                                            disposal is less challenging for Li-on technology than for
                                                            older, lead-acid varieties; LED lights, unlike CFLs,
                                                            contain no mercury and thus really have no significant
                                                            environmental issues associated with them. The
                                                            Philippines has regulations specific to the storage,
                                                            transport, treatment and disposal of toxic and hazardous
                                                            waste under Republic Act 6969 or the Toxic and
                                                            Hazardous Waste Act. TSD facilities (Treatment Storage
                                                            and Disposal) have been accredited by the Environmental
                                                            Management Bureau throughout the Philippines.
                                                            Collection centers for batteries are located in most major
                                                            towns and cities. Improper disposal of batteries is unlikely


                                                              Page 3 of 8
                                                                      due to the opportunity of turning these in for cash.

                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No            The project will not cause any degradation or conversion
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.04                                      of natural habitats as defined under the safeguard policy.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No            The project will not degrade critical forest areas as
                                                                      defined under the safeguard policy.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                Electric cooperatives do not use nor lead to the
                                                                      procurement of pesticides. It was also verified that the
                                                                      project will not use chemical herbicides for vegetation
                                                                      control. It is not the practice to use herbicides to control
                                                                      growth of plants in the vicinity of solar PV facilities.
                            Physical Cultural           No            The project will not adversely affect sites with
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                      archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or
                                                                      unique natural values.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes           There is a possibility that IPs are present in the project
                            BP 4.10                                   area. The IPs may be positively or adversely affected by
                                                                      investments related to the subsidy components. The IP
                                                                      Policy Framework formulated for PHRED will be applied
                                                                      to this project.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              Installing solar home systems, and prepaid metering will
                            OP/BP 4.12                                most likely not require land outside those already owned
                                                                      by homeowners who will benefit from the project.
                                                                      Limited land acquisition may be required for the rural
                                                                      network solar plant. The Land Acquisition and
                                                                      Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy Framework
                                                                      formulated for PHRED will also apply to cases that may
                                                                      trigger the policy on involuntary resettlement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project does not involve any dams.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No            The project does not involve international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The project will not be located in any known disputed
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          areas as defined in the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Social Safeguards: An environmental and social safeguards framework (ESSF) has been adapted
                              from PHRED. The ESSF was cleared and disclosed in country and at InfoShop on February 19,
                              2016. Impacts from the development of and installation of solar panel PV cellsare not significant,
                              site specific, temporary and easy to mitigate. There are no social safeguard issues unique to
                              ASEP; as with PHRED, projects that are ultimately financed will arise through a demand-driven,
                              competitive process designed to achieve value-for-money in terms of subsidy allocation.
                              Households electrified under ASEP will be previously un-electrified households in relatively
                              remote areas within the franchise territories of the various ECs – preliminary identified as 21 in

                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                           total, out of the 120 ECs nationally – that participate in PV Mainstreaming. Many of these
                           households will include Indigenous Peoples. The ESSF will be used in screening for impacts on
                           Indigenous Peoples, enhancing positive impacts, and in engaging with them. No adverse impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on Indigenous Peoples are anticipated. ASEP does not finance hydro plants but, through the rural
                           network solar component, will provide investment support to small solar power plants that feed
                           into the distribution networks of grid-connected ECs. These small solar plants will require plots of
                           land; it is expected that this land is already in the possession of a would-be developer, or would be
                           acquired on a willing-buyer willing seller basis. One of the criteria for subproject eligibility is that
                           there should be no involuntary resettlement involved hence it is very unlikely that temporary or
                           permanent involuntary resettlement will ensue. However, the ESSF includes provisions on
                           involuntary resettlement in the event that involuntary resettlement does come up. Household
                           beneficiaries of the project will experience more and better quality energy availability – better
                           lighting, improved indoor air quality, better security, and enhanced connectivity (through TV,
                           radio, and mobile phones) – thus contributing to the social development of project communities.

                           Environmental Safeguards: As mentioned above, ASEP will have an ESSF adapted from PHRED.
                           Impacts from the development of and installation of solar panel PV cells are not significant, site
                           specific, temporary and easy to mitigate. ASEP includes solar home systems, so treatment of
                           battery disposal and recycling has been added to the ESSF. Solar systems typically use Lithium-
                           Ion batteries which are not considered as containing toxic materials. Disposal of these batteries
                           will be done through firms registered with the Department of Environment and Natural Resources
                           as Transport, Storage and Disposal (TSD) Facilities. It is not expected that any pesticide use will
                           be associated with the project. Developers of small solar plants will want to control vegetation
                           within the fence of their facilities, but multiple Filipino developers have confirmed to us that
                           vegetation is controlled manually in their operations and chemicals are never used. Otherwise
                           there are no environmental issues of note and, given the impact that solar home systems will have
                           on the composition of energy use at the household level, it is expected that the project will have
                           very localized air quality benefits (especially indoors) for project beneficiaries
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The long term impact of the project is mostly positive. Electrification of communities with no
                           access to the grid will have significant impact on quality of life, including access to basic services.
                           The potential impacts related to operation of the subproject infrastructure are described in previous
                           section. No other negative potential indirect and/or long term environmental and social impacts
                           due to future activities are anticipated in the project areas.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The Project follows a framework approach. Subprojects will be selected upon a competitive
                           selection process, which will be initiated through a request for proposal (RFP). At the time of the
                           RFP, proposals accepted for competitive selection will be shortlisted based on their compliance
                           with a list of predefined criteria, which will be crafted with the purpose of screening subprojects to
                           minimize the risk of potential adverse impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The LGUGC has previous experience in implementing World Bank projects. Familiarity with
                           World Bank safeguards policies and procedures is adequate. Project funds will be allocated for
                           training in the UP Learning Resource Center on Safeguards, organized with the assistance of the


                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                           World Bank and ADB. This training will also be promoted in the level of the Electric
                           Cooperatives. The LGUGC has drafted the ESSF and RPF which details the procedures to
                           incorporate safeguards compliance in the ASEP operations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders in the project are the Electric Cooperatives and the communities they serve. In
                           the agency level, LGUGC is the main counterpart. Other partner agencies would include the NEA
                           and the DOE. Disclosure of safeguards instruments will be done through the website of the
                           LGUGC. Participating ECs will also be provided a physical copy of the ESSF and RPF.
                           Consultation will be done at the level of the communities served by the participating ECs. These
                           consultations will be done through the assistance and guidance of the LGUGC.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                      19-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                      19-Feb-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      19-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Philippines                                                      19-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?


                                                                    Page 6 of 8
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alan F. Townsend,Roberto La Rocca
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 15-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                      Date: 18-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
