                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                       Report No.: ISDSA13676

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Afghanistan                        Project ID:    P155443
                                                         Parent         P112872
                                                         Project ID:
   Project Name:      ADDITIONAL FINANCING FOR SECOND CUSTOMS REFORM AND
                      TRADE FACILITATION PROJECT (P155443)
   Parent Project     Second Customs Reform and Trade Facilitation Project (P112872)
   Name:
   Task Team       Hasan Afzal Zaidi,Khaleda Atta
   Leader(s):
   Estimated       16-Apr-2015                      Estimated       11-Jun-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                  Board Date:
   Managing Unit: GTCDR                             Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                    Instrument:
   Sector(s):      Public administration- Industry and trade (70%), Information technology (20%),
                     General transportation sector (10%)
   Theme(s):         Infrastructure services for private sector development (35%), Trade facilitation
                     and market access (20%), Technology diffusion (20%) , Other public sector
                     governance (15%), Regional integration (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      21.50           Total Bank Financing:                  21.50
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                         Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                                21.50
     Total                                                                                      21.50
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                               Page 1 of 6
 Is this a          Yes
 Repeater
 project?

 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To improve the release of legitimate goods in a fair and efficient manner.

   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


 3. Project Description
The proposed USD 21.5 mil grant as Additional Financing for SCRTFP will help finance costs
associated with: countrywide computerization of Customs Clearance operations; installation of
executive information systems for Customs allowing real time monitoring of operations;
development of cross border Customs-to-Customs (C2C) links to capture reliable information on
cargo; provision of adequate Customs infrastructure to enable modernized operations; development
of an adequate regulatory, administrative and institutional framework for Customs including
development of Trade Portal, feasibility for developing a National Single Window, and support for
the Afghan Customs Academy etc. Through these initiatives the project will continue to support the
Customs reform momentum supported by the Second Customs Reform and Trade Facilitation Project
(SCRTFP) started in 2010.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
SCRTFP is a nationwide project. However the infrastructure rehabilitation/refurbishment sub-project
locations are most likely to be Kabul, Jalalabad, Ghazni, Paktya, Farah, Andkhoi, and Ghulam Khan.
All physical infrastructure sub-projects are planned on existing Government land already available
and in-use for similar activities (tax offices, truck parks, customs houses, check-posts, warehouses,
transit facilities).
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mohammad Arif Rasuli (GENDR)

 6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental              Yes            The EA Category for this project is B i.e. the same as the
 Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     parent project SCRTFP (P112872). The OP/BP 4.01 is
                                           triggered due to construction activities at various
                                           locations. The existing ESMF for the original project has
                                           been reviewed and will suffice for this AF operation for
                                           compliance purposes. The reason being that (i) The AF
                                           operation does not trigger new additional safeguards
                                           policies, (ii) the AF will finance exactly the same types/
                                           categories of activities as the original project and (iii) the
                                           existing ESMF referred to activities at customs facilities
                                           nationally, and was not location/province specific. Hence
                                           the team endorses the original ESMF as relevant and



                                             Page 2 of 6
applicable.

The majority of environmental and social impacts of
SCRTFP are generally related to generation development
and rehabilitation of ACD’s Facilities. Because the
project will mostly finance the rehabilitation and
expansion of an existing scheme, implementation of the
project components is not expected to involve any
significant adverse environmental or social impacts.
However, there will be potential short term impacts which
could be minimized, reduced and mitigated if relevant
measures envisioned in the project ESMF are properly
applied.

Specifically:
•        The rehabilitation and expansion of the project
relates to construction/rehabilitation of physical
infrastructure and purchase of equipment for customs and
transit. While some disruptions in day-to-day activities
during construction may be inevitable, these impacts will
be temporary. Furthermore, no land or other assets are
expected to be required.

•        The rehabilitation of the existing facilities will
involve procurement and installation of necessary ICT
equipment including design, supervision, and project
management; and, provide continued technical assistance
for the ongoing ACD restructuring, automation in the
mentioned site. This is not expected to have any impact
on environmental and social aspects.

Most potential environmental impacts are related to sitting
of facilities (such as sub-stations), construction activities
and the possible presence of mines. Assessment and
mitigation of potential impacts will be addressed through
the application of environmental codes of practices, mine
risk and safety procedures all envisioned in the project
ESMF.

Also, operational level impacts should also be considered.
Water and Sanitation in the rest areas, offices and
facilities related to the Customs should be functioning
well hygienically. Offices should have emergency exits,
smoke detectors, fire extinguishers, guard rills, ramps for
the disabled and etc. to be ensure Environmental Health
and Safety issues during the facilities life time.




 Page 3 of 6
                                             Training would also be needed for custom officers to
                                             identify legally banned toxic items, e.g., outdated
                                             pesticides, WHO banned items and etc. to inter the
                                             country.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
   4.04
   Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

   Pest Management OP 4.09 No

   Physical Cultural           No
   Resources OP/BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
   BP 4.10
   Involuntary Resettlement    No
   OP/BP 4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
   4.37
   Projects on International   No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     There will be no potential large scale, significant and/ or irreversible impacts by the SCRTFP.
     Most potential environmental impacts are related to improvement of Afghan Customs facilities
     (such warehouses, Truck parking etc.), construction activities and the possible presence of mines.
     Assessment and mitigation of potential impacts will be addressed through the application of
     environmental codes of practices, mine risk and safety procedures detailed in the ESMF.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     No adverse long term impacts are foreseen. In fact the project is expected to have positive
     environmental impacts after completion of construction works, including a decrease in dust
     generation etc. and provision of rest area helping the cleanliness of the surrounding areas.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     NA
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     The Ministry of Finance (MOF) is the implementing ministry, the Afghanistan Custom
     Department (ACD) is the implementing agency (IA) and the UNOPS is the implementing partner


                                               Page 4 of 6
  (IP). While ACD itself does not have the required capacity or skills to handle safeguard related
  issues, however ACD is utilizing the services of United Nations Office for Project Services
  (UNOPS) as the Implementing Partner (IP). As in the case of the ongoing Second Customs
  Reforms and Trade Facilitation Project, UNOPS shall be effectively managing procurement,
  fiduciary and other safeguards, and has the required capacity to address any safeguard issues if
  they arise. A Safeguards Focal Officer will be identified within the IP with responsibility for
  overseeing the implementation of the Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework. As per
  the requirements of the ESMF the project Focal Officer and other staff will be preparing ESMPs
  or action plans for implementation of the safeguards. The provisions of the ESMPs and other
  safeguards framework relevant items will be included in all works contracts and its proper
  implementation will be the responsibility of the Contractor(s) with oversight from the IP
  (UNOPS).
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Implementing Agency - Afghan Customs Department (ACD)
  Implementing Partner - United Nations Office for Project Services (UNOPS)
  NGOs
  Provincial Authorities
  Municipalities
  Ministry of Information and Culture

  Local Communities
  Disclosure shall be made through local newspapers, TV, radio, websites and public
  announcements.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                       14-Jan-2010
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                    01-Feb-2010
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive       ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure

  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [   ]
 report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information



                                            Page 5 of 6
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Hasan Afzal Zaidi,Khaleda Atta
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                                Date:
   Practice Manager/    Name:                                               Date:
   Manager:




                                             Page 6 of 6
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
