                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA16947
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bangladesh                        Project ID:   P155363
                            Project Name:      Modernization of State-Owned Financial Institutions Project (P155363)
                            Task Team          Marius Vismantas,Shah Nur Quayyum
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          19-Apr-2016                       Estimated   24-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFM06                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Banking (100%)
                            Theme(s):         State-owned enterprise restructuring and privatization (50%), Corporate
                                              governance (30%), Other Financial Sector Development (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     200.00           Total Bank Financing:                150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          50.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                150.00
                              Total                                                                                      200.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective is to contribute to the modernization, transparency and
                           efficiency of state-owned banks.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project intends to provide funding for long-term investments by state-owned banks towards their

                                                                       Page 1 of 5
                         modernization through improved governance, better IT systems, business process re-engineering
                         (BPR) and better decision making and operational processes. Advisory assistance to the banks and
                         the MOF as the representative of the owner ? on the decision making and operational processes,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improved governance, change management - would complement the investments in physical IT
                         infrastructure.

                         The project will follow a sequenced approach. First, SOBs will undergo business process
                         reengineering (BPR) whereby consultancy services will be provided to them to review and improve
                         internal processes, work flows, and business planning. Concurrently with the BPR, the consultants
                         will assess recapitalization plans for those SOBs which require additional capital and will
                         recommend options to BFID. This phase is expected to be done during the first 12 months of the
                         project. IT investments will follow starting in the second year of the project once the important (feed-
                         in) IT diagnostic exercise which is implemented under a parallel FSSP project during CY2016 will
                         result in bank-specific strategies, implementation plans, and procurement packages ready for bidding.
                         The investments will continue throughout years 2-5 of the project. The SOB governance
                         improvement activities ? assessments and implementation of recommended reforms - will start at the
                         outset of the project and continue throughout its duration, in parallel with the BPR and IT
                         modernization activities.

                         Project Components

                         The proposed project will therefore include the following four components: (i) supporting SOB
                         business process reengineering; (ii) supporting IT modernization of state-owned commercial and
                         development banks; (iii) supporting institutional development of banks and MOF in enhancing
                         ownership oversight and corporate governance framework; and (iv) supporting project coordination,
                         implementation and monitoring.

                         Component 1 ? Supporting SOB business process reengineering (US$15 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This Component will provide consultancy support to the SOBs for a comprehensive Business
                         Process Reengineering (BPR) ? from internal control and accounting to credit appraisal system, risk
                         management and transaction processing ? that will be a pre-requisite for an automated modern
                         banking environment. BPR will strengthen and modernize the banks? internal processes, workflows,
                         and business planning.

                         BPR will precede development and implementation of new IT solutions in SOBs. The new IT
                         solutions would then be adapted to the updated processes and workflows. BPR is a fundamental
                         rethink and redesign of existing business practices with a purpose of achieving significant
                         improvements in critical measures of corporate performance such as cost, quality, service and speed.
                         For those SOBs which require additional capitalization by the Government, the BPR exercise will
                         add an additional module which would make assessments of the banks? recapitalization requirements
                         and provide options on capital allocations.

                         Component 2 ? Supporting IT modernization of SOBs (US$125 million)

                         Component 2 will support purchase and implementation of the modernized IT architecture with
                         relevant software and hardware solutions in the SOBs, supplemented by advisory assistance, with a
                         particular focus on cyber security. The requirements for the new IT architecture will be determined
                         through the IT diagnostic exercise (under the FSSP project). The Component will also support SOBs

                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         in improving their basic IT infrastructure in parallel with the implementation of key systems (such as
                         CBS, ERP, and AML). This may include establishing sound technical infrastructure (e.g., power,
                         electrical, server cooling, and internet) to support centralized processing, branch connectivity, an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enterprise wide email system to support communication across the organization, PC/hardware
                         penetration etc. Although all banks have embarked on a centralized CBS implementation, there is a
                         lack of basic technical infrastructure to sustainably support this initiative and provide uninterrupted
                         business process. Furthermore, exposure to basic automation like email, enterprise-wide intranet etc.
                         will help prepare the current workforce for automated business processes down the road. IT training
                         programs to retool existing workforce and prepare them for a fully automated business environment
                         will be developed and implemented under the Component.

                         Component 3 - Supporting institutional development of banks and MOF in enhancing ownership
                         oversight and corporate governance framework (US$7 million)

                         Under this component, the project will provide advisory support to all the banks participating in the
                         project and the MOF as the agency exercising ownership rights of the banks on improving the
                         framework within which the ownership rights are exercised and banks are governed. The adoption of
                         international good practices in the corporate governance of SOBs will increase accountability and
                         transparency, leading to improved performance and the achievement of various social goals and
                         mandates and complement the activities under Components 1 and 2. The project will involve various
                         consultancy and training activities and will address/strengthen the five key pillars of good corporate
                         governance for state-owned financial institutions:

                         ?       The policy and legal framework for SOB governance;
                         ?       Ownership capacity of the Banking and Financial Institutions Department of the Ministry of
                         Finance;
                         ?       Capacity of the SOB Boards to oversee the banks;
                         ?       Transparency of the banks including the role of board audit committees and the quality of
                         external audits; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ?       Internal control, internal audit, and compliance functions, including establishment or
                         strengthening as the case may be of the AML/CTF functions and procedures.

                         Component 4 - Supporting project coordination, implementation and monitoring (US$3 million)

                         This component will provide support for the monitoring and coordination of Project activities
                         undertaken by various beneficiary institutions. It will also help develop a strong monitoring and
                         evaluation system to be used by the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) and other stakeholders to
                         assess implementation progress.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         - The project will be located at the public banks' headquarters in Dhaka and in their branches across
                         the country
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Sabah Moyeen (GSU06)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)



                                                                      Page 3 of 5
                            Environmental               No
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              No safeguard issues and impacts are expected under the project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No long term or indirect impacts are expected under the project.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              No alternatives have been considered due to an absence of potential adverse impacts.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              No measures are required.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Key stakeholders are the Government of Bangladesh and state owned banks. Second tier
                              stakeholders are customers of state owned banks , other banks, and Bangladesh Bank (central
                              bank). No people are expected to be negatively affected by the project from the perspective of
                              safeguards policies.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements


                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marius Vismantas,Shah Nur Quayyum
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Niraj Verma (PMGR)                Date: 03-Jun-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 5 of 5
