                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1198

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tajikistan                       Project ID:      P150816
                            Project Name:      Nurek Hydropower Rehabilitation Project Phase I (P150816)
                            Task Team          Paivi Koljonen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          06-Feb-2017                      Estimated        28-Apr-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEE03                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Hydropower (60%), General energy sector (10%), Flood protection (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Export development and competitiveness (30%), Rural services and
                                               infrastructure (20%), Water resource management (30%), Infrastructu re
                                               services for private sector development (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    250.00                      Total Bank Financing:         70.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:         175.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  70.00
                              Total                                                                        75.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project development objective is to increase the generation capacity of the Nurek HPP and
                           strengthen dam safety.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project is the first phase of the rehabilitation of the 40-year old Nurek Hydropower Plant (HPP),
                         comprising the rehabilitation of three of the nine existing generating units and upgrading of dam
                         safety systems. Given the significant cost of rehabilitating the entire plant ($566-650 million) and the
                         limited volume of financing that would likely be available for Tajikistan, the Government and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bank have agreed that a phased approach is needed. The first phase includes the three generating
                         units, most of the Balance of Plant equipment, and dam safety; the second phase would include the
                         remaining six units and the remaining Balance of Plant and would be done when additional financing
                         becomes available. This two-phase approach would ensure an early start to the rehabilitation and will
                         reduce the financing required to initiate the works. The implementation period for the first phase is
                         about five years.

                         The cost estimate of the first phase is $250 - 300 million, based on the findings of the Feasibility
                         Study Consultants, Tractebel Engineers of France, and following a thorough investigation of the
                         facility. A more precise estimate will be available at the end of CY2016 after the Project
                         Management Consultant has confirmed the scope of the project, including needed dam safety works.

                         The project would be financed through Investment Project Financing (IPF), supported by an IDA
                         credit of about $70 million. Co-financing is expected from multilateral and bilateral development
                         financing institutions.

                         Components:

                         Component 1: Power Plant Rehabilitation
                         This component will finance the replacement and refurbishment of mechanical, electrical, and
                         electromechanical equipment and works required for the rehabilitation of the Nurek HPP.

                         Component 2: Dam Safety
                         This component will finance activities designed to improve the safety of the operation of the Nurek
                         HPP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Project Management, Technical Assistance, Environment and Social
                         This component will strengthen the project's management and implementation arrangements, as well
                         as support beneficiary feedback mechanisms.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Nurek dam, built across the Vakhsh River, was commissioned during 1972 -1979. It is the
                         second highest earth-fill dam in the world (300 m). The Nurek hydropower plant (HPP) has 3,000
                         MW of installed capacity provided by nine turbine-generator units. The Vakhsh River is one of the
                         tributaries of Amu Darya, which is the largest river of Central Asia, and one of the two main
                         tributaries of the Aral Sea. The project is located near the town of Nurek, about 80 km from the
                         capital, Dushanbe, with an estimated population of 18,950 in 2008. The city was founded in 1960
                         alongside the construction of the Nurek HPP.

                         Downstream of the Nurek dam, many other run-of river hydroplants depend on flows released by the
                         Nurek HPP, as also tens of thousands of irrigated hectares of farmland. Construction of the dam had
                         already heavily influenced water quality and hydrology at large. Consultants have prepared an
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) for the project, which currently is under the
                         Bank's review. The Tigrovaya Balka State National Reserve is located in the lowermost part of the
                         Vakhsh River basin, down to its confluence with Pyanj River, close to the border with Afghanistan.
                           The reserve, with an area of 49,786 ha, is located about 200 km south of Dushanbe. It is of great
                           importance for the conservation of the Tugai ecosystem and its unique fauna and flora. The project is
                           not expected to have any impacts on the Reserve, as the ESIA report suggests.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project area and the region are largely rural and the economic activity is predominantly
                           dependent on agriculture. There is some tourist activity revolving around Nurek, including
                           guesthouses and hotels and areas for day recreation.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Energy and Water Resources is responsible for the implementation of policies and
                           laws related to fuel, energy and natural resources. Barqi Tojik (BT) is the national integrated power
                           company of Tajikistan. BT will have the overall responsibility for the project's compliance with
                           national legislation, regional and international agreements, treaties and conventions and international
                           guidelines and good practices for environmental and social aspects.

                           The Ministry of Energy and Water Resources and its existing Project Implementation Unit (PIU), as
                           well as BT and its existing PIU have accumulated experience in managing projects financed by
                           International Financing Institutions (IFIs) and have capacity to ensure compliance with the Bank's
                           safeguards requirements. However, extra capacity will be required to facilitate ESIA-related
                           consultations during preparation and implementation-stage information dissemination and
                           consultations. In addition, capacity development activities on the ESMP and environmental and
                           social risk management is proposed for the PIU during preparation with additional activities during
                           implementation.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSU03)
                           Javaid Afzal (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes             The project has prepared a draft Environmental and
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) report, which is
                                                                            currently under the Bank's review. Considering that
                                                                            majority of the proposed works are of rehabilitation
                                                                            in nature, majority of the environmental impacts are
                                                                            limited to the construction site, are temporary and
                                                                            reversible in nature with minimum residual impacts
                                                                            after mitigation measures have been implemented.
                                                                            Therefore, the project is rated as category B project.
                                                                            However, given that Nurek is the world's second
                                                                            highest earth-filled dam, it raises the project's risk
                                                                            level.

                                                                            There are likely to be minimal direct social impacts
                                                                            from the project-financed activities. The draft ESIA
                                                                            and technical studies indicate that under the current
                                                                            design the rehabilitation works will not result in any
                                                              impacts on total downstream discharge and suggest
                                                              that the electricity output will not decline during
                                                              winter. In addition, the impacts on local jobs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              livelihoods are expected to be minimal.

                                                              Following consultations with local stakeholders, the
                                                              final ESIA will be disclosed in the country and at the
                                                              World Bank's InfoShop around September 2016. The
                                                              ESIA will be translated into Tajik and Russian and
                                                              made available at locations that are accessible to
                                                              stakeholders and on-line.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No    The project is not expected to have any impacts in
                                                              addition to the existing Nurek Hydropower Plant
                                                              (HPP).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    The proposed project will not affect any of the forest
                                                              or forested land.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    The project does not involve or promote use of any
                                                              kind of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    No    The proposed construction works are limited to the
                         OP/BP 4.11                           existing HPP facility.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    No Indigenous Peoples as per OP 4.10 are present in
                         4.10                                 the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   No    The proposed project activities will not result in any
                         BP 4.12                              of the impacts detailed in OP 4.12. All project works
                                                              will take place within the existing power facility. No
                                                              impacts on downstream flows are expected.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      Yes   As required by OP4.37 (Safety of Dams), the project
                                                              will:

                                                              (i) engage a Panel of Experts to provide independent
                                                              review and expert advice on dam safety issues and
                                                              other aspects during both preparation and
                                                              implementation. In particular, the experts will (a)
                                                              inspect and evaluate the safety status of the existing
                                                              dam, its appurtenances, and its performance history;
                                                              (b) review and evaluate the owner's operation and
                                                              maintenance procedures; and (c) provide written
                                                              reports of findings and recommendations for any
                                                              remedial work or safety-related measures over the
                                                              course of the project's preparation and
                                                              implementation.

                                                              (ii) ensure that the work will be designed and
                                                              supervised by competent professionals. This will be
                                                              done by the international Project Management
                                                              Consultant to be financed by the project and for
                                                           which the ToRs are being finalized.

                                                           (iii) prepare and implement the following detailed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           plans: a plan for construction supervision and quality
                                                           assurance; an instrumentation plan; an operation and
                                                           maintenance plan; and an emergency preparedness
                                                           plan.
                         Projects on International   Yes   The project is located on the Vakhsh River, one of
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              the main tributaries of the Amu Darya River, which
                                                           is an international waterway. The other riparian
                                                           states to the Amu Darya Basin are Afghanistan,
                                                           Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan, all three being
                                                           downstream riparians.

                                                           The rehabilitation of existing hydropower facilities
                                                           on an international waterway requires the application
                                                           of OP 7.50. However, according to paragraph 7 of
                                                           OP 7.50, there are exceptions to the Bank
                                                           requirement that riparian states be notified of
                                                           projects on international waterways. The exception
                                                           under paragraph 7(a) applies “for any ongoing
                                                           schemes, projects involving additions or alterations
                                                           that require rehabilitation, construction or other
                                                           changes that in the judgement of the Bank: (i) will
                                                           not adversely change the quality or quantity of water
                                                           flows to the other riparians; and (ii) will not be
                                                           adversely affected by the other riparians’ possible
                                                           water use". This exception applies only to minor
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           additions or alterations to the ongoing scheme that
                                                           would not exceed the original scheme, change its
                                                           nature, or so alter or expand its scope and extent as to
                                                           make it appear a new or different scheme.

                                                           The project involves a phased replacement of aging
                                                           generating units, which came into operation in the
                                                           1970s. This is a normal process in hydropower
                                                           plants. Because the project will rehabilitate an
                                                           existing power plant without exceeding its original
                                                           scheme or changing its nature, there will be no
                                                           additional use of water under the project, and no
                                                           change in water quality. Accordingly, the works to
                                                           be funded under the project will not (i) adversely
                                                           change the quality or quantity of water flows to the
                                                           other riparians; and (ii) be adversely affected by the
                                                           other riparians’ water use. The project will therefore
                                                           seek the approval for such an exception.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not located in the 'disputed areas' as
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                defined in the Bank policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Dec-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESIA is planned to be disclosed in Tajikistan and at the World Bank's InfoShop in September
                                      2016. Consultations on the draft ESIA would take place during April-June 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paivi Koljonen
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                                                                                      Date: 15-Apr-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)                                                                                                Date: 15-Apr-2016
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
