INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR15955
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:         China                      Project ID:   P086446
Project Name: Chongqing Urban-Rural Integration Project (PO86446)
Task Team        Ji You
Leader(s):
Estimated        02-Nov-2009                Estimated     03-Jun-2010
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU08                        Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:          Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (39%), Health (27%), General
water, sanitation and flood protection sector (25%), Vocationa 1 training (9%)
Theme:           Rural services and infrastructure (65%), Health system performance (14%),
Water resource management (13%), Improving labor markets (4%), Education
for the knowledge economy (4%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                    No
O
U         Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     191.85             Total Bank Financing:     84.00
o         Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                 Amount
Borrower                                                         107.85
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development             84.00
Total                                                            191.85
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The project development objective is to increase access of residents in participating counties and
Page 1 of 7


﻿districts to improved public services including roads, water supply, employment training, and
primary health care.
3. Project Description
Component 1 - ? Counties?? Roads Infrastructure
(i) Tongliang County Townships Municipal Roads
(ii)   Yongchuan District Banqiao Town Roads
Component 2 - Township and Village Infrastructure Improvement
(i)   Qijiang County Basic Services Improvement
(ii)  Chengkou County Basic Services Improvement
Component 3 - Migrant Workers# Training for Transfer and Employment
(i)   Yubei District Employment Transfer Training Base
(ii)  Wushan County Employment Training Base
(iii)  Shizhu County Vocational Training Base
(iv)  Chongqing Technology and Business University
Component 4 - Community Health Care Services
(i) Equipping of village clinics and urban Community Health Care Centers by providing
medical and other equipment and training required for the delivery of health care services; and
(ii)   Expanding the Yubei District hospital by constructing the additional hospital facilities on a
new site, and providing medical, and other equipment for such facilities and training required for
health care services.
Component 5 - Project Management Strengthening
(i)   Project Management and Capacity Building for PMOs and PIUs Project management
(ii)  Other consultancy
O
U         4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
O
Chongqing is located in the southwest of China, on the upper reaches of Yangtze River, bordering
Hubei and Hunan Provinces in the east, Guizhou Province in the south, Sichuan Province in the west
*        and Shaanxi Province in the north, with total areas of 82,400km2, including 647.78km2 of urban
areas. Chongqing is surrounded respectively by Daba Mountain, Wushan Mountain, Wuling
Mountain and Dalou Mountain in the north, east and south, where hills and mountains are the
dominating geomorphic plus large areas of hillside fields. The rivers running through Chongqing
include the Yangtze River and Jialing River.
Though great achievements were obtained in the socioeconomic development, Chongqing still faces
enormous challenges. There are still 16 million people living in rural areas. Problems, such as lack of
clean drinking water, adequate accessibility to road and transportation for production, and sound
health care and educational services, still exist.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Chongwu Sun (GENDR)
Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)
Ximing Zhang (GWADR)
Page 2 of 7


﻿Zongcheng Lin (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
o        Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   Yes
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
Environment: Restructuring involves a new road segment with the length 8.428 km in Banqiao
Town and Sanjiao Town of Yongchuan District. The environmental impacts are similar to the
original project??s component on road components, namely, dust, noise, traffic and business
interruption, storage and disposal of spoil during construction, etc. The new EIA prepared for the
restructuring covers all these issues and with the mitigation measures proposed. Therefore, it was
agreed with the PMO that the original Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared will still
apply to the new road component.
The environmental performance for the parent project has been satisfactory. Environmental
management in construction has been carried out largely according to the EMP. The EMP
implementation and environmental monitoring has been included in the semi-annual project
progress report and submitted to the Bank in timely manner.
1.     Social: The implementation of the old RAP is satisfactory. The old RAP will continue to
cover the remaining parts of land acquisition and resettlement of the project. As for the new
segment to be added in two towns of Yongchuan Disctrict, An additional RAP was prepared
because there will be additional land acquisition and resettlement. In order to minimize land
acquisition and resettlement, this subproject design was optimized, which resulted in avoiding the
demolition of 5 transformers, 21 telegraph poles and 18 houses. More specifically, this new
Page 3 of 7


﻿Yongchuan subproject includes two parts. One is Sanban Road double line construction: starting
from the road junction at the Banqiao Town Government with a total length of 6.34km in Sanjiao
Town and Banqiao Town. The other part is Sanban Road reconstruction: starting from the road
junction at the Banqiao Town Government with a full length of 8.42km. The additional subproject
in Yongchuan will affect 9 groups of 3 villages (Liangfengya and Benzun Villages, Banqiao
Town; and Yufeng Village, Sanjiao Town) in Yongchuan District, all of which will be affected by
land acquisition and house demolition. 296.4 mu of land will be acquired permanently, all being
rural collective land (including 210.85 mu of cultivated land), affecting 143households with 417
persons; 76.7 mu of rural collective land will be occupied temporarily; rural residential houses of
1,130 m2 will be demolished, affecting 8 households with 37 persons. In addition, the Subproject
will affect 4 individual businesses with a total demolition area of 70 m2 and 13 persons, and 4
types of ground attachments. 147 households with 430 persons will be affected in total.
The RAP prepared was deemed in compliance with the requirements of the Bank OP/BP 4.12.
The RAP had set various mitigation measures to compensate affected people and minimize
negative impacts on them and their communities. The RAP has also been disclosed to the public in
project sites and the Bank InfoShop.
For IP presence, the social screening during project restructuring reconfirmed that there was no
ethnic minority group as defined under OP4. 10 Indigenous Peoples term in the project areas; Only
a very small number or Miao and Tujia people lived scattered with local Han majority people.
These Miao and Tujia groups are well integrated with the local majority of Han people. They all
speak official Mandarin Chinese, observe the same cultural customs and social organization, and
there are no distinctions of livelihoods, education levels, or civil official appointments for the sake
of ethnic difference. These people will not be disadvantaged by the project. Hence the team
concludes that the IP Policy is not applicable to this project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
NA
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Alternative analysis was carried out from two aspects: one was about with/without project; and
two was to compare two route schemes. For with/without project analysis, it was realized that the
implementation of the proposed project was to improve the regional traffic network, promote the
rapid development of "Sanban economic zone" and the overall urban and rural development. The
proposed new road could bring economic effects to local residents. Through the implementation of
the proposed mitigation measures to prevent and control pollution, the negative impacts on the
atmospheric environment, acoustic environment, ecological environment, and surface water could
be small. Therefore, the recommendation was to have the subproject to be implemented. With
regard to the result of schemes comparison, Scheme 2 was recommended from technical and
financial perspectives.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During restructuring, the EA/EMP for the new road component in Yongchuan District was
prepared by Chongqing International Investment Consultation Group Co.Ltd, which had
experiences preparing the environmental safeguards documents for Bank funded projects. After
over years of implementation of the Bank projects, Chongqing PMO and the project implementing
Page 4 of 7


﻿agency in Yongchuan are experienced with adequate capacity to implement and monitor
environmental measures and the EMP implementation has been satisfactory in general.
The RAP was prepared by the PMO by hiring a local professional consulting institute ?Chongqing
O
Industrial and commercial Management University. The consulting team was very much
experienced in preparing social safeguards documents and monitoring the implementation of the
social safeguards instruments from several previous the World Bank lending projects. Chongqing
PMO and Yongchuan PIU are also experienced with good capacity in implementing safeguards
instruments in Bank financed projects.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
For restructuring, the first round public consultation was from September 30 to October 17, 2014
after environmental screening and the TOR prepared. At the same time, the project summary,
environment impact was introduced via disclosing information both at the project site and on
website for acquiring advice, suggestion and requirement of affected people. The 2nd time
consultation was from Oct 30, 2014 to Nov. 2014 (before finalization of EIA), EIA was placed at
office of transport department of Banqiao township government. Public opinion survey
questionnaire was distributed. The group interview (forum) was organized by EIA consultant and
PIU to give specific presentation on project information and conclusion of EIA, including work
scale, construction phase, short and long term impact on residents?? daily life and surroundings
and proposed mitigation measures as well. The EIA summary was disclosed locally in PMO
agency's official website and public information points of project towns and villages on September
30, 2014. The English version of the EIA summary were posted at the World Bank Infoshop on
March 30, 2015.
Public consultation was carried out with affected people with project information booklets given
out to these people and their communities as part of the preparation of the additional RAP for
Yongchuan subproject during the project restructuring. 39 out of 143 (about 30%) affected
households were investigated through survey, interviews and group meetings as part of the social
assessment and RAP preparation late 2014. The feedback and suggestions from the affected
people were reflected in the RAP such as compensation packages. The final RAP was disclosed
locally in PMO agency's official website, and public information points of project towns and
villages on 15 Mar. 2015 and also disclosed at the World Bank InfoShop on November 6, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           30-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    30-Sep-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              31 -Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-Nov-2015
Page 5 of 7


﻿"In country" Disclosure
China                                                      04-May-2015
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [X] No [     ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ X] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 6 of 7


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ji You
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                   Date: 16-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)               Date: 16-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


