                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC15746

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P153473
                            Project Name:      Three Gorges Modern Logistics Center Infrastructure Project (P153473)
                            Task Team          Binyam Reja
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          19-Sep-2016                      Estimated        30-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI02                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Ports, waterways and shipping (40%), General industry and trade sector (40%),
                                               Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (70%), Trade facilitation
                                               and market access (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    478.00                     Total Bank Financing:        200.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     278.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        200.00
                              Total                                                                        478.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           21.    The PDO is to improve the efficiency and utilization of multi-modal freight transport system
                           and modern logistics services in Yichang Municipality along the Yangtze River.
                           C. Project Description
                           2.      Total Project cost is estimated at USD478.3 million, which will be financed in part by a
                         World Bank loan of USD200 million; the remainder will be financed by loans from commercial
                         banks and Yichang Municipality fiscal funds.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.        Component 1: Baiyang Port and operations area along the Yangzi River (total area:
                         0.45square km; total cost: USD158 million). This component will finance the construction of port
                         facilities, and the purchase of equipment and installation to support port operations. Seven berths, a
                         heavy container yard, a break bulk yard, an empty container yard, a bulk cargo yard, administration
                         buildings, warehouses, and parking lots will be constructed under this component. The counterpart is
                         currently constructing six other berths from its own resources, making the total number of berths in
                         the port 13.

                         4.      Component 2: Baiyang Logistics Park (total area: 0.90 square km; total cost: USD241
                         million). This component will finance the construction of warehouses, trans-shipment yard facilities,
                         urban distribution facilities, living service facilities, business facilities, cleaning and maintenance
                         work areas, internal roads, green spaces, administration buildings, and equipment.

                         5.      Component 3: Transport Connection Infrastructure (total cost: USD51.5 million): This
                         component will finance the construction of: (i) an overpass road connecting Baiyang Port and the
                         Logistics Park to Shawan Marshalling Yard; (ii) G318 underpass section; (iii) surrounding roads, i.e.,
                         Guihu Road and Songgang Second Road; and (iv) Traffic engineering

                         6.       Component 4: Baiyang Logistics Information Platform and Facilities (total cost: USD25.2
                         million): This component will finance the purchase of: (i) computer hardware and equipment, and
                         their installation in the information center; (ii) a system platform; (iii) field surveillance devices; and
                         (iv) tele-communication infrastructure.

                         7.       Component 5: Capacity Building (total cost: USD3 million): This component will finance
                         technical assistance to develop port and logistics operations model, project management consultants,
                         training and capacity building, and port and logistics related sector studies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         8.        The Project is located in Baiyang Industrial Park of Yichang Hi-tech Industry Development
                         Zone. Baiyang, where the Baiyang Port and Logistics Park facilities would be located, is 40 km south
                         of downtown Yichang, and 70 km downstream of the Three Gorges Dam. The location is ideal in
                         that it is removed from the main urban transport corridors and hence does not add to the city➢❨ s
                         congestion and air pollution, but is close enough to serve the urban freight logistics demand for
                         Yichang Municipality. The proposed site is also well connected to all modes of transport, including
                         the national expressway system, nearby Ziyun Railway Marshalling Yard, and the Three Gorges
                         Airport.

                         9.      The Baiyang Port will primarily serve containers, bulk cargo, general cargo, liquid bulk, and
                         ➢❨ roll on-roll off➢❨ trucks. The Logistics Park will be used to process shipments for equipment,
                         building material, food industry, steel, and city distribution. Currently, a feasibility study is under
                         preparation to project the demand for the port and the logistics park.

                         10.     The Yangzi River, the longest and biggest river in China, provides sufficient space for the
                         future Logistics industry and a well-functioning Port. Though the project site is outside the natural
                         reserve for Chinese sturgeon, an endangered migrating species, it is only a few kilometers
                           downstream from the natural reserve➢❨ s boundary. Yichang is strategically located at the junction
                           of the upper and middle branch of Yangzi River. It is a medium sized and the third largest city in
                           Hubei Province, central south China, with a population of 1.2 million. It has a hilly geography with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           lush vegetation and subtropical continental climate with annual precipitation averaging at 1210 mm,
                           mostly falling in summer.

                           11.     All land needed for the project are collective owned land of two villages, Yazishan and
                           Guixihu. These two villages are typical rural villages. Most of labors are working outside the village
                           as migrant labor. All families have contracted land in the village but they do not rely on land for their
                           livelihood. The income is mainly salary from working as migrant labor. The acquired land is mainly
                           used for orchard, fish pond. A small proportion of the land is for construction purpose of residential
                           houses and other structures. Although these two villages are along the Yangtze River, none in these
                           two villages engage fishery.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           12.     A project management office (PMO) has been established within the Three Gorges Port
                           Authority of Yichang. The PMO is responsible for communication with, and reporting to the Bank,
                           and will monitor project implementation. The PMO will also perform the coordination, supervision
                           and quality assurance role. The PMO consists of members from some key government Bureaus of
                           Yichang Municipality, including DRC, Finance Bureau, and Transport Bureau. The Deputy
                           Commissioner of the Three Gorges Port Authority chairs this office.

                           13.     Under the leadership of PMO, a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which rests in the
                           Yichang Transport Investment Co., Ltd, has been established with specialized technical,
                           environmental and social safeguards staff. The PIU will perform the day-to-day preparation and
                           implementation of the project, including consultant hiring, financial management, procurement, and
                           environmental and social safeguards etc. Although PIU has staff on environmental and social
                           safeguards, they do not have experience in preparation of the Bank financed projects. Its capacity on
                           environmental and social safeguards will require strengthening, as this is the first WB project in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Yichang.

                           14.      On environmental safeguard, Term of Reference (ToR) for Environmental Assessment (EA)
                           had been developed, and Hubei Provincial Environmental Institute has been selected as the EA
                           consultant. It is a highest-class certified EA institute with recent experience in WB projects, e.g.
                           Jingzhou Historic Town Conservation Project and Xinxiang New Countryside Project, both category
                           A. The Bank team provided training on the WB safeguard policies and requirements to the PMO,
                           PIU and EA team, provided samples, reviewed the ToR and discussed the key issues and challenges
                           for this project. Capacity building in safeguard preparation and implementation will be continued
                           throughout the project cycle.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Chaogang Wang (GSU05)
                           Xin Ren (GEN2A)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            The proposed project will involve building of major
                         OP/BP 4.01   port infrastructure in the upper-middle branches of
                                      the biggest river in China. It also includes
                                      construction of an overpasses road, roads and other
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      facilities inside the logistic park. The potential issues
                                      associated with construction and operation include
                                      impacts on river environment, aquatic ecology,
                                      fishery, navigation safety, ship waste management,
                                      risks of leakage and contamination during loading/
                                      unloading operation, social disturbance, induced and
                                      cumulative impacts of multiple ports under the
                                      Yichang Hub. Given the nature, scale and sensitivity
                                      of impacts and risks involved, a category A is
                                      proposed.

                                      Environmental Assessment (EA) shall be carried out
                                      by an experienced EA institute. Based on the impact
                                      screening, alternative analysis, and baseline
                                      definition, key impacts will be assessed thoroughly,
                                      especially those on aquatic ecology, water quality
                                      and fishery of the river, both during construction and
                                      operation. Off-site impacts, such as a borrow pit,
                                      disposal site, will be addressed.

                                      Social impacts assessment will be carried out
                                      separately with the results being integrated into the
                                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                                      (ESIA) as a chapter which will also covers analysis
                                      on induced impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      To mitigate adverse impacts, a standalone
                                      Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                                      will be prepared to facilitate its implementation,
                                      taking into account the relevant Environmental,
                                      Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines of the WB,
                                      namely, the general EHS Guidelines, the EHS
                                      Guidelines for Ports, Harbors and Terminals and the
                                      EHS Guidelines on Shipping, and including
                                      measures to address social impacts.

                                      Yichang municipal government has consolidated all
                                      existing or planned ports under its jurisdiction into
                                      Yichang Navigation Hub, of which the proposed
                                      project is a part. For the master plan of Yichang Hub,
                                      Strategic Environmental Assessment (SEA) was
                                      undertaken per domestic requirement and approved.
                                      The SEA constitutes the basis for cumulative impact
                                      assessment (CIA).
                                                             The CIA will follow the international practice as
                                                             reflected in the IFC➢❨ s good practice handbook on
                                                             CIA which is based on selected Valuable Ecological
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Components (VEC). The combined impacts of the
                                                             proposed project with past, present and future
                                                             developments in the area of influence are assessed,
                                                             following the procedure spelled out in the Term of
                                                             Reference reviewed by the Bank. The result will be a
                                                             chapter in the ESIA.

                                                             As per World Bank policy OP4.01 and national
                                                             regulations, at least two rounds of public consultation
                                                             are needed. People to be consulted include: local
                                                             affected communities (men and women)/ institutions/
                                                             businesses, local governments and authorities, etc.
                                                             Means of consultation include public meetings,
                                                             individual interviews and questionnaire surveys.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The segment of Yangzi River around Yichang has a
                                                             long history as port and transportation hub. However,
                                                             the development of Baiyang port and associated
                                                             logistic park will have the potential to add negative
                                                             impacts on aquatic ecology, natural habitats, and
                                                             spawning and feeding grounds for migrating species
                                                             such as the endangered Chinese sturgeon. The
                                                             borrow pits and disposal sites might also affect
                                                             terrestrial natural habitats as defined by this OP.

                                                             To address this issue, a comprehensive investigation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             and description of the riverine and terrestrial natural
                                                             habitats will be included in the ESIA. The
                                                             cumulative impacts of the project, combined with
                                                             past and future developments in the area of
                                                             influence, on ecosystems and migratory species such
                                                             as the Chinese sturgeon will be assessed as part of
                                                             the CIA. Mitigation or compensation measures will
                                                             be devised in the ESMP.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    Policy does not apply as the project will not be
                                                             implemented in any forested areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    Policy is not triggered as the project will not procure
                                                             any pesticides nor will it induce an increase in the
                                                             current non-existent to low levels of pesticide use.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   TBD   Although no physical cultural resources as defined
                         OP/BP 4.11                          by this OP was spotted during initial site visit, s
                                                             systematic survey shall be conducted through field
                                                             investigation and consultations with the local cultural
                                                             relics bureau as well as communities during the EA
                                                                                                                        preparation. Relevant measures and chance find
                                                                                                                        procedures will be included in the EMP in case
                                                                                                                        physical cultural resources might be uncovered or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        affected during construction.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         Policy is not triggered as indigenous people as
                                 4.10                                                                                   defined in the policy are not present in project areas.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        The project will involve permanent acquisition of
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                about 2134 mu of land, physical displacement of
                                                                                                                        about 244 households (880 persons) and 6
                                                                                                                        enterprises and public units. All land needed for the
                                                                                                                        project are collective land owned by two villages,
                                                                                                                        called Yazishan village and Guixihu village. A
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared by
                                                                                                                        following the Bank policy and relevant government
                                                                                                                        laws and regulations. As part of the project
                                                                                                                        preparation, analysis of linked activities as per
                                                                                                                        provision of Paragraph 4 of OP 4.12 has been carried
                                                                                                                        out and two activities are identified as linked
                                                                                                                        activities which are first phase of Baiyang Port and
                                                                                                                        about 4 km of reroute of National Road 318 from
                                                                                                                        Baiyang Port to Taibaochang. Construction of both
                                                                                                                        linked activities has been completed. A resettlement
                                                                                                                        retroactive review will be carried out for the land
                                                                                                                        acquisition involved in these two activities and the
                                                                                                                        retroactive review report will be included in the RAP
                                                                                                                        as an Annex. Mitigation measures will be included in
                                                                                                                        the RAP as well if the review found that the land
                                                                                                                        acquisition of these two linked activities are not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        consistent with the requirements of the Bank Policy
                                                                                                                        OP 4.12. The RAP will be reviewed and cleared by
                                                                                                                        the Bank, and disclosed both in country and at the
                                                                                                                        Bank InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         Policy is not triggered as the proposed project will
                                                                                                                        not affect or be affected by the dam about 70 km
                                                                                                                        upstream.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         Policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   undertake any activities in the catchment areas of
                                                                                                                        international waterways and shared aquifers.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      Policy is not triggered as project activities will not be
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                implemented in any disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             The resettlement consultant has been recruited and a draft Resettlement Action Plan will be
                             available for the Bank review by April 2016.
                             The EA consultant has been recruited. The draft EA and ESMP will be available for the Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                             review in April 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Binyam Reja
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                                 Date: 12-May-2016
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                               Date: 16-May-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
