INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13516
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Dec-2014, 24-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:   P133326
Project Name: Poverty Alleviation and Agriculture-based Industry Pilot and Demonstration in
Poor Areas Project (P133326)
Task Team       Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt
Leader(s):
Estimated       03-Nov-2014                Estimated     23-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Crops (45%), Irrigation and drainage (5%), Animal production (35%), Agro-
industry, marketing, and trade (5%), Agricultural extension and research (10%)
Theme(s):       Rural markets (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural policies and
institutions (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
U         Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     295.10            Total Bank Financing:   150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
a           Financing Source                                                         Amount
Borrower                                                                   145.10
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      150.00
Total                                                                      295.10
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to develop and demonstrate rural value chains that
promote equitable organizational arrangements, participation, and the sustainable increase of income
of target households in the Project Provinces.
Page 1 of 12


﻿3. Project Description
The project would be implemented over a period of five years and include the following components,
sub-components, and activities:
0
Component 1: Integrated Value Chain Development. This component would support the
improvement of key commodity value chains for selected agricultural products with local
competitive advantage, establish new farmer cooperatives or strengthen existing cooperatives or
o         other producer/ community cooperation arrangements to become effective business entities, and
strengthen forward and backward marketing linkages. The specific activities supported under this
component are arranged along three sub-components:
(a) Cooperative Establishment and Development, supporting the construction of management
facilities (small office buildings) for cooperatives, procurement of basic office equipment, including
computers, printers, copy machines, software, and office furniture. The sub-component would also
support training in cooperative management and business operations, technical and other training
related to the establishment of new and improvement of existing farmers cooperatives and
community-based production arrangements, training and capacity building for community-based
economic groups in ethnic minority areas, and technical advisory services and subsidies for risk
prevention and agricultural insurance on a pilot basis for poor households and for selected products.
(b) Cooperative Development Fund, providing finance to support newly or existing eligible farmer
cooperatives and community groups to implement cooperative investment plans. Upon approval of
the investment plans by the county government, cooperatives would invest the cooperative
development funds in: (i) new production systems for improved and high quality seedlings and
improved breeding stock, (ii) facilities and goods for pre-processing and processing of agricultural
and related products at the cooperative level, (iii) facilities and goods related to rural tourism
development (in counties where rural tourism is a key value chain), and related civil works and
goods, (iv) storage and marketing facilities at the cooperative level, (v) technical services for market
analysis and market development to access new and higher-value markets, and civil works, goods
and services related to up-grading of quality standards, labeling, certification, branding, logistics,
food safety and others at the cooperative level, and (vi) procurement of annual farm inputs such as
seeds and fertilizer through the cooperative.
(c) Public Private Partnerships, support training and technical services for cooperatives,
communities, and farmer households that will be delivered through qualified agricultural enterprises.
It would also provide support to enterprises in strengthening their outreach to targeted poor
households and farmer groups.
Component 2: Public Infrastructure and Services. This component would establish and strengthen the
supporting public infrastructure and service systems for cooperatives and key commodity value chain
development through investments in: (a) the construction of production road infrastructure, such as
tractor roads, field tracks, off-grade access roads to village production areas or processing and
marketing facilities, (b) construction of irrigation and drainage infrastructure, land leveling and
terracing, (c) establishment of communications and procurement of information infrastructure and
equipment, (d) construction of public market facilities, electricity supply and other infrastructure and
goods necessary to facilitate and complement investments under Componentl. It would also support
government entities and public service providers in improving food safety testing and control,
extension and training, development of marketing systems and agriculture research and technology
Page 2 of 12


﻿transfer provided by government and private entities, and market studies for business development
and others. The component would also support advisory services for cooperatives and provide
financing support to cover salaries, training, and related cost of cooperative advisors and facilitators.
O
U         Component 3: Poverty Reduction in Adjacent Destitute Areas-Training and Learning, supporting the
learning and dissemination of project implementation lessons in support of operationalizing and
implementing the LGOPADI s Development-oriented Poverty Reduction Strategy 2011-2020. The
component would support: (a) analytical studies, including studies on poverty reduction and rural
pillar industry development in adjacent destitute areas, (b) studies on equitable cooperative
organizational arrangements and other topics to be determined during implementation, (c) training
and workshops for government line agencies, entrepreneurs, and public sector institutions on value
chain development for key commodities, and (d) the development of policy and appraisal guidelines
for public sector support in rural areas and others.
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, supporting the strengthening and
development of the administrative and technical capacity of staff of the Project Management Offices
to manage the project effectively. The component would support the county, prefecture and
provincial PMOs with office equipment, management software, vehicles or vehicle rental fees,
training, domestic and international study tours, project management training and provide
incremental operating funds for supervision, progress and impact monitoring and evaluation,
acceptance checks, and for safeguards implementation supervision and monitoring.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project covers 27 poor counties in Guizhou, Sichuan and Gansu Provinces, of which 11 counties
are located in the Wuling and Wumeng Mountains of Guizhou and Sichuan and 16 counties in the
Liupan Mountains of Gansu. Poverty rates in the project areas range between 25 to up to 40%.
In Guizhou, limestone and karst mountains with relatively fertile but often shallow soils dominate.
Water and soil erosion, limited availability of farmland and underdeveloped infrastructure hamper
agricultural and rural development. About 90% of the population in the project areas are Han while
ethnic minorities, including the Miao, Yi, and other smaller groups comprise about 10% of the local
population. In Sichuan, project areas are located in Xichang and Luzhou Prefectures. These areas are
characterized by high mountains, narrow and steep valleys, and limited flat or terraced land for
farming. Altitudes range from several hundred to over 4,000 meters above sea level and agro-
climatic conditions vary widely. Alpine meadows and shrublands are used for livestock grazing,
often in unsustainable ways with visible degradation of vegetation and soils. At lower elevations,
steep slopes and narrow valleys are used for cropping and erosion risk is high. Local communities
belong nearly exclusively to the Yi Minority. Yi language is used widely and only few people speak
Mandarin Chinese. Due to remoteness, unique cultural background, and low education levels,
communities are not well integrated into the mainstream society. In Gansu, the predominant loessial
soils of the midland and hilly areas are comparatively fertile. Per capita farmland resources are more
abundant as compared to the other two provinces. Project areas have comparative advantages in
horticulture, and several counties have successfully developed advanced production and marketing
bases for apple, pear, grapes, medicinal herbs, and potato. Agricultural productivity is constrained
primarily by low annual precipitation between 300-400 mm and seasonal droughts. The population is
nearly exclusively Han, except for Yongjing, Zhangjiachuan, and Anding counties where 61%, 53%,
and 20% of the population, respectively, belong to the Hui, and Dongxiang County where nearly
100% are Dongxiang.
Page 3 of 12


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Aimin Hao (GSURR)
Chaogang Wang (GSURR)
Mark R. Lundell (AFCS2)
Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)
Peter Leonard (OPSOR)
Xin Ren (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project is expected to bring about positive social and
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environmental benefits to the poor rural areas of Sichuan,
Gansu and Guizhou Provinces. Two components will
involve activities that may have adverse environmental
impacts. Component 1 will support agricultural activities
and agro-product processing. Component 2 will finance
investments in rural infrastructure (production roads,
access tracks, irrigation, public market facilities) that are
needed to complement investments under Component 1.
Potential negative impacts associated with these
investments can be avoided and/or mitigated through
appropriate environmental management measures that
will be guided by an Environmental Management Plan
and an Environmental Management Framework.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         Through the EA screening process, a number of national
4.04                                and provincial level natural reserves were identified in the
vicinity of the project area. While the project is expected
to result in improved agricultural practices and increased
farmer incomes and likely help to reduce pressure on
natural habitats and the risk of encroachment, some
project activities, such as partial free grazing of animals
or rural infrastructure construction/ rehabilitation may
affect natural habitats negatively because of the proximity
of these activities to natural habitats, if not managed
properly. OP/BP4.04 is applicable to highlight the
importance of eco-system protection among the project
entities during implementation and ensure that appropriate
mitigation or protective measures are included in the
project. Agriculture activities, such as investments into
productive farming, would take place on existing
household farmland and no expansion of farmland into
fragile mountains, forests, or other natural habitats areas
is foreseen.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          OP/BP4.36 is not applicable. The project will not impact
any forest ecosystems. Project-supported agricultural
activities will take place on existing farmland and there is
Page 4 of 12


﻿no expansion into forest areas. Rural road investments
will include mainly the rehabilitation and improvement of
existing along existing alignments.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          Because of the expansion and standardization,
intensification and diversification of agricultural activities
promoted under the project, changes in the application of
pesticides for pest and disease control are foreseen. A
Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been prepared by each
project province centering around the principles of
Integrated Pest Management.
Physical Cultural       No           Surveys conducted during the EA process verified that the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 closest physical cultural resources, as defined by OP/
BP4. 11, are two kilometers away from project sites. These
will not be affected by project construction or other
project activities. There will be no project activities in the
vicinity of or affect physical cultural resources, as defined
by OP/BP4.11.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          The Social Assessment (SA) identified ethnic minorities
BP 4.10                              in 17 counties in 209 administrative villages (40% of all
project villages) with a total population of nearly 200,000
people. The SA identified the Yi, Miao, Hui and
Dongxiang as the main ethnic minorities in the project
areas. The Yi are the largest group, accounting for 80% of
ethnic minority population in the project area. Three of
the four counties in Liangshan Prefecture have a 100% Yi
population in project villages. About 95% of all ethnic
minority villages are listed as officially designated key
villages for poverty reduction work. In Gansu, the
communities of the Hui and Dongxiang minorities display
very high rates of poverty incidence. The Yi and the
Dongxiang are culturally significantly different from the
mainstream society, have much lower education levels as
well as access to formal education, and a large share of
the rural population does not speak or has a low command
of Mandarin. In Liangshan Prefecture formal education is
bilingual and the Yi script is in use. Each project province
has prepared an Ethnic Minority Development Plan
(EMDP) for the ethnic minority villages. EMPDs
incorporate the recommendations of the SA on how to
address vulnerability and allow for effective project
participation of ethnic minorities.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         No involuntary resettlement is expected under the project.
OP/BP 4.12                           The project will not be part of any ecological resettlement
programs. The project will involve some small-scale land
acquisition for civil works at the village level that will be
built on existing available land. Any needed land
Page 5 of 12


﻿adjustments will be coordinated and agreed at the village-
level and will be voluntary. In cases where the need for
land acquisition arises and where infrastructure
construction extends beyond individual villages, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will apply and
guide the process in each project province. The RPF
provides the principles and procedures for land
acquisition in the project, describes provisions for
compensation and mitigation measures of any negative
impact from land acquisition, includes a grievance redress
mechanism, and sets up M&E and institutional
arrangements in the event of land acquisition.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Not applicable. The project will support only small
4.37                                 irrigation facilities such as water tanks or small irrigation
ditches at the farm level. The project will not involve any
dam construction or related activities.
Projects on International  No        Not applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           Not applicable
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Environmental Assessment (EA) reports describes the baseline conditions and assesses the
potential impacts of all major types of project activities in each province. The EA reports confirm
)           that the project is expected to generate positive environmental benefits in the project areas of each
province. Two components will involve activities that may have adverse environmental impacts
that require mitigation. Component 1 will support agricultural production activities and agro-
products processing. Component 2 will finance investments in rural infrastructure, including the
construction and rehabilitation of access roads and fields tracks, market facilities, irrigation
infrastructure, and public market facilities. Most of these activities are small scale and dispersed
over the project areas. Road construction will primarily involve upgrading of existing roads. The
project does not impact on forests or protected areas. Adverse impacts on the environment are
expected to be moderate. Some agro-product processing, e.g. potato starch processing, walnut oil
production, fertilizer production from manure and slaughter house operation, may be water use
and pollution intensive during their operation, if managed improperly. The EAs confirm that any
negative environmental impact resulting from these activities can be mitigated. The expansion,
intensification and diversification of agricultural activities will likely result in increases in the
application of pesticides for pest and disease control. Pest Management Plans (PMP) have been
prepared for each province, focusing on the principles of Integrated Pest Management (IPM).
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared that specifies the proposed
mitigation measures, related training and monitoring, as well as the supervision arrangements for
environmental management. For activities and individual investments (sub-projects) that cannot
Page 6 of 12


﻿be specified by appraisal, an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been developed,
in accordance with Bank safeguard policies and requirements. The EMF defines the screening
criteria for sub-projects and site selection, and procedures and responsibilities to ensure
compliance with both Chinese EA laws and regulations and the Bank's safeguard policies, as
O
specified in OP/BP 4.01.
The Social Assessment (SA) identified various opportunities to maximize positive project impact.
The improvement of local infrastructure will have a positive impact, which can be maximized
through careful identification of infrastructure that both serve the needs of local communities and
agricultural production. The formalization of cooperatives will likely enhance the self-
development capacity of rural communities, in particular if training activities are designed as real
capacity-building opportunities and not only as skill development programs, and if a large number
of households actively participate in the development of the local cooperative. Cooperatives will
also improve market access to poor farmers as they will be able to benefit from technical advice
for better product quality and sell their products through their cooperatives rather than
individually. Cooperative arrangements may also allow for easier purchases of agricultural inputs
and equipment.
Involuntary Resettlement OP4.12. No involuntary resettlement is expected under the project. The
project will involve some small-scale land acquisition for civil works at the village level that will
be built on existing available land. Any land adjustments will be coordinated and agreed at the
village-level and will be voluntary. The process of reaching agreement within th village will be
documented in writing. In cases where the need for land acquisition arises and where
infrastructure construction extends beyond individual villages, a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) will apply and guide the process in each province. The RPF describes the principles and
procedures for land acquisition in the project, describes provisions for compensation and
mitigation measures of any negative impact from land acquisition, includes a grievance redress
mechanism, and sets up M&E as well as institutional arrangements in the event of land
acquisition. The RPF has been prepared in compliance with the current Chinese legal and policy
framework for land acquisition and with the World Banki s Policy on Involuntary Resettlement
(OP4.12).
The project is not supporting or linked to the governmentl s current ecological resettlement
programs. The project also does not support farmland consolidation or the acquisition for farmland
by agro-enterprises.
Indigenous Peoples OP4. 10. Four ethnic groups, including the Yi, Miao, Hui and Dongxiang, are
present in distinct communities in the project area. These meet the characteristics of indigenous
peoples under Bank policy. An Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP) has been prepared by
each province to enable ethnic minorities to better participate in, and benefit from, the project and
to ensure the protection of their interests and rights in land and resources. Key elements of the
EMDP include: (a) the recruitment of qualified cooperative facilitators and trainers that are
familiar with local cultures and speak local languages in villages where a language gap is present;
(b) an enhanced mobilization and participation process at village community level; (c) a reinforced
capacity building program with a related budget; and (d) a required minimum proportion of ethnic
minority people among cooperative members, cooperative project workgroups and training course
participants. Assistance or participation of the Ethnic Minority Affairs Commissions at various
levels will be invited as and when required, and a grievance mechanism has been established.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Page 7 of 12


﻿Over-grazing can lead to deterioration of grassland, soil erosion and even exacerbate stony
desertification which is already widespread in part of Guizhou and Sichuan Provinces. Animal
waste management is another concern related to husbandry due to considerable non-point
pollution from improper handling of manure and over expansion of husbandry that exceed the
capacity of the land to absorb manure as nutrient. Overuse of fertilizer and pesticides, common in
rural China, can lead to water and soil contamination and eutrophication in the long term. The
project will bring in new opportunities for rural households to participate in farmer cooperatives or
other community-based producer organizations, access to improved agricultural production
technologies, and improved agricultural infrastructure and public services, and these are expected
to have positive impacts on the environment.
The SA has pointed to the potential risk of failure in the establishment of farmer cooperatives in
the Liangshan mountains in Sichuan and in the Dongxiang and Hui areas in Gansu because there is
only initial experience in farmer organizations at present and management skills at the
microenterprise level is very limited locally. The EMDP is designed to address this risk. Market
risks might remain prominent despite the establishment of cooperatives. The development of
commercial agriculture might also lead to some transfer of rights over indigenous crop varieties or
animal breeds, and the development of private brands making use of local cultural heritage might
take place in a way that would impact those communities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Project technical design alternatives were analyzed in the EA, including a without-project
scenario. Different methods of manure treatment that are suitable for both household level (simple
piling with soil cover versus biogas production) and medium scale husbandry (larger biogas, septic
tank, anaerobic digestion, composting or conversion of manure to fertilizer) were compared.
Conventional planting and pest control practice were also compared respectively. Options of
technical designs and specific location selection of civil works were carefully considered and
compared to avoid acquiring land. Civil works would be built either on existing state land or in
project villages where land will be voluntarily provided by villages. To minimize the need for land
acquisition, technical, economic, environmental and social factors of project investments were
analyzed comprehensively.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment. The project provinces recruited qualified institutes to carry out the EAs, based on
which an EMP has been developed for each province. The Provincial Leading Group Offices of
Poverty Reduction and Development will serve as the Project Management Offices (PMOs) in
each province with their branches in counties as County PMOs. Capacity building has been an
integral part of the project preparation process to address environmental and social safeguard
issues. Adequate institutional arrangements have been set up in each province to ensure the
implementation of the EMP, EMF, and PMP. The EMP (EMF) and PMP include a budgeted
training program and monitoring plans, as reflected in the project cost tables. During
implementation, the Bank task team will work with PMOs to apply the EMF to improve the site-
specific mitigation measures as individual cooperative-level investment plans are being finalized.
Social. The central LGOPAD has recruited a professional qualified institute to conduct a
comprehensive SA. It included extensive surveys and consultations through questionnaires,
interviews and group discussions. A RPF and EMDP were prepared by each province to guide any
Page 8 of 12


﻿land acquisition in the future and help ensure that the needs and interests of ethnic minorities are
properly addressed in project design and during implementation. The RPF provides the principles
and procedures for managing potential land acquisition, describes the provisions for compensation
and mitigation of any negative impacts from land acquisition, includes a grievance redress
O
mechanism, monitoring and evaluation, as well as institutional arrangements for implementing
land acquisition. Key mitigation measures in the EMDP include: (a) the recruitment of qualified
cooperative advisors and trainers, who speak local languages, and the preparation of culturally
appropriate materials for training, (b) training programs for PMO staff on culturally appropriate
interaction and training to ethnic minorities, (c) training ethnic minority in agricultural production
and resource development where they have strengths, avoiding or tackling market risks of their
products or livelihoods, (d) assistance or participation of the Ethnic Minority Affairs Commissions
at various levels, as and when required, (d) provision of budgets and designated staff in the PMOs
to implement the EMDP, including regular monitoring and evaluation, and reporting of EMDP
implementation.
The three provincial PMOs will have overall responsibility to coordinate and oversee RPF and
EMDP implementation, including management and supervision, training and capacity building,
and preparation of project progress report based on the reports and monitoring information from
each project county, etc. Each county PMO will take respective responsibility for specific
implementation of RPF and EMDP as required, including hiring qualified social/resettlement
experts for social and resettlement monitoring, supervising implementation of the mitigation
measures together with related local authorizes and stakeholders, promoting good practice of
resettlement and social development. Each PMO will assign a dedicated social staff to coordinate
social safeguards work, together with related local government departments in charge of local land
requisition.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
For the provincial EAs, two rounds of public consultation were conducted during the preparation
in each province. The first round of information disclosure was during Jan-Feb 2014 in three
provinces respectively at their county PMO or government websites as wellas bulletin boards of
project villages. The second round was the disclosure of draft EA from late March to May 2014 at
O
the website of the Provincial PMO and notice posted in project villages with hardcopy available at
county PMOs in all provinces. Public consultations of EA were carried out mainly after the
*           disclosure of draft EA through questionnaire and meetings. With averagely 20 questionnaires /
village, altogether about 8400 people in the project area were surveyed with a balanced
distribution in gender, age, education background and profession, together with more than 200
institutions. The majority shows strong support to the project activities and believes the project
could create more job opportunity, boost rural development and improve their economic wellbeing
as well the surrounding environment.
The SA included a project stakeholder analysis which demonstrated that all primary stakeholder
have a positive stake in the project and support the project. They share an interest in the
development of cooperatives, improvement of agricultural skills among farmers, and rural
infrastructure investment. Rural households see a need to establish formalized cooperatives and
expect that such cooperatives will help reduce market risks. Members of existing cooperatives are
interested in formalized and registered cooperative arrangements as well as in learning from other
cooperatives. Agribusinesses view cooperatives as a means to reduce their risks and move into
processing, and individual businesses other than cooperative investors are interested in linking up
Page 9 of 12


﻿with cooperatives.
During the SA process, field visits took place from November 2013 in each of the 27 project
counties in three provinces, with an average of 3 days per county. A quantitative survey with 1,507
Q)         respondents was combined with close to 150 focus group discussions in project villages and
around 400 interviews with households and local cadres. The SA has allowed consultations with
households in 69 villages, i.e. 13% of the proposed project villages. The SA successfully involved
women and ethnic minority people. Women account for 48% of survey respondents. Half of focus
group discussions have been held with women groups. Ethnic minority households account for
almost 60% of survey respondents.
The Environmental and Social Assessment report and safeguards instruments have been disclosed
locally (in Chinese language) and through the World Bank Infoshop (in English language).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                             08-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                          1 1-Sep-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  //
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                   14-May-2014
Comments: Sichuan: March 10, 2014; Guizhou: April 28, 2014; Gansu: May 14, 2014.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                             05-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                          05-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                   28-Apr-2014
Comments: Guizhou and Gansu: April 28, 2014, Sichuan: April 18, 2014
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                             05-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                          05-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                   28-Apr-2014
Comments: Guizhou and Gansu: April 28, 2014, Sichuan: April 18, 2014
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                             24-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                          12-Aug-2014
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                   24-Jun-2014
Comments: Sichuan: June 11, 2014; Guizhou: June 20, 2014; Gansu: June 24, 2014
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Page 10 of 12


﻿Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
All documents have been disclosed locally.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
O
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[X] No[       ]  NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA[]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA[]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X] No[   ]  NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 11I of 12


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
a          measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ulrich K. H. M. Schmitt
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                   Date: 20-May-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)              Date: 24-May-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


