                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSA22109
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 09-May-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               08-Jun-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          China                        Project ID:              P154621
    Project Name:                     China: Guangdong Compulsory Education Project (P154621)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Amer Hasan
    Estimated Appraisal               24-Apr-2017                  Estimated Board          07-Sep-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GED02                        Financing                Investment Project
                                                                   Instrument:              Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                   Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           267.40                         Total Bank Financing: 120.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                      147.40
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                         120.00
    Total                                                                                                         267.40
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objective is to improve learning facilities and teaching quality in selected public
    primary and junior secondary schools in project counties.
    3. Project Description
    The project development objective is well aligned with the pillars of the government's program, which are
    focused on strengthening the existing basic education system and modernization. Specifically, the project will
    support the following activities:

    Component 1: Improve school equipment and facilities. This component will have two subcomponents.

    (a) Subcomponent 1 will focus on school equipment. It will support the installation of information and
    communications technology (ICT) equipment in classrooms. It will also support the development of digital

                                                     Page 1 of 8
educational content as well as a management system for a virtual learning community of teachers.

(b) Subcomponent 2 will focus on school facilities. It will support the construction of classrooms. It will also
support the construction of accommodations for teachers, particularly in rural locations. This subcomponent will
be financed by counterpart funds.

Component 2: Strengthen the training and assessment system for teachers and principals. This component will
have three subcomponents.

(a) Subcomponent 1 will support improvements in existing training content for in-service training of teachers
(including regular and backbone teachers) and principals as well as the development of new training content.
The training content that will be developed will be shared online.

(b) Subcomponent 2 will support improvements in the current system for delivering training and providing
mentoring to teachers.

(c) Subcomponent 3 will assist in strengthening the quality assurance, monitoring, and evaluation (QAME)
system for teacher continuous professional development (CPD). This system will use classroom observations to
assure the quality of training teachers receive.

Component 3: Pilot reforms to improve equity and quality of education. As the government of Guangdong seeks
to modernize the basic education system, a number of initiatives are under consideration. This component will
allow the government to pilot initiatives focused on two core issues: equity and quality. The component will
support activities that will evaluate these pilots for impact, efficiency, and cost-effectiveness. As such, the
component will have three subcomponents:

(a) Subcomponent 1 will support pilots to improve equity in compulsory education. This will include:
(i) Providing support to left-behind children in public primary and junior middle schools. It will ensure that
relevant equipment and teaching resources are available to support their well-being.
(ii) Enabling inclusive education in primary and junior middle schools with a particular emphasis on children
with mild to moderate disabilities. It will ensure that relevant equipment and teaching resources for learning are
available to all students, including those with disabilities. To this end, selected schools will be outfitted with
equipment for allowing children with disabilities to participate in education in mainstream schools.
(iii) Providing mobile labs to schools that do not have laboratory equipment.

(b) Subcomponent 2 will support pilots to improve the quality of compulsory education by improving the
existing system of school partnerships to support teacher mentoring.

Component 4: Project management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E). This component will strengthen and
build capacity for monitoring and evaluation and project management. As such, this component will finance the
costs associated with technical assistance, supervision of the project, M&E including sample-based survey for
the results framework, training of project implementation personnel, study tours, workshops, seminars, office
equipment, and office consumables

In order to build a strong evidence base for policymaking, the pilots will be evaluated. Lessons to guide future
decision making will be distilled in a policy paper capturing the recommendations from the pilots and their
evaluations. Guidance based on the findings of these evaluations will be issued by the Department of Education.

As an example, an evaluation will be carried out to assess whether the improvements in the training system
carry through to changes in teaching practices in the classroom. This evaluation will rely on classroom


                                                 Page 2 of 8
observation of a random sample of teachers at two points in time and will compare their progress over time to
that of similar teachers who have not yet received the training. An intermediate outcome will be whether or not
teachers' knowledge changed as a result of the training they received. This will be assessed through a knowledge
test that will be taken by a sample of trainees. The knowledge test will be designed as relevant for each type of
training.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)


5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                    Team
 Aimin Hao( GSU02 )
 Yiren Feng( GEN2A )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes             Component 1 of the proposed project will finance
                                                              the construction of standardized classrooms, teacher
                                                              dormitories, and mobile laboratories. Both the
                                                              classrooms and the teacher dormitories for each
                                                              participating school will be within the existing
                                                              campus, and no land acquisition or relocation of
                                                              people is anticipated. Depending on the equipment
                                                              loaded into the van at any given time, the mobile
                                                              lab can be configured to be a physics, chemistry,
                                                              biology, or computer lab. Currently there are 16
                                                              participating project counties. In total, 250
                                                              standardized classrooms will be built for the 16
                                                              counties, each classroom will be 100 square meters;
                                                              the teacher dormitories will be 35 square meters
                                                              each with less than a 5- or 6-floor building planned.
                                                              The total construction area will be less than 1,000
                                                              square meters within the existing campus of each
                                                              participating school. The scale and size of the
                                                              building within the existing campus of each
                                                              participating school is very small. Considering the
                                                              type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the proposed
                                                              project, the project is proposed to be classified as
                                                              Category B due to the potential impacts that are
                                                              small scale and limited to the site. An
                                                              Environmental Management Plan (EMP) has been
                                                              prepared for the civil works of the project and the
                                                              labs to cover the environmental management
                                                              activities of the project. The Environmental Code of
                                                              Practice (ECOP) is part of the EMP to address
                                                              generic construction impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   No              The civil works of the project are within the
                                                              existing campuses, the project will not affect any
                                                              natural habitats or critical natural habitats as

                                                Page 3 of 8
                                                        defined under the policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No             Project activities will not affect forest areas; it will
                                                        not involve any logging or planting activities in
                                                        forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No             The project will not procure pesticides or increase
                                                        use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No             Both the classrooms and the teacher dormitories
                                                        will be constructed within the existing campus of
                                                        each participating school. The EA team visited each
                                                        proposed participating school and confirmed there
                                                        are no physical cultural resources within the
                                                        campuses as defined by the policy. Chance finding
                                                        procedure will be included in the ECOP, and
                                                        relevant clauses will be included in all construction
                                                        contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No             Ethnic minority students account for 0.5 percent of
                                                        total number of students in the 16 project counties.
                                                        However, no ethnic minority concentration is found
                                                        in these counties. No ethnic minority has been
                                                        identified satisfying the four criteria stated in
                                                        OP/BP4.10 policy. Based on the social assessment,
                                                        all ethnic minority students are from communities
                                                        where there are predominantly Han people, and
                                                        they mostly speak fluent Mandarin. There are no
                                                        language barriers for these students to receive equal
                                                        education at school.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes            The proposed project will improve the quality of
                                                        compulsory education in selected counties through
                                                        improved school infrastructure and improving
                                                        teachers' quality. Construction of classrooms and
                                                        teachers' accommodations will take place within
                                                        current campuses with land use rights, and no land
                                                        acquisition is expected. This has been confirmed by
                                                        the social assessment. However, in order to ensure
                                                        that schools that do not have adequate land and will
                                                        need land acquisition in the future can equally
                                                        benefit from project investment, a Resettlement
                                                        Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared on a
                                                        provisional basis. The RPF will guide the land
                                                        acquisition process when such needs arise. Based
                                                        on the Social Assessment report, temporary impacts
                                                        will be caused to teachers already living on the
                                                        campus during dormitory rebuilding. An
                                                        Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has
                                                        been prepared to guide proper treatment of these
                                                        teachers. The social assessment report also
                                                        mentioned impacts on the welfare of local
                                                        communities during construction, and this will be

                                          Page 4 of 8
                                                                    covered by the EMP. This will be monitored during
                                                                    project implementation. The Resettlement Policy
                                                                    Framework has been disclosed locally on April 29,
                                                                    2016. The Abbreviated RAP has been disclosed
                                                                    locally on April 28, 2016. These documents were
                                                                    re-disclosed in China on June 12, 2016 and May 4
                                                                    2017 and at the World Bank InfoShop on June 20,
                                                                    2016 and on May 7 2017.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No               The project will not finance construction or
                                                                    rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                    policy.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                    The project is not located in any international
    7.50                                                            waterways as defined under the policy.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               The project is not located in any known disputed
                                                                    areas as defined under the policy.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The proposed project will finance the construction of school buildings, teacher dormitories, and mobile
    laboratories. The project will have very limited adverse impacts during the construction and operation phase.
    OP4.01 Environmental Assessment (EA) is therefore triggered. The project is classified as Category B by
    considering the type, location, sensitivity, and scale of the proposed project and the potential environmental and
    social impacts. All planned civil works will be built on existing land within the campus of the project schools.
    The project will have very limited adverse impacts during the construction and operation phases. The negative
    environmental impacts during construction include ambient air, water, noise, solid wastes, and worker safety.
    These negative impacts will be limited, short-term, temporary, and site-specific. During the operational stage,
    the main environmental impacts are expected from domestic waste management. No potential large-scale,
    significant, and irreversible impacts were identified during the EA process.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
    project area:
    This project will play a significant role in improving learning facilities and teaching quality in selected public
    schools in Guangdong. As such, it will benefit project schools, teachers, and students. The project will benefit
    approximately 984,200 students, who will benefit from the project through improved learning facilities and
    teaching quality, which is equivalent to 41 percent of students in the project counties. The project will
    concentrate its efforts towards children in poverty by focusing on improvements in learning facilities in public
    primary and junior secondary schools with large student populations located in project counties. The project will
    train approximately 22,800 teachers, equivalent to approximately 15 percent of all teachers in compulsory
    education in the project counties.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
    This project will play a significant role in improving learning facilities and teaching quality in selected public
    schools in Guangdong. As such, it will benefit project schools, teachers, and students. The project will benefit
    approximately 984,200 students, who will benefit from the project through improved learning facilities and
    teaching quality, which is equivalent to 41 percent of students in the project counties. The project will
    concentrate its efforts towards children in poverty by focusing on improvements in learning facilities in public

                                                      Page 5 of 8
primary and junior secondary schools with large student populations located in project counties. The project will
train approximately 22,800 teachers, equivalent to approximately 15 percent of all teachers in compulsory
education in the project counties.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project owner contracted an accredited environmental assessment institution to conduct the Environmental
Assessment for the project. The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was selected as the EA instrument due
to the nature of the project. The EMP was prepared based on national norms, practice proven in similar Bank-
financed projects and the practice recommended in the Environmental Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines. The
EMP includes the Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) to address generic construction impacts. It specifies
each aspect of environmental management during the whole project cycle, including but not limited to, site
preparation, construction dust management, air pollution control, noise impact control, water pollution control,
waste management, public and workers' health and safety, and traffic management. The EMP also includes
mitigation measures to address site-specific impacts and the wastes produced by the mobile labs. The waste
liquid from the chemical or biological experiments will be sent to the local Waste Water Treatment Plants
(WWTPs) for final treatment to ensure no secondary pollution. The due diligence review for the WWTPs was
conducted and included in the EMP. It also includes the institutional arrangement, the training and capacity
building, environmental monitoring plan, reporting, and supervision arrangements for the implementation phase
of the project. Proper implementation of the mitigation measures required by the project will minimize the
impacts to an acceptable level or eliminate them entirely. The temporary impacts on teachers living on campus
was addressed in the Abbreviated RAP, and the impacts on the welfare of local communities and other impacts
defined under OP4.01 were covered in the SA of the project. Both impacts and the mitigation measures were
included in the EMP. The EMP was reviewed by the Bank safeguards team and found to be satisfactory. The
EMP will be included in the bidding documents and the corresponding contracts.

The World Bank has supported several projects in education and vocational training in Guangdong Province,
and this is the first education project managed by the provincial Project Management Office (PMO) established
under Guangdong Provincial Education Department. However, there are no major safeguards policy issues as
noted above. The Bank assessment indicates that the borrower has reasonable capacity to conduct construction
and project implementation consistent with EMP and RAP. The PMO is staffed with six full-time staff; one staff
will be responsible for safeguard-related work. The Bank's safeguards specialists will provide further training on
safeguards during the project implementation phase.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the project preparation, the project schools, PMOs, environmental, and social consultants carried out
public consultation and information disclosure through posters, questionnaire survey, interviews, and public
meetings in project schools and counties. The key stakeholders include teachers, students, and students' parents
of the project schools, communities nearby, and local relevant government agencies. Public opinions were
properly incorporated into the project design and safeguard reports, including EMP, SA, RPF, and RAP. Prior to
project appraisal, the EMP, Social Assessment Report, and RPF were disclosed locally at the website of the
Guangdong Provincial Education Department, and the main newspaper Nanfang Daily of the Guangdong
province on April 29, 2016, and are publicly available on the websites of the education bureaus of the
participating counties, and through the posters of the project schools. These reports were also disclosed at the
World Bank Infoshop on May 3, 2016. Revised versions of these documents were re-disclosed in China on June
12, 2016 and on May 4 2017 and at the World Bank on June 20, 2016 and on May 7 2017.
.




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

                                                 Page 6 of 8
Date of receipt by the Bank                                         20-Jun-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                      20-Jun-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    China                                                                   12-Jun-2016
 Comments: The most recent revised versions were disclosed on the website of the Department of Education on
 May 4 2017 and on the World Bank website on May 7 2017.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       20-Jun-2016
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    20-Jun-2016
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 China                                                                       12-Jun-2016
 Comments: The most recent revised versions were disclosed on the website of the Department of Education on
May 4 2017 and on the World Bank website on May 7 2017.
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [X]     No []        NA          []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice      Yes []      No []        NA          [X]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP               Yes []      No []        NA          [X]
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                 Yes [X]     No []        NA          []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards   Yes []      No []        NA          [X]
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes []      No [X]       TBD         []
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []      No [X]       TBD         []
 to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
 of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]     No []        NA          []
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]     No []        NA          []
 public place in a form and language that are understandable
 and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []        NA          []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of

                                                 Page 7 of 8
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been          Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
included in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?


III. Approval
Task Team Leader(s):                Name:Amer Hasan
Approved By:
Practice Manager/Manager:           Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos        Date: 09-May-2017
                                    (PMGR)




                                              Page 8 of 8
