INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14154
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Pacific Islands            Project ID:   P152653
Project Name:    Sustainable Energy Industry Development (P 152653)
Task Team        Roberto Gabriel Aiello
Leader(s):
Estimated                                   Estimated     21-Aug-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Other Renewable Energy (75%), General energy sector (25%)
Theme(s):        Other environment and natural resources management (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.87             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                      1.92
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program                       3.70
Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery               0.25
Total                                                             5.87
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective (PDO) is to increase the data availability and capacity in Pacific
Island power utilities to enhance their ability to incorporate and manage renewable energy
technologies and long-term disaster risk planning.
C. Project Description


﻿The growth of sustainable energy technologies in the Pacific region has accelerated the need to fill
gaps in the establishment and adoption of training standards, installation and design guidelines for
renewable energy systems and the powers for the industry to provide self-regulation during this
period of rapid growth.
Successful quality driven and sustainable industries require a skilled workforce and appropriate
guidelines and standards that the industry applies. Together the Pacific Power Association (PPA) and
the Sustainable Energy Industry Association of the Pacific Islands (SEIAPI) have identified a suite of
activities to be implemented over the coming four years to support the creation of an enabling
environment for renewable energy investments in the Pacific Island Countries (PICs). The proposed
projects will increase the understanding and willingness of the PICs' utilities to accept renewable
energy systems through a greater understanding of the expected impacts on grid stability, load
forecasting as well as to facilitate better knowledge and data sharing. In addition, the project will also
lead to consistent competencies amongst practitioners in the field through development of standards
and the creation of certification pathways for practitioners to receive formal recognition of their
technical training.
This project has three components:
*      Component 1: Renewable Energy Resource Mapping Phase 1-3: This component will
conduct a resource mapping assessment of solar and/or wind capacity across 10 PICs. The objective
of this component is to enhance awareness and knowledge among governments, utilities and the
private sector about the resource potential for renewable technologies (solar and/or wind), and
provide the governments with a spatial planning framework to guide investment in the renewable
energy sector. These resource maps will (a) provide a detailed assessment for solar and potentially
also wind and other renewable energy resources in the islands, (b) increase the awareness and
knowledge of the governments and other energy-sector players on renewable energy potential, (c)
provide baseline information for potential new public and private sector investments projects and (d)
serve as input for grid integration studies.
The abovementioned Phase 1-3 of the resource mapping will be undertaken with support from the
Energy Sector Management Assistance Program (ESMAP):
O
o      Phase 1 - Project inception, preliminary modeling and implementation planning: Project
inception and stakeholder engagement; preparation of an initial resource estimate at the country level
based on a mesoscale model using satellite and reanalysis data; preliminary validation using existing
ground-based data; preparations for the implementation of Phase 2;
o      Phase 2 - Ground-based data collection: Implementation of a ground-based measurement
campaign using high quality measurement devices, with real-time data transmission and reporting,
for the purpose of validating and improving the mesoscale model and generating reliable
benchmarking data;
o      Phase 3 - Production of validated wind resource atlas: Prepare validated resource maps and
Atlas reports that describes the final outputs, methodology and process, and includes provision of the
final geographic information system (GIS) data.
The activity will ensure the sharing of knowledge about the current existing information and will
avoid duplication of data collection. Use of the ESMAP approach will make it possible to continue
with the next phases (phases 4 and 5) under a different project if additional funds become available
or if the funds allocated to phases 1-3 allow to cover additional scope in some islands.
*      Component 2: Technical Assistance: This component will conduct a program of activities
designed to increase capacity within the utilities in 10 PICs 1 and PNG on planning for and
management of the integration of variable RE in their systems, data collection and management and


﻿knowledge-sharing across jurisdictions. This program of activities is to include:
*      A grid stability modelling sub-component including: (a) purchase of modelling software and
tools to support utilities with network expansion planning, variable renewable interconnection studies
and grid stability and protection coordination studies (building on the work started by IRENA in
O
2013/14); and (b) training of PPA staff in the use of the software in order to support utilities through
the conduction of independent grid stability studies.
A power benchmarking sub-component including: (a) development of an online Power
Benchmarking data submission tool to support PPA's coordination of the annual Power
Benchmarking Report with input from member utilities; and (b) training of PPA staff in the use of
the tool in order to support utilities with their independent data collection/entry using the tool
*      An industry guidelines and competency standards sub-component including: (a) Hiring of a
consultant to develop solar and wind grid codes in order to establish the minimum interconnection
standards for renewable energy systems, and (b) development of industry guidelines (design,
installation, operations and maintenance) and competency standards to support certified technical
training in RE technologies.
*      A training/ workshop sub-component for PPA members including: (a) support for training
courses in a range of demand-driven RE technologies, industry guidelines, standards and other
relevant industry issues in each PIC (thus reducing the cost of bringing people from multiple PICs to
a single location and reaching more staff within utilities, system planning (including energy
efficiency considerations) and demand-side management; (b) support for the PPA to undertake an
online training needs assessment among its members to identify training and skills-enhancement
needs at the individual utility level to then draw common issues/themes for multi-utility staff training
sessions; and (c) support for the PPA's management of workshops focused on developing utilities'
understanding of frameworks for private sector involvement in the energy sector (links with IFC's
P600131 Pacific RE Gen focused on developing business models for private sector engagement in
the energy sector).
*      A career development sub-component for the PPA to hire a consultant who would assist with
the development of career development initiatives aimed at attracting and retaining talented staff
within utilities (e.g., staff development and training, performance incentives etc.). The PPA will also
join PIC university career fairs to encourage both female and male high school students to study
engineering and other energy-related majors at universities and will provide internship opportunities
for them.
 *    A disaster-recovery and risk-reduction subcomponent that supports PIC power utilities'
o       efforts to improve their preparedness for responding to natural hazards/climate shocks and to reduce
economic losses when disasters occur. This component will include the provision of advisory
services to the utilities on the planning and prioritization of investments in resilience in the power
sector, as well as an emergency response window to assist utilities with post-disaster needs
assessment reports. Risk-reduction/adaptation measures will include engineering (e.g., designing
more robust design specifications; relocating or retrofitting extremely vulnerable existing
infrastructure; designing new systems better able to capture the energy of increased wind speeds,
flood protection, underground distribution for protection against wind, high temperatures, corrosion,
and flooding), and non-engineering options (more robust operational and maintenance procedures,
improved and better-coordinated land-use planning; for example, rezoning land use so that future
power infrastructure is located in less vulnerable areas).
This component will complement Component 1 by providing training and workshops to power sector
utility staff on technical skills related to renewable energy integration so that they can better use the
information that is obtained through the resource mapping component.


﻿*      Component 3: Project Implementation Support. This component will conduct a program of
activities designed to enhance the PPA's capacity for overall project coordination, management and
monitoring. These activities include coordination, administration, technical operation, procurement,
financial management, environmental and social management, monitoring, evaluation and reporting.
O
U       The project's incremental operating costs will also be financed through this component. This
program of activities will include:
A project management support sub-component including: (a) hiring of a full-time project
implementation support officer to support the PPA throughout project implementation; (b) hiring of a
part-time procurement support officer to assist with procurement processes throughout project
implementation; (c) provision of technical assistance to support mainstreaming of safeguards and
gender dimensions in the Project; (d) purchase of video conferencing equipment to support enhanced
interaction and training support between the PPA and utilities; (e) support for the PPA to organize
training courses and workshops on RE technologies and key issues facing utilities; and (f) support for
PPA to update its website to facilitate links to the resource mapping online tool, online grid stability
software, online benchmarking tool and other resources generated throughout project
implementation.
*      An incremental operating costs sub-component.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Component 1 (Phases 2of the ESMAP process) comprises the temporary installation of wind
monitoring masts and solar monitoring equipment, but the proposed locations will not be known until
the desk-based research under Phase 1 has been completed. They may be located in 10 of the 11
countries. The installation of ground based measurement equipment under Phase 2 of the project is
expected to be on Government land but this may not always be the case (for example wind
monitoring will depend on the location of the wind resource). Custom or community land may be
required temporarily. The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be used
to inform site selection and the mitigation measures required at each site. Sensitive sites, such as
physical cultural resources, nests or productive gardens, can be avoided through the use of the ESMF
o       in the site selection process.
The ESMF will also include methods to identify and minimize impacts during installation, use and
decommissioning, and will include voluntary land donation protocols and consultation methods.
Potential impacts to be managed are: 1) minimizing vegetation clearance for mast installation and
associated track clearances; 2) ensuring land access is secured (as discussed in Section E above); 3)
avoiding nests, gardens, houses, sites of significance to local people and other physical cultural
resources etc.; and 4) ensuring affected parties are consulted and are fully informed of the activity.
Technical Assistance activities under Components 1 and 2 will produce outputs, such as resource
maps and training materials, that will influence infrastructure planning and decision making in these
countries in future (not funded by this project). Technical Assistance will be guided by ToRs
approved by the Bank which will ensure safeguard issues are adequate addressed in activities.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The PPA will be responsible for the implementation of the ESMF, preparing TOR's for consultants
that include safeguards clauses, and reviewing the consultants' outputs in relation to the TORs and
the ESMF. PPA has five staff, none of whom have safeguards experience or skills in environmental
or social impact assessment. Therefore, one of the consultants selected to support PPA under
Component 3 will require experience in donor safeguards to undertake this role.


﻿The ESMAP consultants engaged under Component 1 will be required to develop the ground
monitoring program in accordance with the ESMF, and will be required to use the site selection
checklists and the guidelines in the ESMF for installing, maintaining and removing the equipment.
O
U       The task team safeguards specialists will provide further training and support to PPA during
implementation.
The World Bank task team will conduct training and awareness on safeguards relevant to the project
and the proposed instruments, and supervise the site screening processes.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Penelope Ruth Ferguson (GENDR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Screening has identified low risk of environmental
OP/BP 4.01                              and social impact, from the installation of wind
monitoring masts and solar monitoring equipment
and the indirect implementation of recommendations
from Component 1 desk-based research. An ESMF
will be prepared that will include guidelines and a
screening checklist to avoid or manage impacts from
the siting of the equipment. PPA will ensure that all
terms of reference for technical assistance and
studies carried out under the Project are consistent
with the WB's environmental and social safeguards
policies and requirements.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No         The footprint of the infrastructure is very small and
through the desk top study any natural habitats can
be avoided in Component 1.
Forests OP/BP 4.36         No           The footprint of the equipment required in
a                                               Component 1 is very small and will not adversely
affect forested areas or the use of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09    No           There is no pest management under this project.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        The footprint of the equipment required for
OP/BP 4.11                              Component 1 is very small and physical cultural
resources can be avoided. Physical cultural resources
will be screened as part of site selection, hence the
policy is triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         Because the project will apply to a number of
4.10                                    Countries where Indigenous Peoples reside and have
strong relationships with land, OP/BP 4.10 is
proposed to be triggered. For the Component 1 land
requirements, it is expected that Government land


﻿will generally be available, and use of this land will
be prioritized, but this may not always be possible.
Land acquisition will not be required, but there will
be some temporary use of land and this will require
either voluntary land donation or temporary land
lease or similar arrangement; some of this land may
be in areas used/inhabited/owned by indigenous
communities.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         Under Component 1 there will be temporary use of
BP 4.12                                   land for wind monitoring masts and solar monitoring
equipment. Government land will be prioritized, but
if community or custom land is required, a process
for consultation and access agreements is required
and this will form part of the safeguards
documentation as described under 4.01.
PPA will ensure that all terms of reference for any
technical assistance or studies carried out under the
Project are consistent with the requirements of this
policy.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           This project does not involve the construction of
dams or rely on the performance of an existing dam
or a dam under construction.
Projects on International    No           No studies or activities are proposed international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waters.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         No studies or activities are proposed in disputed
BP 7.60                                   areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jul-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF will be drafted by the end of June 2015, and key stakeholders will be consulted, prior
to appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Roberto Gabriel Aiello
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 26-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                    Date: 29-Jun-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


