INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14552
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Uruguay                    Project ID:   P151978
Project Name:    Uruguay FCPF REDD Readiness Preparation (P151978)
Task Team        Peter Jipp
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Jun-2020
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN04
Sector(s):       Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):        Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       6.47             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          2.67
Carbon Fund                                                       3.80
Total                                                             6.47
Environmental
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The overall objective of this project is to strengthen key stakeholder capacity to prepare and
implement a REDD+ strategy in Uruguay.
Specific objectives include:
i.     assessing the country's situation with respect to deforestation, forest degradation,
conservation and sustainable management of forests and relevant governance issues;
ii.   identifying REDD+ strategy options;


﻿iii.   assessing key social and environmental risks and potential impacts associated with REDD+,
and developing a management framework to manage these risks and mitigate potential impacts;
iv. working out a reference level of historic forest cover change and greenhouse gas emissions and
uptake from deforestation and/or forest degradation and REDD+ activities, and potentially forward-
U       looking projections of emissions; and
v.     designing a monitoring system to measure, report and verify the effect of the REDD+
strategy on greenhouse gas emissions and other multiple benefits, and to monitor the drivers of
deforestation and forest degradation, as well as other variables relevant to the implementation of
REDD+.
C. Project Description
The Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) prepared by the Government of Uruguay identifies the
necessary activities to strengthen Uruguay's technical and institutional capacities to participate in a
future REDD+ mechanism. The overall financial envelop needed for achieving REDD+ Readiness in
Uruguay has been estimated at US$ 6.47 million (as per the final version of the R-PP dated April 1st,
2015), of which US$2.67 million are contribution from the Government. REDD+ is a new concept
in Uruguay that aims to be inserted in land use decision making onwards. It is important to highlight
that the FCPF support is limited to analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation processes at
the national and sub-national levels and would not include any physical investment or the
implementation of any REDD+ program on the ground.
The FCPF implementation grant (US$ 3.8 million) contemplates the following five components:
Component 1: Organization and Consultation (US$ 1,110,438). This component will assist the
Ministry of Livestock, Agriculture and Fisheries (MGAP) to: (i) establish and operate a consultative
platform for REDD+ implementation; (ii) design and operate a phased national communications and
dissemination strategy for REDD+; and (iii) design and implement a consultation and participation
strategy that includes a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM).
Component 2: Preparation of the National REDD+ Strategy (US$ 1,941,153). This component will
assist MGAP to: (i) identify and analyze the main direct and indirect cause of deforestation and
landscape degradation; (ii) identify effective REDD+ strategy options; (iii) design the
implementation framework for REDD+; and (iv) assess possible social and environmental impacts
associated to the REDD+ strategic options (SESA and ESMF).
Component 3: Development of a National Forest Reference Emission Level or a Forest Reference
Level (US$ 276,955). This component will assist MGAP to identify a national Reference Emissions
Level, and/or Reference Level (REL/RL) for the forest sector.
Component 4: Design a System for National Forest Monitoring and on Safeguards (NFMS) (US$
447,455). This component will assist MGAP and other government agencies in the design and
implementation of: (i) a national forest monitoring systems; and (ii) a national information system for
multiple benefits, other impacts, safeguards and governance.
Component 5. Design of a Program Monitoring and Evaluation Framework (US$ 24,000). This
component will support MGAP in the establishment and operation of a technical/administrative
implementation unit that will be in charge of coordinating and executing the technical and fiduciary
activities of the readiness phase, including a monitoring and evaluation framework.


﻿D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The FCPF Readiness Preparation Grant does not involve physical investments and pilot projects on
the ground. However, the donation can finance certain studies (diagnostic and analytical) as well as
Q      workshops and consultation meetings with relevant beneficiaries (stakeholders). The Readiness
Preparation is designed as a strategic planning where key policies and regulations are setup and
articulated in order to achieve "downstream impact" before REDD+ implementation per se.
It will be important in this regard to note that, despite the small size of the country, there is i) a
distribution of natural landscapes, uses and capacity of the natural resources in a "mosaic" type
(typical situation in temperate middle latitudes), and ii) the whole country is easily accessible. The
right combination of both variables must be subject to special attention in the process of strategy
development.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project implementing agencies (MGAP and MVOTMA) are the institutions responsible in the
country of the activities to take place in native, planted and naturalized forests, in addition to fire
management, wildlife, environmental issues (assessment and monitoring of impacts) and natural
ecosystems. They are also responsible for the management of protected areas and agri-biosystems,
the implementation, monitoring and evaluation of their national policies, and the administration and
management of any incentive programs, training and education. Education programs are coordinated
with other public or private institutions at the national level including: Ministries, INIA Instituto
Nacional Forestal and Agricultural Research and Public Enterprises). At the subnational level there
are alos departmental governments and municipalities where coordination takes place.
The headquarters of the implementing agencies are in Montevideo as well as a small number of
decentralized offices in the regions, especially from the MGAP.
Given MGAP seniority in relation to MVOTMA, has a larger network of technicians distributed in
the territory, although more oriented to production processes in the primary sector. The levels of
quality and professional commitment of both institutions are good to very good, although specific
expertise, articulation and training of safeguard policies that look to both production and
environmental aspects are weak.
Given MGAP seniority in relation to MVOTMA, has a larger network of technicians distributed in
the territory, although more oriented to production processes in the primary sector. The levels of
quality and professional commitment of both institutions are good to very good, although specific
expertise, articulation and training of safeguard policies that look to both production and
environmental aspects are weak.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Lilian Pedersen (GSURR)
Ricardo Larrobla (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         It will be applied in situations that do not correspond


﻿OP/BP 4.01                                 specifically to the activated OP / BP 4.04, 4.36 and
4.11, and in cases where there is reasonable doubt: i)
other environmental risks and ii) against any
activities that affect environmental factors combined
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes          REDD+ programs including offset programs may
have potentiential impacts on natural habitats, in
particular non-forest habitats such as natural
grasslands.These potential impacts will be
considered as part of the SESA.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes          In natural forests and woodlands ecosystems small
areas of natural habitats play important global
functions or are part of local biological chains, which
must be identified and managed.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes          An analysis during the SESA process and
preparation of the ESMF will provide further
guidance, however restoration and reforestation
activities planned may require its triggering.
Physical Cultural Resources   Yes          Given the historical context of occupation and of
OP/BP 4.11                                 land use in the country all landscapes are
anthropogenic and cultural remains are scattered and
small-scale, therefore preservation options should be
evaluated before any intervention.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      TBD          Despite a nearly complete nationwide cadaster
4.10                                       (97%), there is an ongoing national debate regarding
identification and rights of indigenous people in
Uruguay. Based on visits performed during the due
diligence phase, initial analysis of census data
(identifying claims of IP ancestry), the legal
framework, recent anthropological analysis, and
primary research conducted with diverse Charria
communities and disperse Guarani populations, there
is evidence to substantiate that OP 4.10 criteria are
partially met in Charnia communities
Further information and consultation are required to
confirm whether the criteria for "collective
attachment" is met, given that indigenous land claims
thus far have focused on acknowledgement of sacred
lands, rather than on land ownership per se.
Given the current lack of clarity, OP4. 10 cannot be
triggered at the concept stage, however during
implementation careful consideration will be given to
triggering OP4. 10 if all criteria are met and
considering the potential for future claims on
ancestral lands. Further consultation and fact-finding


﻿will take place during the Strategic Environmental
and Social Assessment (SESA) of the readiness
process and if OP4.10 is triggered then an
Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) will
be prepared.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) is
BP 4.12                                   triggered as a preventive measure considering the
possibility of a) future access restrictions on the use
of natural resources or b) involuntary land
acquisition that may be proposed as strategic options
to reduce deforestation and forest degradation during
REDD+ strategy development.
During the Readiness phase financed by this grant,
an assessment of the nature of potential impacts will
be carried out as part of the SESA process to identify
the geographical focus of REDD+ strategic options.
If strategic options involve potential restrictions on
natural resources use or involuntary land acquisition
then the anticipated impacts will be identified and
mitigation measures including assistance to improve
livelihoods for those impacted will be included in the
ESMF. If required the ESMF will contain specific
sections addressing these issues, and a Process
Framework (PF) relating to access restriction and/or
a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will be
prepared if involuntary land acquisition is
anticipated.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           This policy is not triggered because no dam safety
issues are anticipated.
Projects on International    No           This policy is not triggered because no international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterway issues are anticipated.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         This policy is not triggered because no disputed areas
&        BP 7.60                                   are included.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Nov-2018
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The SESA will be based on a participatory approach, articulated with the operational,
environmental and social policies of the World Bank and aimed at identifying and addressing
environmental and social benefits and risks of the REDD + strategy. The SESA will be designed
and initiated during the next 12 months.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Jipp
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:  Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)               Date: 03-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/    Name: Raul Ivan Alfaro Pelico (PMGR)        Date: 04-Sep-2015
Manager:


