INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15015
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Dominican Republic         Project ID:  P147277
Project Name: Distribution Grid Modernization and Loss Reduction Project (P 147277)
Task Team       Sergio Augusto Gonzalez Coltrinari
Leader(s):
Estimated       10-Aug-2015                Estimated    16-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE04                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%), Urban Economic
Development (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     120.00            Total Bank Financing:  120.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     120.00
Total                                                                     120.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to improve the financial viability of the electricity distribution
companies (EDEs) by reducing energy losses and increasing revenue collections in the circuits
rehabilitated under the project and consequently increase the supply of electricity. .
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 11


﻿A.     Project Components as described in the PAD (after Decision Meeting)
Component 1: Rehabilitation of Selected Distribution Circuits and Upgrading of Metering Systems -
Implementation of Environmental Management System (US $103.63 million). This component will
support investments to rehabilitate circuits selected by each EDE. Investments include: (i) the supply
and installation of remote metering and remote switching (disconnection and reconnection) systems
for end-users in low voltage residential and commercial circuits; (ii) the eradication of illegal
connections by means of anti-theft MV and LV network, installation of high multiple meter boxes
*         and individual meters with remote metering and switching to existing and newly regularized
unmetered end-users through this project; (iii) the replacement of obsolete and overloaded MV and
LV overhead power lines and transformers; and (iv) supply and installation of macro-metering
equipment in mid-voltage branches and micro-metering in power transformers to better track and
monitor power flows, overloads, energy balances, and commercial losses in the distribution grids,
and (v) development of an environmental management system and upgraded monitoring and
management of electrical residues sites, following international best practices for hazardous waste
management.
Component 2: Citizen Engagement and Community Participation. (US$ 4.56 million). This
component will implement a Social Management Strategy (SMS) aiming at restoring the confidence
between users and EDEs, increase cash collection levels, and use electricity efficiently and safely.
Through the implementation of the (SMS), leaders and communities will be informed about the
modernization of the networks, and will be organized to participate actively in the implementation of
the project. Social Compacts will be signed between the EDEs and the communities to reflect
agreements reached on the number of hours of electricity that the EDEs will deliver per day and the
legalization of illegal users and payment of the electricity bills by the clients. Communities will be
trained on the safe and efficient use of electricity, and their rights and duties as regular clients of the
EDEs. All the activities of the SMS will be implemented with a differential approach based on
gender and age. A detailed description of this component and the Social Management Strategy is in
Annex 2. Each EDE has a Social Management Unit and a team to implement the Strategy in each
O
Q)       circuit to be rehabilitated. The component will finance the activities related and resources needed for
the implementation and evaluation of the Strategy. This evaluation includes pre and post Customer
Service Satisfaction Surveys
Component 3: Commercial Management and Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation of the
Loss Reduction Program (US$ 11.16 million). This component will finance consulting services to
improve the commercial management of the EDEs; integrate the corporate IT systems of CDEEE and
the EDEs to improve corporate processes; and strengthen the coordination and monitoring of the
rehabilitation projects. Significant potential for governance improvements recommended in the
Governance Study conducted by the World Bank lies in the enhancement of management processes
at CDEEE and EDEs, and more specifically enhancements that can be attained through investment in
information systems. This project will include the integration of commercial, financial and
accounting systems and standardization of reporting to help establish transparent processes for
procurement of goods and services linked to the sector's planning goals, facilitate quality business
data to top management and market regulator, and provide access to real time operational
information.
Component 4: Complementary Tariff Study (US$350,000). The Electricity Market Regulator (SIE) is
currently undertaking a Tariff Study (a loan from IDB) to assess and update the levels of the current
Page 2 of 11


﻿electricity tariffs in terms of cost-recovery. This component will finance a complementary study (to
be completed two years from project implementation) to weigh the social implications of the changes
in the tariff rates and recommend mitigation measures and glide-path implementation of the tariff
levels proposed in the ongoing Tariff Study supported by the IDB
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The CDEEE and its three companies (EDEs) cover the entire country's power distribution sector.
The energy generation in Dominican Republic is mainly thermal (86%) and only 13% of
hydroelectricity, thus having an important footprint on green house gases. The forest land covers
about 40% of the country.
The project works will concentrate in specific provinces and municipalities served by each EDE such
as Distrito Nacional, Santo Domingo, San Crist6bal, Santiago, La Vega, Puerto Plata, Duarte and San
Pedro de Macori. The majority of the works will be performed along public streets and urban areas.
The planned activities within the project do not include the construction of new transmission o
distribution electrical lines. The project might include the construction or rehabilitation of storage
sites for the electrical residues from the project woks which might be located close to streams and
neighborhoods. About 2200 kilometers of power lines will be rehabilitated as part of Component 1
activities. An additional 6760 km of power lines of will be rehabilitated as part of the energy loss
program and potentially at the same time of this project through the implementation of similar
projects financed by other Banks (IDB, European Bank, OPEC, OFID). The project areaa are about
60% urban (poor neighbors in suburbs) and about 40% in rural areas.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The proposed works to be completed under the Project
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               pertain to the rehabilitation of medium (69kV;34.5kV;
15kV; 12.47kV; 7.2kV; y 4.16kV) and low voltage lines
(120/208V o 240/415V) and the installation of metering
systems. The works will not involve construction of new
facilities, or electrical lines but the rehabilitation
(replacement of existing power lines and related
equipment) and installation of new meter systems. Based
on the project characteristics, a category B was proposed.
Most works will be performed in along public urban and
rural roads. Special attention have taken in the EIA to
avoid impacts on forested and urban areas to reduce
impacts to natural habitats and local inhabitants during
construction.
The project is expected to have positive impacts on urban
and rural residents of the selected areas of intervention
due to the rehabilitation of the distribution electrical grid,
home connections to beneficiaries and the reduction of
electricity interruptions which is a common issue in the
country.
Page 3 of 11


﻿Potential environmental impacts of the project activities
are related to the rehabilitation works of the distribution
power lines and include:
i) generation of a large quantity of electrical residues,
such as: transformers, cables, meters, street lights, poles
(of wood, concrete and metal). New poles financed by
this project will be only concrete.
ii) generation of hazardous electrical waste (old
transformers) which might be contaminated with PCBs
iii) interruption of electricity service to local
communities during works.
iv) changes in the normal transit in streets, sidewalks and
public areas
A recent rehabilitation distribution project by EDENorte
and financed by IDB in the Municipality of Villa
Gonzalez required the installation of 80.6 km of power
cables of medium voltage, 65 km of low voltage cable,
1978 concrete power poles, 205 transformers and 1,704
street lights. As a result, a similar number of deployed
equipment became residues and required additional space
which is limited in each EDE.
To ensure that any environmental issues by the project
activities are appropriately addressed by the selected
implementing agencies, CDEEE and all 3 EDEs, the
client prepared an Environmental Impact Assessment in
accordance with the OP 4.01 in order to meet the World
Bank safeguards policies and the national applicable
legislation. The EIA included a diagnostic of the project
areas, potential environmental impacts, and capacities in
each EDE to evaluate, supervise and manage the expected
impacts.
The EIA evaluated the impacts on natural resources (trees,
birds, bats), community and workers health and safety (e.
g. working at heights, electric shock, electromagnetic
fields, etc). The prepared EMP for this project includes
measures to reduce impacts in the project areas during the
construction and operation. The EMP also includes
actions to ensure communication, health and safety,
grievance redress mechanisms, screening of voluntary
land donations and checklist for screening; monitoring
and supervision of works. Also the EMP includes
Environmental Clauses for the bidding documents so
contractors must comply with environmental legislation,
Page 4 of 11


﻿worker's occupational health, safety local labor
regulations, the WB Safeguards Policies and the approved
EIA.
The project will cause cumulative impacts due to
production of hazardous and electrical solid waste by all 3
EDEs, by this project and the other projects financed by
IDB, the European Bank, OFIC. The client agreed to
include as part of Component 1.1 a budget of $2.4 to
finance the development of an environmental
management system to implement actions in all EDEs and
the CDEEE to improve environmental management in the
EDEs and to apply best international best practice,
including handling, transportation, and final disposition of
transformers contaminated by polychlorinated biphenyls
(PCBs) and remediation of soil contaminated sites.
The client has been informed of the WBG's
Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS) Guidelines for
Power Transmission projects and IFC guidelines.
The EIA was disclosed on March 17 at the World Bank
and CDEEE web sites on consulted with relevant
stakeholders on March 25-27, 2015. The EIA was
reviewed by the Bank team, updated and the final
documents disclosed on August xx, 2015.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         This policy is triggered to ensure proper management of
4.04                                and disposal of project residues and in order to avoid
impacts on natural or critical habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          No project activities are involved with forest
management. Thus the Forest safeguard policy is not
triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The Project does not involve the purchase or increased
use of pesticides.. Thus the Pest Management s policy is
not triggered.
Physical Cultural       Yes         This policy is triggered as precautionary measure to avoid
Resources OP/BP 4.11                impacts to the country's diverse cultural and historical
resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          This policy is not triggered as there are no Indigenous
BP 4.10                             Peoples that meet the four criteria of OP/BP 4.10 within
the project area that could potentially benefit or be
adversely affected by the Project's investments.
Involuntary Resettlement No         The Project does not involve land acquisition or
OP/BP 4.12                          imposition of easements or rights of way. The planned
works involve the rehabilitation of existing medium and
low voltage power lines and the installation of metering
Page 5 of 11


﻿systems. The works do not involve construction of
electrical lines. Most works will be performed in the right
of ways of country roads and are not expected to cause
physical or economic displacement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
4.37                                 support the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will
support other investments which rely on the services of
existing dams.
Projects on International  No        No project activities are involved in international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterways as defined under OP/BP 7.50. Thus the
International Waterways policy is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed    No           No project activities are involved in disputed areas as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     defined under OP/BP 7.60. Thus the Disputed Areas
policy is not triggered.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
1. Environmental Category and proposed works. Based on the proposed activities for this project,
the project was classified as B and the Environmental Safeguards Policies triggered are OP 4.01,
OP 4.11 and OP 4.04. Most of the environmental and social impacts are related to the activities to
be financed by Component 1. The subprojects, named Circuits or Circuitos (in spanish), are
sections of distributions lines which have been selected by the client to rehabilitate in order to
improve electricity services.
2. The civil works will be implemented by contractors supervised by the three EDEs and hired by
O
U           the CDEEE under Component 1 (US$103.7 million), and the main activities might include: i)
rehabilitation of medium and low voltage distribution circuits in targeted areas (about 20 circuits
for the three EDEs representing change of about 2300 km of cables, 3400 transformers, 15,000
street lights) and the installation of metering systems (approximately 10,135 meters). The works
will not involve construction of new electrical distribution or transmission lines but the
rehabilitation (replacement of existing power lines and related equipment) and installation of new
meter systems which will generate important volumes of discarded electrical residues.
3. EDEs will have to manage this project together with other similar works financed by other
Banks ( IDB, OPEC, OFID, and EIB) which will also generate large amounts of electrical residues
(cables, lights, transformers). EDEs environmental teams estimated that the amount of residues
that will be generated by the other subprojects will be about 4 times that of the Bank's project. The
rehabilitation of the circuits might include, the changes of poles, cables, insulator's, street lamps,
meters, transformers, etc. The EIA estimated that the CDEEE Loss Reduction program will
generate as residues in the next 5 years about 38,000 poles, 9000 transformers, 20,000 street lights.
As needed, EDEs might need to build storage sites for the new equipment that will be purchased
and the old equipment that will be retired. Any construction needed for the project will be done on
land owned by the EDEs or CDEEE or any other public institution.
Page 6 of 11


﻿4. Potential environmental impacts. During the EIA preparation, environmental and social impacts
were identified for both construction and operation stages. Most of the impacts during construction
can be prevented and mitigated by proper implementation of preventive and mitigation measures
and increased on site supervision and coordination among the three EDEs and CDEEE. Potential
O
environmental and social impacts that can be the result of this project, might include: generation of
electrical waste (e.g. old poles, transformers, insulators, cable lines, street lights, meters, and other
related electrical equipment to be replaced), generation of hazardous electrical waste (e.g. old
transformers, oils, cables, etc.), cutting of trees, perforations of sidewalks, interruption of
electricity service to local communities during works, safety issues to manage contingencies
(accidents, explosions), effect on normal traffic and access to homes and other public areas of the
project sites, among others.
5.Existing contamination issues of current storage sites in the EDEs have been addressed as per
OP 4.01 (Annex C) in the EIA and the project has included as part of Component 1 the
implementation of an environmental management system in order to improve current
environmental practices in the EDEs, remediate some of the project storage contaminated sites,
increase coordination among the EDEs and the CDEEE, hire additional environmental staff and
standardize capacities and responses to health, safety and environmental issues that are involved in
the typical activities and works that the project will finance. During preparation, 'pasivos
ambientales' were identified in all three EDEs, mainly related to the large amounts of unmanaged
old electrical residues (transformers, cables, lights, meters, etc) some resulting from previous Bank
and IDB operations. The existing contamination issues of current storage sites in the EDEs have
been addressed as per OP 4.01 (Annex C) in the EIA and the project has included as part of
Component 1 the implementation of an environmental management system in order to remediate
some of the project storage contaminated sites in order to have the necessary space to store the
additional residues that this project will gen erate, increase environmental coordination among
EDEs and CDEEE, hire additional environmental staff, standardize capacities and responses to
health, safety and environmental issues that are involved in the typical activities of the works to be
financed by the project and to improve the overall current environmental practices in the EDEs.
6. The project has agreed to implement through Component 1, the development of an
environmental management system which will allow CDEEE and the EDEs to improve
management of environmental issues, health, and occupational safety aspects, associated with the
type of works to be financed and also to a better management of hazardous electrical waste in
order to reduce environmental and social impacts in the project areas. Some of the mitigation
measures agreed are: i) construction of at least one additional deposit site per EDE to store and
handle hazardous wastes (e.g. transformers) and other electrical waste that the project activities
will generate (meters, cables, street lamps, etc); ii) training of the environmental and occupational
safety teams of EDEs and CDEEE to improve experience and share knowledge to improve
management and response to anticipated environmental issues, iii) development of a IT platform
for an environmental monitory system, iv) increase supervision of contractors by EDEs, v)
standardization of protocols among EDEs for management of environment, health and safety
issues, supervision of works, among others.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
With the development of the project, the indirect impacts are related to the increase pollution of
land as more electrical residues are accumulated as result of the operations. The EIA and EMP
include measures to reduce current and future impacts of project activities following OP 4.01. OP
Page 7 of 11


﻿4.11 and OP 4.04 and national legislation. Component 1 includes the development of the
environmental management system that will require EDEs to remediate some of the storage sites
contaminated with old electrical residues, increase supervision of hazardous waste (transformers),
among other activities to reduce long term impacts on the project areas.
o
Positive social impacts of the project interventions in poor and rural areas can be linked to increase
opportunities for education, living and community security.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Since all subprojects have already been selected by the client and all are existing distribution lines,
consideration of alternatives is not applicable. All impacts will occur in the selected areas and in
order to reduce and mitigate these impacts, the client prepared the EIA and EMP to manage these
impacts following application of the OP 4.01, OP 4.04 and OP 4.11, the WB guidelines, standards
and national legislation.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Assessment of Borrower capacities
The project will be implemented by 4 agencies: i) the Dominican Corporation of State Electrical
Utilities (Corporaci6n Dominicana de Empresas E16ctricas Estatales, CDEEE), ii) EDE-Norte, iii)
EDE-Sur and iv) EDE-Este. All EDES are now 100% public owned (under CDEEE). All EDE's
are in charge of distribution and commercialization of electricity in the country. The Bank has
supported CDEEE and the three EDEs since 2007 through the Electricity Distribution
Rehabilitation Project (PO89866) which closed in September 2013 and overall project and
environmental safeguards rating of this project were ranked as satisfactory. However during the
evaluation for this new project, it was found that each EDE had different frameworks to handle
environmental and safety issues and different capacities in each EDE to handle the large amounts
of electrical residues that these type of energy rehabilitation projects have generated. Previous
Bank and other IF operations have left important amounts of electrical residues accumulated in
open areas and close to streams.
CDEEE has an environmental guideline in place for distribution electrical works dated from 2007
which was accepted by the Bank in the previous project. However, compliance with this guideline
was found to be limited in some of the EDEs. This guideline and other environmental instruments
in place in the EDEs will be reviewed and updated during project implementation an according to
the environmental management system to be developed under Component 1. During the
preparation of this new project, the Bank environmental specialist worked with the CDEEE and
EDEs to establish institutional arrangements for new staffing and improvement of environmental
management for the proposed project activities and agreed in different environmental actions
described in the EMP of this project which will be implemented as part of Component 1. CDEEE
and the three EDEs will be responsible for overall project activities, including design,
construction, operation and environmental and social management of the project.
Measures Agreed
For project implementation, it has been agreed that: i) at each EDE and environmental-safety unit
will be created to be responsible of project overall environmental management and supervision; ii)
EDEs will implement the agreed EMP prepared as result of the EIA; iii) implement an
environmental management system as part of Component 1 which will include hiring of an
Page 8 of 11


﻿environmental specialist at the PIU to increase coordination among the three EDEs and CDEEE;
hiring of one or two environmental specialists at each EDE to increase support for project
implementation and supervision; construction or rehabilitation of electrical residues storage sites;
diagnostics of land pollution in the current storage sites; final treatment of contaminated
O
transformers, purchase of screening tests for PCBs (Clor-N-Oil-50); v) prepare jointly EDEs
safeguards reports and training, among other actions.
Institutional arrangements for Environmental safeguards.
During preparation, the CDEEE and the EDEs recognized the need to improve the arrangement of
the environmental and safety units in all EDEs, and it was agreed that the PIU of the CDEEE, will
hire an environmental specialist to support the PIU on supervising the overall performance of the
environmental management of the Project in all EDEs. Also in each EDE, a PIU with an
environmental-safety management unit have been created specially to handle the project.
Additional consultants, supervisors ('fiscales') and auditors might be hired as needed during
implementation to supervise contractors, prepare studies, remediate sites, etc.
The PIU of the CDEEE will hire an environmental specialist financed by the project who will be
responsible for monitoring and supervising compliance of EDEs with the EIA-EMP, activities of
Component 1 and other agreements with the EDEs for project implementation. The CDEEE will
prepare comprehensive safeguards reports each semester for all project implementing units in the
EDEs and submit to the Bank in the agreed time frame. There are some environmental specialists
at the CDEEE that could serve as technical advisers for the Environmental-Safety Unit at the
CDEEE as needed.
The Environmental-Safety Unit at each EDE will consist of a coordinator/manager and current
and other environmental, health and safety staff and additional full time environmental/safety
specialists (at least 1-2 for each EDE) to be financed by this project. These staff will be
responsible for overall implementation of the EMP, activities of Component 1 development of the
environmental management system, and supervision and monitoring of the project activities. They
will also be responsible for field supervision of contractors and works to be financed by the
project, preparation of reports, and other duties described in the EIA/EMP of the project. The
Environmental-Safety Unit at each EDE will also contract consultants or auditors as needed to
support supervision. The Environmental-Safety Unit will also coordinate with the coordinator of
the Social Unit of each EDE on the implementation of communication plans and application of
agreed grievance mechanisms. Bidding documents will include environmental clauses and works
preparation and mitigation will follow procedures and arrangements described in the EIA and
EMP prepared for the project. During implementation, as needed the Bank might request
additional mitigation measures to prevent, mitigate or remediate potential impacts that can occur.
The EIA and EMP of the project are an integral part of the project Operational Manual (POM) of
this project.
Supervision.
The supervision of project compliance with the Bank safeguards policies during construction and
operation will be done by the environmental-safety staff of the EDEs and supported by the
Environmental Specialist of the UEP from CDEE and consultants as needed. EDEs will be
responsible to the environmental management after subprojects construction and in the operation
of the environmental management system and handling of solid waste. EDEs will also ensure that
Page 9 of 11


﻿bidding documents of projects have environmental clauses to ensure compliance of contractors
with the project EMP and the environmental prevention, mitigation or compensation measures
agreed in the EIA and required by the OP 4.01, OP 4.11 and OP 4.04 and the applicable national
legislation.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
The beneficiaries of the PRPMC are distributed in different locations at the EDEs geographical
jurisdiction. However, the priority geographic areas are mainly located in the following provinces:
Distrito Nacional, Santo Domingo, San Crist6bal, Santiago, La Vega,Puerto Plata, Duarte and San
Pedro de Macori. Main stakeholders include: CDEEE, EDEs, contractors, communities,
municipalities, residential, commercial and industrial beneficiaries.
Consultation and Disclosure
A draft of the EIA was published on March 17, 2015 on the websites of the three EDEs and
CDEEE and in the Infoshop of the World Bank on March 18, 2015. Consultations were held on
March 27, 2015 in two locations in the country. Invited stakeholders included: local communities
within a proposed circuit to be rehabilitated within this project, representatives from the national
environmental agency (Ministry of Environment), municipality, contractors, EDES, CDEEE.
Representatives of the EDEs, and CDEEE explained the project scope, objectives, possible
construction impacts, mitigation measures, monitoring protocols and grievance mechanisms.
Subsequently, there was a question and answer session and the results of the consultation have
been included in the EIA. Stakeholders support the project and no major issues were raised. The
final EIA was revised by the Bank, found acceptable and it was published on September 9, 2015 at
the website of CDEEE, EDEs and at the Infoshop of the World Bank.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              16-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           17-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Dominican Republic                                       17-Mar-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Page 10 of 1I


﻿Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X]  No[  ]  NA[  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
O
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sergio Augusto Gonzalez Coltrinari
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Antonio Alexandre Rodrigues        Date: 15-Oct-2015
Manager:                     Barbalho (PMGR)
Page 11 of 11


