                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR17081
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Montenegro                                   Project ID:           P122785
                            Project Name:       Higher Education Research for Innovation and Competitiveness Project
                                                (P122785)
                            Task Team           Roberta Malee Bassett
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       28-Oct-2011                                      Estimated   24-Jan-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GED03                                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:           Tertiary education (50%), Public administration- Education (50%)
                            Theme:            Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                              No
                            Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          15.98               Total Bank Financing:        15.98
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                                Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 15.98
                              Total                                                                                                 15.98
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The Project development objective is to strengthen the quality and relevance of higher education and
                           research in Montenegro through creating a transparent finance system and a coherent quality
                           assurance system and by strengthening research and development capabilities.


                                                                                  Page 1 of 6
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The Project development objective is to strengthen the quality and relevance of higher education and
                         research in Montenegro through creating a transparent finance system and a coherent quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assurance system and by strengthening research and development capabilities.
                         3. Project Description
                         This project is organized around four components:

                         Component 1: Higher Education Finance Reforms and Implementation of Quality Assurance Norms

                         This component would finance activities to implement the goals of the Strategy through such
                         measures as improving the administrative capacity of the Council of Higher Education and the
                         Higher Education Department, through activities such as study visits and technical assistance, to
                         support the membership in the European Quality Assurance Register for Higher Education (EQAR)
                         and ENQA. It would also finance a sector-wide evaluation of the Universities, which includes
                         baseline, and follow-up studies. The assessment of Bologna implementation would be part of these
                         studies, as well as the assessment of learning environment. Some identified needs of individual
                         faculties would be financed under implementation of the grants subcomponent. Finally, this
                         component would also financed one tracer study and skills and two knowledge labor market studies
                         (one benchmark and one results study), which includes technical assistance for designing such
                         studies and carrying out the related proposed methodologies.

                         Component 2: Human Capital Development through Internationalization Initiatives

                         This component would address cross-border opportunities in two ways: (i) establishing a facilitation
                         agency, which would serve as a clearinghouse for all information regarding international
                         opportunities for students and academic staff; and (ii) funding renovations to about 10 university
                         dormitories, the development and implementation of a targeted scholarship scheme for graduate and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         post-graduate students, as well as mechanisms to attract international staff to Montenegrin higher
                         education institutions, into fields deemed nationally important. The activities would also support a
                         feasibility study to examine the potential of introducing some basic changes, such as greater use of
                         English language in the classrooms and provision of subsidized housing, for instance, to lure foreign
                         scholars and students. Finally, as a bridge to Component 3, internationalization efforts can and ought
                         to be embedded into every ambitious academic program, as it would be in the competitively awarded
                         (and well-funded) posts at newly established CoEs.

                         Component 3: Establishing a Competitive Research Environment

                         The component would support the development of the criteria defining the CoE and their governance
                         framework and the establishment of one pilot CoE, to be identified through competitive selection
                         criteria, as established in the law. It is envisioned that existing faculties and research institutes would
                         compete, either on their own or in consortia, to establish this CoE. It would help the GoM to
                         prepare the necessary assessments of upgrading and skills gaps and feasibility studies to establish the
                         centers, including co-finance upgrading of equipment, providing technical assistance and training in
                         strategic areas, and funding the development of partnerships with private sector and international
                         research centers.

                         To support larger, more impactful R&D subproject that nurture international collaboration and have a


                                                                        Page 2 of 6
                         high potential to generate commercial innovations, the Project would provide for a significant
                         expansion of the competitive National Project's research grants program. Under this component, the
                         grants would be awarded to Montenegrin research institutions or firms that wish to initiate a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programmatic R&D project together with an international partner.

                         Component 4: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation

                         This component was designed to build capacity within MoES and MoS to manage the day-to-day
                         implementation of the HERIC Project, as well as monitor and evaluate its impact. It would support
                         the establishment of a minimal Project Management Team (PMT). This component would finance
                         the salaries of PMT staff, and financial audits. This component would also finance consultant
                         services of the Technical Service Unit (TSU) within the MoF. Lastly, this component would provide
                         funds for M&E studies.

                         The restructuring of the project does not envisage any changes to the project components, any new
                         activities or triggering of any new safeguards policies.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project would be implemented nationally.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes           This safeguard policy is triggered because the proposed
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    project finances renovations to student hostels/
                                                                   dormitories, establishment of one pilot Center of
                                                                   Excellence in Montenegroand the expansion of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   existing national research grants program. The project did
                                                                   not finance major civil works or new construction, but
                                                                   rather minor works (e.g. renovations) within student
                                                                   hostels at the Center of Excellence (CoE) and at grantee
                                                                   institutions. The research grants and CoE may involve
                                                                   lab waste management and biosecurity issues, which are
                                                                   addressed in the EMF.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09    No
                          Physical Cultural          No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/     No
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement   No
                          OP/BP 4.12



                                                                     Page 3 of 6
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               OP 4.01 is triggered by the Project as it finances renovations to dormitories, establishment of one
                              pilot Center of Excellence in Montenegro and the expansion of the existing national projects
                              research grants in areas of significant national interest. The funds were also used to purchase lab
                              equipment, the operation of which would generate waste. The Project does not finance major civil
                              works, and new construction of buildings or schools has not been carried out, as it has not been
                              envisaged or planned for. Minor scale refurbishment works (e.g. repainting, window alterations,
                              upgrading sanitation, etc) were carried out at the dormitories, Center of Excellence and the grantee
                              institutions. The Project will also finance the technological equipment for the pilot Center of
                              Excellence and other research institutions.

                             The research grant program included awarding large scale grants for advanced research (maximum
                             U$500,000) through a competitive process. A negative list of activities that cannot be supported
                             by this research program activities (e.g. IFC Exclusion List) was with the Borrower and included
                             in the Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and POM developed for the Project. The
                             potential environmental impact of the dormitories renovations CoE and grant sub-projects was
Public Disclosure Copy




                             assessed through a screening procedure based on the WB Environmental Assessment safeguard
                             policy (OP/BP/GP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment), WB Pollution Prevention and Abatement
                             Handbook (PPAH) and the relevant laws and bylaws of the GoM, in particular the Waste
                             Management Law (Official Gazette of the RM, No. 80/05), and the Law on Integrated Prevention
                             and Pollution Control (IPPC) (Official Gazette of the RM No 80/05). The environmental
                             screening procedure outlined in the EMF is an integrated part of the POM and Grants Operational
                             Manual. When the screening procedure indicates that environmental impacts may occur, a specific
                             Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was developed for the object (dormitories, CoE or grant
                             sub-project). The EMPs identify mitigation measures recommended for the assessed adverse
                             environmental impacts. Sub-projects that are screened as category "A" were not eligible for
                             funding.

                             HERIC was not expected to present any large scale, significant or irreversible negative
                             environmental impacts, and no such impacts or issues were noted during implementation.

                              The restructuring of the project does not envisage any changes to the project components, any new
                              activities or triggering of any new safeguards policies.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:



                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                             There are no indirect negative long-term impacts anticipated as a result of this project.
                           Modernization and upgrading of research facilities is expected to result in adoption of good
                           laboratory practices, including for waste management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The EMF provides an exclusion list and screening process to avoid investments that would meet
                           category "A" conditions or that would trigger any of the other Bank safeguards policies. The EMF
                           provides guidance for preparation of sub-project EMPs to mitigate and monitor environmental
                           risks.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) has been disclosed and consulted prior to
                           appraisal. The EMF includes a screening checklist for the pilot CoE and candidate research grant
                           recipients to establish the sub-project environmental category. When indicated based on the
                           screening (e.g., category B sub-projects), a sub-project EMP will be prepared and incorporated
                           into the sub-project Grant Agreement. Guidance for preparation of the sub-project EMP is
                           provided in the EMF. The Ministry of Education and Sports (MoES) as implementing agency for
                           Component 2 Human Capital Development through Internationalization Initiatives, and the
                           Ministry of Science (MoS) as implementing agency for Component 3, Establishing a Competitive
                           Research and Innovation Environment, will be responsible for implementation of the EMF as
                           these are the only components that trigger safeguards policies. MoS and MoES have recruited a
                           local environmental specialist funded under HERIC to advise and assist with implementation of
                           the project with respect to environmental safeguards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders include universities, research institutions and commercial science innovators.
                           MoS conducted a stakeholder consultation on the EMF on 21 Oct 2011. MoS invited Key
Public Disclosure Copy




                           stakeholders include universities, research institutions and commercial science innovators. MoS
                           conducted a stakeholder consultation on the EMF on 21 Oct 2011. MoS invited directly a wide
                           range of representative stakeholders to the consultation meeting, including from Ministry of
                           Education, Environmental Protection Agency/Ministry of Tourism and Environment, Universities,
                           Research Institutes, environmental NGOs, industry or trade associations and media. Comments
                           received from participants were reflected in the final version of the EMF.

                           MoS has disclosed the draft EMF by posting the draft document (in Montenegrin) on the websites
                           of MoS and the MoES prior to the stakeholder consultation meeting. A revised draft EMF was
                           disclosed on the websites of the MoS and MoES on 18 November 2011.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                       17-Oct-2011
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                    25-Oct-2011
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Montenegro                                                       18-Oct-2011
                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Roberta Malee Bassett
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza                  Date: 07-Jun-2016
                            Manager:                   (PMGR)




                                                                       Page 6 of 6
