The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                     Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Dec-2016| Report No: ISDSR20936




                         Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                                Country Director:    Bert Hofman
                  Senior Global Practice Director:   Timothy Grant Evans
                     Practice Manager/Manager:       Toomas Palu
                              Task Team Leader:      Lingzhi Xu
           The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
P126210                                                        Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Lingzhi Xu                                                     China
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
14-Jun-2012
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GHN02

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
155,510,000.00                                                 155,510,000.00
Financing Gap
    0.00

Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                  55,510,000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                        100,000,000.00
Total                                                                                               155,510,000.00

2. PROJECT INFORMATION
           The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The Project Development Objective is to improve the access of populations in selected non-metropolitan areas to
    County/District level hospital-based services, raising the efficiency of service production and improving the quality of
    care in targeted hospitals.



.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content, document is editable from here.


1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The Counties/Districts proposed to receive support from the Project for construction of additional
outpatient/inpatient capacity include Changkou, Dianjiang, Tongnan, Fuling, Qianjiang, Wanzhou, Wushan,
and Youyang.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM

Name                                                             Unit
Yongli Wang                                                      GENDR
Shuang Zhou                                                      GSU02
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


    Safeguard Policies                         Triggered                Explanation

                                                                        As indicated in the project description, one of the
                                                                        major proposed project components will improve
    Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                         county-level health facilities in selected
                                                                        counties/districts through civil works/ construction
                                                                        to increase access (including bed capacity),
       The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)



                                                                thereby providing additional outpatient and bed
                                                                space. Therefore, this policy is triggered.
                                                                The environment specialist in the task team
                                                                conducted a preliminary environmental screening
                                                                during the identification. It was noted that three
                                                                of eight county-level health facilities proposed for
                                                                World Bank financing will be constructed within
                                                                existing hospital locations, and the remainder will
                                                                be built on new sites, and according to the
                                                                information provided, are not special ecological
                                                                and culturally sensitive sites (natural habitat,
                                                                protected area or physical cultural resources).
                                                                Potential environmental issues that will be
                                                                addressed in the environmental impact
                                                                assessment (EIA) include: (a) construction related
                                                                nuisances (e.g., dust, noise, management of
                                                                excavated soil and construction materials, etc.)
                                                                associated with the component one during the
                                                                construction phase; and (b) wastewater
                                                                management and medical waste management
                                                                during operation. Such impacts are site-specific,
                                                                unlikely to be significant or irreversible, and
                                                                mitigation measures can be readily designed with
                                                                known engineering and good management
                                                                practices. Therefore, the project is proposed as a
                                                                Category B project as per OP4.01.
                                                                The proposed Project activities are mainly in the
                                                                urban setting and areas disturbed by intensive
                                                                human activities. According to the preliminary
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            No
                                                                environmental screening, there are no ecological
                                                                sensitive areas and natural reserved. This policy is
                                                                not triggered.

                                                                The proposed Project does not involve forests
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     No
                                                                resources. This policy is not triggered.


                                                                The proposed Project will not lead to purchase or
Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No
                                                                use of any pesticides. This policy is not triggered.

                                                                Based on the survey conducted in project
                                                                preparation and social survey, the identification of
                                                                household graves has triggered this policy, and
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes                  compensation and mitigation measures are
                                                                covered under the resettlement action plan.
                                                                Chance-find procedures have been developed and
                                                                incorporated in the EA and EMP.
       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)



                                                                 The policy is not triggered based on the screening
                                                                 undertaken by the Task Team, no Indigenous
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)           No
                                                                 Peoples as defined in OP4.10 are present in, or
                                                                 have collective attachment to, the project areas.
                                                                 The policy is triggered because there will be
                                                                 limited land acquisition in two of the proposed
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     Yes
                                                                 project sites under component 2, Improvement of
                                                                 County/District Level Health Facilities.
                                                                 The proposed Project will not involve impacts to
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No                   any dams in the project area. This policy is not
                                                                 triggered.

Projects on International Waterways (OP)                         The proposed Project will not involve trans-
                                            No
(BP 7.50)                                                        boundary rivers. The policy is not triggered.


                                                                 The proposed Project is not located in any
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)   No
                                                                 disputed areas. The policy is not triggered.

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   Environmental safeguards:
   The proposed restructuring will mainly involve the extension of the closing date by 3 years and increasing the
   disbursement rate to 100% for civil works and goods. The restructuring will not add new activities, and not change
   the size, magnitude, location and nature of the project, thus it will not trigger new safeguard policies and change
   the category of the project. The EMP developed during the preparation stage can effectively address the
   environmental impacts which are site-specific and moderate. Therefore neither need new instruments to be
   developed, nor need the current EMP to be revised or updated. The original EMP still can be applied. Relevant
   mitigation measures should be included in the bidding documents and contracts. In addition, implementation
   arrangement, monitoring and training needs were identified and included in the EMP and be reported in the project
   progress report.
   Up to the date of restructuring, the progress of the physical works and procurement of equipment is far behind the
   schedule, and most of the works are still in the biding or design stage. However the medical wastewater treatment
   stations within the hospitals have been designed which have been reviewed and found satisfactory by the water
   engineer of the Bank, and the design for temporary storage chamber for medical solid waste, as well as the vertical
   and horizontal transport routes for medical solid wastes have been designed in compliance with the domestic
   requirements. The mitigation measures have been included in the biding documents and contracts. Thus the
   environmental performance of the project is moderately satisfactory.

   Social safeguards:
   The restructuring changes will not increase new land acquisition and resettlement, and will not affect the
      The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
      Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)



  implementation of projects Resettlement Action Plan. The restructuring will not trigger any new social safeguard
  policy. The ongoing project does not have any significant outstanding social safeguard implementation issues.



2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  The proposed project will help improve the health service facilities, especially at district/county level in Chongqing
  Municipality, thus to improve health condition and welfare of local population which will contribute to the
  integrated urban and rural development of Chongqing. The project is in line with the overall master plan of health
  sector development in Chongqing.


3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  Environmental: No alternative considered for this restructuring.

  Social: Based on the screening at PCN stage, alternatives related to land use were explored through optimizing
  locations and land use so as to minimize social risks and adverse impacts. Comparisons were analyzed in the
  Feasibility Studies (FS) with comprehensive consideration of technical, economic, as well as environmental and
  social factors.
  Six out of eight subproject sites were selected with existing land for project civil works, and therefore those six
  subprojects do not need to acquire extra land.


4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Environmental:
  As the proposed restructuring will not add new activities, or change the location, size, magnitude and nature of the
  project, the original Environmental Management Plan will still apply. The EMP include the mitigation measures for
  construction impacts, i.e. noise, dust, wastewater, traffic blocking, etc. the monitoring plan, the institutional
  responsibilities, and the medical waste management plan for the operation stage. The contractor will manage the
  construction site properly through implementing the mitigation measures. The Chongqing PMO will engage the
  external environmental monitoring unit to carry out the monitoring plan and the results will be incorporated into
  the project progress report, and the hospitals, under the guidance and supervision of Chongqing Health Bureau, will
  carry out the medical waste management plan.

  Social: The Chongqing Project Management Office (PMO) has hired a professional institute to prepare the
  resettlement action plans (RAPs) to handle land taking and house demolition which will take place in Wanzhou and
  Wushan. The task team will provide training and consultancy services throughout the project cycle. The RAPs were
  reviewed by the World Bank team and deemed acceptable, and in line with the World Bank social safeguards policy.
  The RAPs set detailed principles, standards and procedures as well as other crucial requirements for handling
  involuntary resettlement. Implementation of the RAP will be monitored periodically, internally and externally,
  during the implementation stage of the Project. To the team’s knowledge, the PMO has rich experiences in
  implementing World Bank-supported projects and has successfully handled land acquisition under other World
  Bank projects without receiving any complaints in the past. The PMO will assign a dedicated social staff to
  coordinate social safeguards work, together with the local government departments responsible for local land
  requisition and house demolition.
                       The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                       Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)



                  5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
                   with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                   Environmental: EMP implementation will be managed by Chongqing PMO. The contractors and supervision
                   engineers will be required to assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective implementation
                   of the EMP. During the EA preparation, public consultations were conducted two times in accordance with the
                   World Bank?s OP4.01. Main public concerns have been addressed in the EA, and necessary mitigation measures
                   were developed in EMP and the project design. The EA documents have been locally disclosed prior to disclosure at
                   Bank?s Infoshop on February 8, 2012. The updated documents have been locally disclosed on February 25th and
                   disclosed at Bank’s InfoShop on March 8th.

                   Social: During the RAP preparation and FS, resettlement information dissemination campaign was carried out
                   among rural villages and towns in the project areas. Public consultations were taken through surveys, interviews
                   and meetings with future affected people. Information and alternative options about the project, the plan of civil
                   works, and the proposed locations of hospitals were shared with the public and key stakeholders during
                   consultation. The RAPs were disclosed locally in relevant hospital and government websites on February 9, 2012
                   and they were disclosed in the InfoShop on February 10, 2012. The updated documents after safeguard review and
                   clearance has been posted locally on February 29th and disclosed at Bank's InfoShop on March 8th.


            DISCLOSURE_TABLE
            B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

        Date of receipt by the Bank                                       Date of submission to Infoshop
        13-Feb-2012                                                       08-Feb-2012
         For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


         “In country? Disclosure

            Country                                                          Date of Disclosure
            China                                                            02-Feb-2012
            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission to Infoshop
           The World Bank                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)



19-Jan-2012                                                    10-Feb-2012
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
 China                                                          09-Feb-2012
 Comments


COMPLIANCE_TABLE
  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                   Yes

 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                     Yes
 and approve the EA report?

 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                     Yes
 credit/loan?



 PCR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                 Yes

 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                     Yes
 impacts on cultural property?



 IR_TABLE
 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              framework/process
                                                                                     Yes
 framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                     Yes
 Manager review the plan?



 PDI_TABLE
 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's
                                                                                     Yes
 Infoshop?
          The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Chongqing Urban Rural Integration Project II-Health (P126210)



Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups                   Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                                 Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                                 Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                                 Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the
borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal                             Yes
documents?




III. APPROVALS


    Task Team Leader(s)                    Lingzhi Xu


    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                      Peter Leonard                          28-Mar-2017

    Practice Manager/Manager                Toomas Palu                            28-Mar-2017

.


    Note to Task Teams: End of system generated content
