                                  The World Bank
                                  Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jun-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23833




                         Jun 18, 2018                                                                                            Page 1 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category        Country
                                                             Myanmar RBF Off-grid         B - Partial Assessment
                           P166413                                                                                      Myanmar
                                                             Solar                        (B)
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit                 Financing Instrument
                           Sunil Kumar Khosla, Raluca
                                                                                                                        Investment Project
                           Georgiana Golumbeanu,                                          GEE02
                                                                                                                        Financing
                           William Onahan Gallery
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                       3.45
                           Total Financing                                                                                                          3.45
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                            0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                          3.45
                                  Energy Sector Management Assistance Program                                                                      0.45
                                  Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                                           3.00


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the RBF for Off-grid Solar is to help increase access to electricity in Myanmar.

                           C. Project Description
                           The activity consists has two components: a) results-based subsidies to eligible companies selling Lighting
                           Global certified products; b) implementation support.

                           Component 1: Results-based subsidies (US$ 3.25 million) provided to eligible companies/NGOs for solar
                           products ranging from 0.3 watt peak (Wp) solar lamps up to 50 Wp SHS. These products cater for basic needs
                           such as lighting and phone charging (Sustainable Energy for All - SE4All tier 1 access) as well as the operation
                           of direct current (DC) appliances such as televisions and fans (SE4All tier 2 access). The activity will contribute
                           to more sustainable, private sector driven off-grid solar market development. It will address high initial

                         Jun 18, 2018                                                                                                          Page 2 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar




                           market development costs faced by the private sector in Myanmar, contributing to supply chain
                           development and provision of quality sales and services. As RBF/OBA solar energy programs have
                           demonstrated, potential customers would benefit of increasing market competition, which is expected to
                           result in offer of quality products at competitive price.

                           RBF grant will promote Lighting Global certified products that are delivered with 1-3 year warranty
                           requirement depending on product and after sales service. The Lighting Global testing procedure for small
                           solar systems up to 10 Wp has become an international standard IEC-TS 62257-9-5, while the testing
                           procedure for SHS kits up to 350 Wp is planned to be formalized as IEC standard in 2018. Companies can
                           either select one of currently 134 certified products of 65 suppliers or submit their untested products for
                           certification.

                           Companies entering the rural solar market in Myanmar with quality products and services are facing the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           challenge of high market risks and market entry costs. Risks include uncertainty of market uptake caused by
                           low willingness to pay of the households due to the competition of cheap low quality products and
                           uncertainties of planning rural electrification projects. Market entry costs include marketing, employment
                           and training of staff, rent for office and warehouse space, import and transport logistics, and facilitation of
                           consumer financing. Companies' income consist of sales revenues which are usually low and difficult to
                           predict in the pilot phase. High initial investment is required to bridge the time until increased sales
                           eventually pay off. Depending on their confidence in the market potential, equity investors will accept higher
                           risks to quickly scale-up a company’s market entry or require a slower approach, expecting first results
                           before decisions on further expansions are taken. The RBF grant incentive aims to accelerate market uptake
                           by partially compensating companies for risk taking and high marginal retail costs incurred by entering new
                           markets.

                           A subsidy of maximum US$ 50 per system sold will be reimbursed to solar companies/NGOs based on
                           certification of sales by an independent verification agent hired by DRD, on sample basis. The subsidy
                           calculation and adjustment mechanism will be presented in the Operating Manual. Commercial practices will
                           be applied for the proposed RBF grant.

                           Component 2: Implementation support to DRD (US$ 200,000). Key activities include overall management
                           and promotion of the RBF Off-grid Solar, launch of the RBF call for proposals, communication with
                           companies, processing of RBF subsidy contracts, annual review of the RBF incentive, monitoring of the grant
                           implementation, hiring and coordination of the independent verification agents (IVA), review of the output
                           verification reports and processing of subsidy disbursement transactions.

                           ESMAP approved US$450,000 for the RBF. The ESMAP recipient executed grant will provide results-based
                           subsidy to facilitate the market uptake for Lighting Global certified products. Additional grant funding in the
                           amount of US$ 3 million has been approved for eligibility (concept stage) by GPOBA as follows: a) US$ 2,8
                           million for RBF subsidy; and b) US$ 200,000 for implementation support.




                         Jun 18, 2018                                                                                               Page 3 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          Based on the nature of the technology, the Lighting Global certified products supported under the proposed
                          grant have very small footprint and are widely dispersed. The proposed RBF proposed grant will initially
                          support the ongoing IFC-led Lighting Myanmar activities in central Myanmar as envisaged at NEP project
                          design. In the longer term, the scope of the project remains national, demand driven, where households are
                          willing to buy Lighting Global certified solar products. The revised NEP's ESMP will apply. The ESMF will
                          include this activity in the typology of sub-projects covered, with corresponding brief ECOPs added (e.g.
                          encouraging appropriate disposal). An Action Plan to address NEP safeguards policies issues has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                          articulated as a part of the project MTR. The key elements include (i) revision of ESMF by the client with
                          support provided by GIZ, (ii) upstream E&S support by GIZ, (iii) recruitment of the minimum number of local
                          safeguards consultants with a view to add additional consultants as capacity deficit becomes clearer; (iv)
                          continued training of implementing agencies staff.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          DRD is responsible for monitoring the safeguards’ compliance for the proposed grant. Overall, DRD in-house
                          safeguards capacity has been weak. In March 2018, a local environmental and social safeguards consultant
                          was engaged by PMO. Moreover, GiZ has recently engaged an international consultant to support the client
                          with the ESMF's revision. Since safeguards staffing and resources have been below those agreed at appraisal,
                          the World Bank has provided training and capacity building activities included: in-mission training session to
                          assigned staff on screening using the ESMF screening form (May 2017), two day training on environmental
                          and social safeguards to NEP staff (June 2017), two day training on grievance redress and village
                          electrification guidelines to NEP Union level staff (September 2017), two day training on grievance redress
                          and village electrification guidelines to NEP township engineers (November 2017), two day training on
                          environmental and social safeguards to NEP staff (April 2018).



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Martin Fodor, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler, Social Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                Triggered?                Explanation (Optional)



                         Jun 18, 2018                                                                                                   Page 4 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar



                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01   Yes   The RBF grant supports the supply of small
                                                                      solar products of up to 50Wp capacity, with
                                                                      minimal environmental impact that would
                                                                      correspond to EA category C. Considering
                                                                      this activity as part of NEP broader suite of
                                                                      interventions and the country-specific
                                                                      social risks associated with social inclusion,
                                                                      the proposed project is treated as EA
                                                                      category B as overall NEP project.

                                                                      The NEP's revised Environmental and Social
                                                                      Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                                                                      applied. The revised ESMF is currently
                                                                      developed by the client with support
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      provided by GiZ and is expected to be
                                                                      finalized by the beginning of June, 2018.
                                                                      The revised ESMF will be approved by the
                                                                      World Bank (following the review and
                                                                      clearance by Regional Safeguards Advisor)
                                                                      prior to the appraisal of the proposed
                                                                      grant. The revised ESMF will undergo public
                                                                      disclosure and consultation process prior to
                                                                      appraisal.

                                                                      As a part of the revised ESMF, the proposed
                                                                      RBF grant for Off-grid Solar will be included
                                                                      in the typology of sub-projects with its own
                                                                      brief ECOPs added. Battery based products,
                                                                      disposal / recycling will be considered as a
                                                                      part of NEP’s solar program sustainability
                                                                      plan agreed during the Mid-term Review
                                                                      (April 24-May 25, 2018).

                                                                      NEP's ESMF revision is aimed to (i) tailor
                                                                      the document more specifically to the
                                                                      types of sub-projects funded, (ii) make its
                                                                      prescriptions more proportionate to the
                                                                      risk of different sub-project types, (iii)
                                                                      revise its screening guidance to make it
                                                                      more user friendly, (iv) exclude from early
                                                                      sub-projects those with land acquisition
                                                                      and develop a protocol for voluntary land
                                                                      donation; and (v) inform the revisions by
                                                                      piloting simplified screening for grid and
                                                                      mini-grids.


                         Jun 18, 2018                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar




                                                                         Significant impacts on natural habitats are
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No
                                                                         not expected.
                                                                         The grant will not affect any forestry
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No    activities nor require triggering of OP4.36.

                                                                         The pest management policy is not
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                  No    triggered under the proposed RBF off-grid
                                                                         solar grant.
                                                                         Given the scope of the proposed grant,
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No
                                                                         OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes   The project triggers OP 4.10 because ethnic
                                                                         minorities that fit the criteria of indigenous
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                         people are present in project areas. As part
                                                                         of the ESMF, the Indigenous Peoples
                                                                         Planning Framework will also be revised to
                                                                         ensure that the project obtains and
                                                                         documents broad community support in
                                                                         areas with ethnic minorities, following free,
                                                                         prior and informed consultation. To date,
                                                                         systematic application and documentation
                                                                         of the policy has been weak, but the
                                                                         revised ESMF and increased safeguards
                                                                         staffing should improve application. While
                                                                         some facilitators are used in consultations
                                                                         to communicate in ethnic languages,
                                                                         general communication and grievance
                                                                         materials under NEP still need to be
                                                                         translated in to ethnic languages.

                                                                         The RBF will not specifically target areas
                                                                         with ethnic minorities.
                                                                         Originally, NEP was designed to serve more
                                                                         peripheral and ethnic areas in Myanmar
                                                                         with high-subsidy solar systems, while the
                                                                         IFC provided lower-subsidy solar systems in
                                                                         central Myanmar to jump-start the private
                                                                         market in these more accessible areas.
                                                                         During NEP implementation so far
                                                                         however, DRD has also included the central
                                                                         Myanmar areas in ICB SHS, with higher-
                                                                         subsidy support than planned. However,
                                                                         the next round of high subsidy support
                                                                         under ICB SHS will be concentrated in
                                                                         ethnic areas. As higher-subsidy support

                         Jun 18, 2018                                                                           Page 6 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar



                                                                                                  shifts to peripheral ethnic areas, the lower-
                                                                                                  subsidy RBF support will target central
                                                                                                  Myanmar to stimulate the private sector in
                                                                                                  these areas.
                                                                                                  The grant does not trigger OP 4.12 on
                                                                                                  Involuntary Resettlement since it supports
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No
                                                                                                  small solar systems of up to 50 Wp that will
                                                                                                  not have physical footprint.
                                                                                                  The project intervention is not expected to
                                                                                                  require the construction of dams or
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No                  impoundment structures, nor is it expected
                                                                                                  that it could cause impacts to existing
                                                                                                  structures as governed by this policy.
                                                                                                  The project intervention is in nature and in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  scale not expected to cause any drainage or
                                                                                                  discharges to surface waters, nor entail any
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No
                                                                                                  significant usage of surface water for
                                                                                                  cooling or other purposes, that would
                                                                                                  affect international waterways.
                                                                                                  The project intervention is not in disputed
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No                  areas and will be wholly within the borders
                                                                                                  of Myanmar.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           31-May-2018
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           The revised ESMF is expected to be finalized by June 2018.


                           APPROVALS

                            Team Leader(s):                           Sunil Kumar Khosla

                           Approved By

                            Safeguards Advisor:                       Surhid P. Gautam                    09-May-2018

                            Practice Manager/Manager:                 Julia M. Fraser                     09-May-2018



                         Jun 18, 2018                                                                                                   Page 7 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Myanmar RBF Off-grid Solar




                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jun 18, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 8
