INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA16092
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                       Project ID:  P154523
Project Name: Technical Education Quality Improvement Project III (P154523)
Task Team       Tara Beteille,Tobias Linden
Leader(s):
Estimated        18-Jan-2016                Estimated    31-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDO6                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Tertiary education (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for the knowledge economy (70%), Export development and
competitiveness (10%), Technology diffusion (10%), Decentralizatio n (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     600.00             Total Bank Financing:   300.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                    300.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       300.00
Total                                                                       600.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed Project Development Objective is "to improve quality and equity in selected
engineering education institutions and increase the effectiveness of the engineering education
system."
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 10


﻿Component 1: Improving quality and equity in LIS and SCS (Total: USD 201 million; IBRD: USD
100.5 million)
1.     This component will focus on improving quality and equity in engineering education in all
government and government-aided colleges and technical universities, including ATUs, in seven
LIS, six SCS in the North-East of India, and Andaman and Nicobar Islands (a union territory (UT)).
o
Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Development Grants to Selected Institutes
*         2.     All government and government-aided colleges, new National Institutes of Technology
(NIT) and non-affiliating technical universities in Component 1, totaling about 80 institutes, will
receive funds once they have the enabling mechanisms required for project success in place (see
Annex 2). Institutes with these mechanisms in place will receive Institutional Development Grants
(IDG) as determined by their plans for improvement articulated in Institutional Development Plans
(IDP). The ultimate goal of these plans should be either improving the learning outcomes and
employability of undergraduates and/or the research pursued under post-graduate programs. Each
institute will receive specialized support from NPIU, SPFU and mentors in framing their IDPs, which
will resemble NBA's self-assessment reports, asking institutes to specify key needs, activities,
timelines and measures of success. All IDPs will be based upon iterative consultations with a range
of stakeholders, including faculty, administrators, students, parents and industry. Autonomous
colleges under this sub-component will receive INR 12 cr (approximately US$1.9m), and non-
autonomous colleges will receive INR 8 cr (approximately US$1.2m) (which will be increased to
INR 12 cr if they attain autonomy).
3.     In addition, activities under this sub-component will focus on addressing fundamental
system-level challenges. First, the sub-component will support states in filling sanctioned posts
through hiring of faculty as per AICTE norms on qualifications and pay, by partially funding the cost
of such faculty during the project period. Second, the project will fund procurement expenses,
including refurbishment, minor civil works and equipment, up to a maximum of 60 percent of an
institute's basic fund allocation. Additionally, institutes are expected to undertake the activities
O
Q)       focused around these themes: (1) improve student learning; (2) student employability; and (3)
increasing faculty productivity and motivation (see Annex 2). Which particular activities an institute
undertakes will be set out in its IDP. This sub-component will also support a mentoring system based
upon a head mentor for the state and institute-level mentors as well as linkages with a mentor
institute.
4.     Institutes which do not immediately have the enabling mechanisms in place will benefit from
"seed persons" (expert mentor), non-financial assistance and seed money from MHRD to motivate
and facilitate these institutes to obtain the mechanisms. Only institutes that have built the seven
enabling mechanisms listed above by October 2018 will receive Institutional Development Grants. In
addition, seed money will be used for specific activities as specified in the PIP with the objective of
motivating faculty and students to work toward improvement of their institute, and to provide some
immediate support to students' learning. These will include: training of staff in financial management
and procurement processes; campus wi-fi; e-library; campus environment plan and smart classrooms.
These funds will be managed by MHRD/NPIU.
Sub-component 1.2: Widening Impact through ATUs in LIS and SCS
5.     Sub-component 1.2 will provide financial support to 5-7 ATUs in LIS and SCS, based upon
certain enabling mechanisms relevant to ATUs being in place (see Annex 2). Each ATU will receive
Page 2 of 10


﻿INR 10 cr. This sub-component will pilot reforms with ATUs in the following areas to address the
above challenges: academic reforms; learning assessment and examination reforms; student
placement; and improving data management and administration. Project ATUs are expected to assist
all affiliated colleges through opportunities for accessing modem teaching and research facilities
O
(access to IT-facilities, e-leaming courses and laboratories). For instance, ATUs could administer
merit-based research grants for faculty and students that encourages interdisciplinary and inter-
collegial/departmental collaborations. The goal of these pilot interventions will be to demonstrate
mechanisms through which ATUs can improve the performance of all the colleges affiliated to them
S-government, government-aided and private unaided - and thereby catalyze profound changes in
the engineering education system. Importantly, project ATUs will be expected to pilot reforms in
assessment of student learning outcomes as described in Component 2.
6.     Institutes in 1.1 and ATUs in 1.2 will sign MOUs which will set out annual (or semi-annual)
performance benchmarks to be met, in order for funding to be released. Commitment from the state
finance department, technical education department and ATU will be sought through a state-level
steering committee (SSC) with representatives from these bodies and the lead mentor. AICTE will
provide mentorship support to all colleges in SCS that are in the North East, given its experience
implementing the North East Quality Improvement Program (NEQIP).
Component 2: System-level initiatives to strengthen sector governance and performance (Total: USD
37 million; IBRD: USD 18.5 million)
7.      This component will provide technical assistance to MHRD and key apex bodies in
engineering education, including AICTE and NBA, to strengthen the overall system of engineering
education. Technical assistance to MHRD will include designing an assessment system to track
student learning at different points of the undergraduate program. The assessment system will track
key academic skills in engineering, such as proficiency in mathematics, physics and computer
science, as well as higher order thinking skills. In addition to this, students' non cognitive and
behavioral skills will also be tracked. Finally, surveys of students, faculty, non-teaching staff and
administrators will deepen insight into how institutes address specific problems related to student
learning. Assessments will be designed to provide feedback to institutes on how and where to
improve, without putting undue pressure on students.
o        8.     This Component will also provide technical assistance to AICTE to: undertake tasks to
mentor colleges, especially in the North East; design MOOCs for faculty and students; create
benchmarks for institutes; promote industry collaboration in research and placement; and streamline
data management across all institutes. AICTE's e-govemance cell will lead an effort to harmonize
data management by AICTE, the All India Survey of Higher Education (AISHE), NBA and TEQIP.
Technical assistance will also be available to NBA to help strengthen its analytical and institutional
capacity to use planning, information and data to manage the organization in a more efficient way.
Finally, this component will seek to build the capacity of technical education policy planners,
administrators and implementers at the central, state, and institutional levels. Technical assistance
will be available to the respective Departments of Technical Education and State Project Facilitation
Units (SPFU) to build their capacity to support institutional development and technical education
reform in institutes and states.
Component 3: Sustaining excellence in engineering education and widening impact through
competitively-selected institutes in non-LIS/SCS (USD 362 million; IBRD: USD 181 million)
Page 3 of 10


﻿Sub-component 3.1: Incubating, Sustaining and Spreading Excellence through Competitively-
selected Institutes
9.     This sub-component will provide IDGs to support around 160 (out of 220) competitively-
selected state government and government-aided engineering institutes in non-LIS/SCS. IDGs will
O
U         enable institutes to meet the objectives set out in their IDP, with the ultimate goal of either improving
the learning outcomes and employability of undergraduates and/or the research pursued under post-
graduate programs. Sub-component 3.1 IDPs will be expected to contain a detailed outline of how
the institute plans to (a) incubate innovations; (b) strengthen and sustain well-performing activities
after the project; and (c) mentor other colleges, especially in the LIS and SCS. Within this broad
framework, institutes will have the flexibility to decide the inputs and activities that meet their
expected outcomes, subject to a short list of prescribed items and limits on civil works construction.
Activities will resemble those in sub-component 1.1.
10.    Autonomous colleges under this sub-component will receive INR 12cr, and non-autonomous
colleges will receive INR 10.5cr (to be increased to INR 12cr if they attain autonomy). After an
initial release (INR 2cr) to start project activities, financial releases to institutes will depend on
performance against pre-agreed indicators. Depending on the availability of overall funding under
the project, it will also be possible for some institutes to receive more than INR 12cr should their
performance be sufficiently high.
11.    All decisions related to implementation of the activities will rest with an institute's BoGs,
subject to any requirements set out in the Procurement and Financial Management Manual or the
Project Implementation Plan (PIP). Any government rules or order related to the enhanced academic,
administrative and financial autonomy of an institute will apply to all the activities of a given
institute, not just to those activities funded under the Project.
Sub-component 3.2: Widening Impact through ATUs in non-LIS
12.    Two or three eligible ATUs will be competitively chosen from non-LIS states, based upon
approved IDPs. Each ATU will receive INR 5cr. The academic activities supported by the IDPs will
include closely mentoring ATUs in LIS/SCS. Other activities will resemble those undertaken in sub-
component 1.2. Given the advanced level of ATUs in these states, their benchmarks and targets will
be correspondingly tighter than in sub-component 1.2.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
*        analysis (if known)
Countrywide (India). Specific locations will be identified after competitive selection of institutions.
Around 250 institutions are expected to participate from across the country.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (GENDR)
Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project interventions by and large are not likely to
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                cause significant or serious damage to natural and
physical environment. However, specific interventions
envisaged under the project such as refurbishment/repair
of existing buildings/laboratories may have some
Page 4 of 10


﻿potential adverse environmental impacts in the local
context. Even though no new building are planned under
the project, minor refurbishment/ repair would require
appropriate consideration and integration of environment,
health and safety measures to ensure that adverse
environmental impacts are minimized and properly
managed.
OP 4.01 has been triggered to ensure that project/program
interventions are planned and designed to be
environmentally sound by integrating appropriate
principles and approaches into the over-all decision
making process.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes         By and large, implementation of the project/program is
Resources OP/BP 4.11                not likely to affect religious structures of local
significance or other heritage/protected structures.
However, since some civil works are involved, 'chance
finds' at work sites is a likely impact that cannot be ruled
out and will have to be managed by incorporating
appropriate provisions in the bidding/contract documents.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         The policy is triggered given the project is country-wide
BP 4.10                             and the beneficiaries would also include students
belonging to Scheduled Castes (SCs) and Scheduled
Tribes (STs) and other disadvantaged groups. A Social
Assessment was carried out and an Equity Action Plan
(EAP) (or Social Management Framework (SMF)) has
been prepared.
Involuntary Resettlement No         This policy has not been triggered given that project shall
OP/BP 4.12                          not finance civil works involving compulsory land
acquisition, involuntary resettlement, or causing
restriction of access to natural resources. The project
activities will focus on improving the quality and access
of technical education and will only support minor repairs
and refurbishments of existing infrastructure.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
Page 5 of 10


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
)           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project involves limited construction activities such as refurbishing/upgrading technical
O
education facilities such as classrooms, laboratories, library, etc. These activities are not expected
to cause any significant environmental or social impacts. Likely environmental and social impacts,
which will be limited in nature, may include temporary construction related impacts.
Environmental impacts which require attention pertain to: location; design; construction and
worksite safety management; and operation/maintenance aspects of physical assets. Also, any
refurbishment/repair/retrofitting works may require specific student and worker safety measures
during construction if it involves removal of asbestos (which can be identified only when the civil
works assessment is carried out during implementation). In view of the project's potential impacts
on the environment, the Bank's safeguards policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) have been triggered, and the project is designated
as Category B. On the whole, with proper management, the project interventions are not likely to
cause large scale, significant or irreversible damage to the natural, physical or social environment.
The project will finance limited construction activities such as refurbishing/upgrading higher
education facilities such as classrooms, library buildings, etc. within the existing premises. These
activities are not expected to cause any significant environmental or social impacts. Likely
environmental and social impacts, which will be limited in nature, may include temporary
construction related impacts. No civil work involving compulsory land acquisition or involuntary
resettlement or restriction of access to natural resources shall be financed. Therefore, the World
Bank's Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) has not been triggered. The
project institutions, especially those in low-income states, are located in states and communities
inhabited by tribal communities. Therefore, the Association's safeguards policy on Indigenous
O
U           Peoples (OP/BP 4.10) has been triggered.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
While the project interventions, on the whole, will have a positive impact on the technical
education sector, specific interventions envisaged under the project such as refurbishment/
retrofitting/major repair works of existing classrooms/laboratories/libraries may have some
potential but limited adverse environmental impacts in the local context. Therefore, these activities
are central to the approach and design from an environmental management and safeguards
perspective for the project.
Some specific long-term environmental impacts are associated with the operation and management
of the institutes/buildings itself. Appropriate water and sanitation facilities, disposal of wastes
including management of e-wastes, energy use/efficiency, disaster preparedness and dealing with
issues where institutes are exposed to noise or other sources of pollution require regular attention.
However, such adverse impacts are not likely to be large-scale or irreversible in nature. These can
be avoided/minimized to a great extent and the positive outcomes from the project can be
enhanced substantially by putting appropriate institutional mechanisms, procedures and capacity in
place, to deal with such issues.
Page 6 of 10


﻿The anticipated future activities such as minor civil works for improving and expanding existing
facilities within the technical education campuses are likely to generate temporary employment
opportunities for the local people. Expanded influx of students and teachers may also contribute to
expansion of the local market, especially in the rural locations.
O
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
O
The project primarily emphasizes improving the quality of technical education and thereby
promotes several softer interventions against creation of large scale/major infrastructure. Any
proposed construction will be restricted to refurbishment/repair/retrofitting works within the
existing educational campuses. These activities may have some potential but limited adverse
environmental impacts in the local context. Therefore, these activities are central to the approach
and design from an environmental management and safeguards perspective for the project. The
proposed activities will not cause any involuntary resettlement or restriction of access to the
natural resources.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A limited Environmental Assessment (EA) study was undertaken by the National Project
implementation Unit for the proposed project with guidance from the Bank team. The study
included a specific comprehensive questionnaire targeted at TEQIP II institutions to learn from
their experiences as well drawing on an accumulation of practices from TEQIP implementation, as
well as projects in India financed by the Bank with similar approaches. As part of the EA, the
current processes, systems and capacity of the implementation agencies from an environmental
management perspective were also reviewed.
To effectively plan, design and integrate environmental dimensions into the overall project
preparation and implementation, an Environment Management Framework (EMF) has been
prepared, and incorporated into the Project Implementation Plan. The framework provides
guidelines for design (including that for the physically challenged), construction and maintenance
of environmentally-friendly facilities in line with relevant policy, legal and regulatory
requirements of GOI, state governments and the environment safeguard policies of the Bank. The
mitigation and management measures required to deal with temporary construction related impacts
such as health and safety, labor, accident risks, dust and noise, sanitation and waste management
have also been provided in the EMF. Beyond the regular environment, health and safety
dimensions, the project also offers an opportunity to improve the overall environmental footprint
of colleges by creating 'greener facilities' by adopting practices of water efficiency, energy
conservation, wastewater recycling and reuse. Considerations of environment, health and safety
dimensions would help in ensuring the soundness and sustainability of the project and help in
achieving the larger quality related objectives.
The Government of India has prepared an Equity Action Plan (EAP) (Indigenous People's Policy
Framework (IPPF) which addresses issues of gender equality and social inclusion with special
attention to the needs of the Scheduled Tribe and the Scheduled Caste students and faculty
members fulfilling the requirements of OP 4.10 with free, prior, informed consultation held with
the primary stakeholders. The EAP/IPPF is a revised version of the EAP prepared for the TEQIP-
II which has been finalized using mostly qualitative research methodologies, including intensive
stakeholder interviews and focus groups discussions with male and female students and faculties
from various social backgrounds, including ST and SC groups, and poor and disadvantaged
communities. The EAP/IPPF draws extensively on the experience of TEQIP I and II. The EAP/
Page 7 of 10


﻿IPPF identifies key issues and problems affecting academic performance and overall development
of students and recommends a set of actions to address the same. Key recommended actions in the
EAP/IPPF include: (i) improving the learning efficiency, English language skills, and non-
cognitive skills of the students, especially those from socially and economically vulnerable groups
O
Q)          including ST and SC, (ii) supporting faculty to improve their knowledge levels, pedagogical skills,
and sensitivity to gender equality and social inclusion issues in educational institutions, (iii)
encouraging and institutions of excellence to organize annual technology innovation forums to
enable students from various colleges share experiences and innovations; (iv) promoting
mentorship amongst students and teachers (to aid needy students and younger faculty members);
and (v) supporting research scholars as a part of IDPs. The measures proposed in EAP/IPPF are
linked with DLIs and the key performance indicators. The overall project also proposes to monitor
carefully and report on the impact of project interventions on vulnerable groups, on a regular and
timely basis so that corrective actions can be taken. The focus of Component 1 is on low-income
states will have a positive impact on equity. The overall project also proposes to monitor carefully
and report on the impact of project interventions on vulnerable groups, on a regular and timely
basis so that corrective actions can be taken. The focus of Component 1 is on low-income states
will have a positive impact on equity
Implementation Arrangements: Each participating college will prepare and include the EAP/IPPF
in the Institution Development Plan submitted for funding. There shall be institution level student-
faculty committees to approve and monitor the implementation of the EAPs. The Dean, Students'
Welfare will be generally the nodal officer responsible for implementing the EAP. The
institutional arrangements will integrate professional capacity and expertise to plan and implement
actions in fulfilment of the EAP/IPPF. The NPIU, SPFUs and other project institutions will have a
nodal officer responsible for monitoring and supporting the EAP implementation
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders: The primary stakeholders include the intended target population or beneficiaries of
the project being supported through the proposed operation - the selected Engineering Colleges
and Affiliating Technical Universities in India, which includes students, faculty, non-teaching
staff, members of the Governing Body & local employers, tribal students and communities, civil
O
society and those likely to be affected by any temporary impacts. The secondary stakeholders
include officials from the Ministry of Human Resource Development and related agencies,
National Board of Accreditation, All India Council for Technical Education.
Consultations: Stakeholder participation is central to design and implementation of the project and
provides for information sharing, consultation and collaboration measures. Guidelines for
consultation have been laid out in the EMF and the EAP/IPPF to ensure proper consultation and
participation of stakeholders at the various stages, including preparation and implementation at the
institute level. The key elements of strategy include: (i) consultations with primary stakeholders
people during project planning and implementation, (ii) information disclosure and dissemination,
(iii) grievance redress mechanisms, and (iv) feedback on project implementation (including EMF
and EAP/IPPF) through third party monitoring.
In accordance with applicable Bank policies, consultations have been carried out in selected
TEQIP II institutions, as part of the limited environment and social assessment process. The public
consultation process has indicated that the stakeholders strongly support the proposed project. The
feedback/inputs from these field based discussions have been primarily used for preparing the
Page 8 of 10


﻿environment management instrument (ie the Environment Management Framework) of the
project. The EAP/IPPF was prepared through free, prior and informed consultation with the
students and other primary stakeholders. The final round of stakeholder consultations were held at
the Rajasthan Technical University (RTU) at Kota on July 8, 2015, at CTAT, Udaipur on July 9,
O
2015, and at the Institute of Engineering and Technology (IET), Lucknow on November 19, 2015.
The project will continue to hold stakeholder consultations as a part of EMF and SMF
implementation.
Disclosure: The EMF and the EAP/IPPF have been have been made public through the Project
Authority's website (link: http://www.npiu.nic.in/PDF/News/Draft%20EMF%20and%20EAP.zip)
and has been disclosed at Bank's Infoshop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                            02-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         02-Dec-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                  02-Dec-2015
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                            02-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                         02-Dec-2015
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                  02-Dec-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [ ]  NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [ ]  NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [ ]  NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X] No[ ]  NA [ ]
property?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X] No[   ]  NA[     ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Tara Beteille,Tobias Linden
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Keiko Miwa (PMGR)                    Date: 10-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


