                                  The World Bank
                                  Tackling Non-Communicable Disease Challenges in Kenya ( P164301 )




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2017 | Report No: ISDSC22343




                         Jul 18, 2017                                                                                             Page 1 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Tackling Non-Communicable Disease Challenges in Kenya ( P164301 )



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Project ID                    Project Name                 Environmental Category       Country
                                                          Tackling Non-
                                                          Communicable Disease
                            P164301                                                    B - Partial Assessment       Kenya
                                                          Challenges in Kenya (
                                                          P164301 )
                            Team Leader(s)                Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit                Financing Instrument
                            Gandham N.V. Ramana,                                                                    Investment Project
                                                                                       GHN01
                            Miriam Schneidman                                                                       Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                           PROJECT FINANCING DATA


                          FINANCING


                          FINANCING SOURCES

                            Select all that apply

                           [ ] Counterpart Funding        [ ✔ ] Trust Funds                [ ] Parallel Financing



                           SUMMARY (USD)

                           Total Project cost                                                                          2,500,000
                           Total Financing                                                                             2,500,000
                            Trust Funds                                                                                2,500,000
                           Financing Gap                                                                                       0

                           DETAILS      -OldFin1




                           Trust Funds
                           Source                               Currency                           Amount                       USD Equivalent
                           Pharmaceutical Governance
                                                                USD-US Dollars                   2,500,000                           2,500,000
                           Fund(PHGF)




                         Jul 18, 2017                                                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Tackling Non-Communicable Disease Challenges in Kenya ( P164301 )



                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed RETF will support the Government of Kenya (GOK) to develop and pilot models of integrated NCD care at
                           community and primary care levels in selected counties that can inform the national scale up. More specifically, the
                           RETF will support the design, execution, and systematic monitoring of a pilot program for screening, early detection
                           and treatment of selected NCDs at community and primary care levels complemented by cost effective referral
                           linkages. The RETF will lead to the production of a case study, documenting the main features of the model of care,
                           and lessons learned to inform interventions that are scalable and sustainable.

                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed NCD pilot project focuses on prevention that is one of the main priorities in Kenya. Early screening,
                           detection and basic treatment will: (i) avert high levels of morbidity and mortality; (ii) pre-empt an escalation of health
                           care costs associated with delayed health care seeking behavior; and (iii) lay the foundation for a comprehensive
                           approach to chronic care management (i.e. patients need to be aware and know their status to seek care). Ultimately,
                           catching people early will save lives, improve the quality of life, and avoid the impoverishing effects associated with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           high out-of-pocket spending due to catastrophic illnesses.

                           The pilot project will generate a model of care that will inform the roll out of the national strategy and that may be
                           replicated by other county governments. The pilot builds on ongoing experience with a Chronic Care Model
                           supported by AMPATH [1] in several counties in Western Kenya. Insights and lessons from the proposed NCD pilot are
                           expected to inform policy development while simultaneously expanding coverage. The model (focused on
                           hypertension and diabetes) has been introduced in limited geographic areas with promising initial results, as discussed
                           below. The proposed pilot offers an opportunity to introduce the model to additional sub-counties to test its
                           robustness in different settings; to include additional NCDs (cervical and breast cancer); and to systematically estimate
                           the costs and cost-effectiveness of alternative strategies.

                           The pilot will focus on NCD services at the community and primary health care levels while strengthening the
                           referral system across different levels of care in two pilot counties. It will document what it takes to make this work
                           in terms of strategies, systems, and resources. The process of scale up would involve initial meetings with county
                           leadership led by the county health management teams to forge partnerships and sensitize them to this program. This
                           would be followed by adaption of the program to the local situations. The curricula will be used to train trainers who
                           will also be mentors during the roll out process. The training will be cascaded to primary health care workers and the
                           same model of hypertension and diabetes prevention and control will be rolled out at all project sites while cervical
                           and breast cancer screening is rolled out at selected sites. The tools, strategies, experiences and lessons from this pilot
                           will be shared widely with other county officials to assist in the scale up to other parts of the country. The NCD pilot
                           project will be separately supported by the Bank through a BETF (P163853) which aims to share and disseminate
                           experiences and lessons from implementation at the national and global level. The description of the activities to be
                           supported under the RETF is provided below.

                           Design, Piloting and Evaluating Models of Care for Screening and Treatment of Select NCDs. Two pilot projects would
                           be conducted in two counties (i.e. Busia, Trans-Nzoia) in Western Kenya with support of AMPATH. Pilot 1 would
                           include the expansion of the Chronic Care Model (CCM) and the testing of the Expanded Chronic Care Model (ECCM) in
                           select sub-counties in Trans-Nzoia. Pilot 2 would include the expansion of the Chronic Care Model in sub-counties in
                           Busia. Counties were selected based on the following criteria: (i) commitment and support of county governments;(ii)
                           high poverty rates; and/or (iii) disease burden. Busia county with a population of roughly 954,000 inhabitants has a
                           poverty rate of over 64 percent and a life expectancy of only 47 years. Based on community screenings done over the
                           past two years in select counties the prevalence of elevated blood pressure is 22 percent and diabetes is 1.5 percent.

                         Jul 18, 2017                                                                                                         Page 3 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Tackling Non-Communicable Disease Challenges in Kenya ( P164301 )



                           Trans-Nzoia county has a population of nearly 957,000, a poverty rate of over 50 percent, and is predominantly
                           agricultural. Based on community screenings the prevalence of elevated blood pressure and diabetes is 27 and 2
                           percent, respectively.

                           The main focus of the pilots would be on establishing/expanding basic NCD services at the community and primary
                           health care levels using the Chronic Care Model. This would include raising awareness, early screening, diagnosis,
                           linkage to a health facility for initial treatment of basic, cost effective interventions with referral to specialized
                           facilities. In addition, a number of the sub-counties will benefit from the Expanded Chronic Care Model that includes
                           community empowerment activities and enrollment of beneficiaries in the NHIF, as these aspects are critical to
                           sustainability. An important aspect of the pilot will be to sensitize communities in participating counties on the
                           importance of health insurance, the NHIF benefit package, payment rates and payment options and how to access
                           services. Sensitization will be conducted jointly with the NHIF during the community meetings and NCD screening
                           exercises, and will also include registration of beneficiaries. To increase retention rates, AMPATH will collaborate with
                           the NHIF to monitor registration of beneficiaries and send monthly reminders through mobile phones to remind
Public Disclosure Copy




                           registered beneficiaries of their monthly payments. The interventions to be supported are expected to generate
                           lessons on what is feasible; what impediments arise; what remedial actions are taken; how much it cost; and what is
                           the scale up strategy. The pilots would be evaluated to draw lessons for potential scale up to other counties in Kenya.
                           In addition to an impact evaluation (before and after study) a small qualitative process evaluation would be conducted
                           to document the implementation process (i.e. What worked? What did not and why?). All necessary ethical clearances
                           would be obtained prior to launching the pilots.

                           The implementation of the pilot NCD project will generate important lessons in terms of how services should be
                           organized, delivered, and financed. The project will provide an opportunity to identify health system barriers to care
                           and develop feasible approaches and apply cost effective interventions with a focus on primary care. The pilot will: (i)
                           determine knowledge, attitudes and practices of patients and providers; (ii) establish the effectiveness of alternative
                           community education and screening strategies and different linkage and referral strategies; (iii) demonstrate the
                           feasibility and scalability of the chronic care model for select NCDs; and (iv) ascertain the costs of these interventions
                           and evaluate the cost effectiveness of the screening, linkage, referral and care strategies. The experience and lessons
                           generated will be of broader interest to other county governments in Kenya struggling with similar challenges as well
                           as to other low and middle-income countries participating in the broader industry-supported initiative (Accelerated
                           Access) supporting this critical work.[2] The pilot NCD project will focus on health system barriers that impede access
                           to chronic care: (i) shortages of personnel; retention and motivation of personnel; (ii) cost of drugs, stock outs, and
                           inadequate availability of diagnostics; and (iii) weak referral system. While AMPATH’s experience with chronic care has
                           generated important early lessons in some counties, it is important to test the replicability and robustness of the
                           model in different settings. Based on discussions with key stakeholders in Kenya a series questions have been
                           identified, and will form the basis for the operational research agenda to be supported under the project. This current
                           preliminary list of questions to be explored is as follows:

                           Community Level

                                   Which approaches are most effective and cost effective in conducting screening -- facility based or community
                                    outreach either through mass screening or targeted screening at community meetings (Barazas)?
                                   Which workers are most appropriate to use (e.g. community health volunteers or remunerated community
                                    health workers) for initial screening?
                                   Should referrals to a health facility be done based on the initial screening or should there be a second


                         Jul 18, 2017                                                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Tackling Non-Communicable Disease Challenges in Kenya ( P164301 )



                                    confirmation measurement at the community level?
                                   Where should initial referrals be made to? (i.e., patient support groups,dispensaries, health centers or higher
                                    level facilities)
                                   How do these questions differ for each NCD (hypertension, diabetes, cancers)?
                                   What is the potential role of community level workers in supporting adherence?



                           Primary Health Care Level

                                   What strategies are most appropriate to address shortages, turnover and motivation of clinicians? What
                                        options work? - task sharing; task shifting or recruitment of additional personnel? What models of capacity
                                        building are most effective? What will be the commitment of county governments to absorb additional
                                        personnel at project completion?
Public Disclosure Copy




                                       Which approaches and strategies are most effective to address the high cost of drugs and frequent stock outs?
                                        Role of community revolving pharmacies; strengthening the KEMSA system of drug stocking or centralized
                                        procurement of generic medicines by counties?
                                       How can health record systems be improved to comprehensively cover NCDs for better quality reporting to
                                        MOH and other stake holders?
                                       What strategies are most effective to address impediments to treatment adherence at facility level (i.e. long
                                        waiting times; frequent visits to collect medications; low health literacy level)?
                                       What is the cost of offering care for different tracer conditions?

                           Cross Cutting

                                   What measures need to be put in place to ensure that the referral system operates efficiently across the
                                    different levels of care?
                                   How will county and national governments sustain activities supported under the pilot program?
                                   How to promote financial sustainability? Role of the risk pooling? Role of county governments?

                           [1] AMPATH consists of Moi University College of Health Sciences, Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital and a
                           consortium of North American Universities

                           [2]Accelerated Access is a multi-stakeholder initiative to improve NCD care in low and middle income countries,
                           involving more than 20 biopharmaceutical companies working in close collaboration with The World Bank Group and
                           the Union for International Cancer Control (UICC) to overcome a variety of access barriers.




                           SAFEGUARDS




                         Jul 18, 2017                                                                                                          Page 5 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Tackling Non-Communicable Disease Challenges in Kenya ( P164301 )




                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The pilot project is expected to have a minimal risk in terms of safeguard policies. The recipient, Moi Teaching and
                          Referral Hospital, has adequate capacity to ensure compliance with environmental safeguard policies. To implement
                          the social safeguards related to OP4.10, the client will engage services of a social consultant.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Edward Felix Dwumfour (GEN01)
                          Kimberly Vilar (GSU04)


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                      The initial scoping of the project
                                                                                                      interventions suggest that the potential
                                                                                                      environmental and social impacts will be
                                                                                                      low. The potential negative environmental
                                                                                                      impacts of the project relate to issues of
                                                                                                      health care waste management, associated
                                                                                                      with the handling and disposal of medical
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes
                                                                                                      waste. The Environmental Assessment
                                                                                                      Category assigned is B Partial Assessment
                                                                                                      since the anticipated impacts are
                                                                                                      reversible, localized and easily manageable.
                                                                                                      The project will adopt the National Health
                                                                                                      Care Waste Management Plan for the
                                                                                                      project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                            No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      Yes                      The project is not expected to have


                         Jul 18, 2017                                                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Tackling Non-Communicable Disease Challenges in Kenya ( P164301 )



                                                                                                                      negative impacts on the Vulnerable and
                                                                                                                      Marginalized Groups (VMGs) residing in the
                                                                                                                      counties where the activities will be carried
                                                                                                                      out. The policy has been triggered to
                                                                                                                      ensure that there is free prior and informed
                                                                                                                      consultation, appropriate targeting, and
                                                                                                                      broad community support from the VMGs
                                                                                                                      for the project.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                            No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                      No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                           APPROVALS

                            Team Leader(s):                                    Gandham N.V. Ramana

                           Approved By

                            Safeguards Advisor:                                Nathalie S. Munzberg                              17-Jul-2017

                            Practice Manager/Manager:                          Carolyn J. Shelton                                17-Jul-2017


                          1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country

                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Jul 18, 2017                                                                                                                               Page 7 of 7
