                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA17335
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Feb-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                         Project ID:   P154255
                            Project Name:      PK-Balochistan Integrated Water Resources Management & Development
                                               Project (P154255)
                            Task Team          Mahwash Wasiq,Muhammad Riaz
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       22-Feb-2016                         Estimated   02-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GWA06                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (60%), Forestry (10%), Public administration- Water,
                                              sanitation and flood protection (10%), Water supply (10 %), Flood protection
                                              (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (10%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%),
                                              Other rural development (10%), Climate change (10%), Wat er resource
                                              management (30%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     209.70           Total Bank Financing:               200.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        9.70
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             200.00
                              Total                                                                                   209.70
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen provincial government capacity for water resources monitoring and management and

                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         to improve community-based water management for targeted irrigation schemes in Balochistan.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will begin the transformation of water management in Balochistan from a narrow
                         irrigation project focus, to an integrated multi-sectoral river basin planning and development
                         approach. It will achieve this through institutional restructuring and strengthening, investments in
                         hydro-meteorological data and water information systems, and priority infrastructure investments in
                         irrigation, potable water supply, flood protection, watershed and rangeland management. The project
                         comprises the following components:

                         Component A: Institutions, Capacity and Information
                         This component will lay the foundation for a gradual transition to IWRM in Balochistan in line with
                         the IWRM policy described above. It will support institutional restructuring, professional
                         development, installation and operation of hydro-meteorological systems, and establishment of river
                         basin information systems.

                         Component B: Sector Sub-projects
                         This component will support implementation of IWRM sectoral investments within a framework of
                         community mobilization and participation. Investments will include: B1 – Construction and/or
                         rehabilitation of irrigation and potable water supply facilities; flood protection infrastructure; B2 –
                         Related watershed and rangeland management and environmental protection works; and B3 – On-
                         farm water management and agricultural productivity activities.

                         Sub-component B1 will implement eight irrigation sub-projects: four each in the Nari and Porali
                         basins, spanning ~128,000 ha and benefiting ~48,100 households. Development work will include
                         remodeling of the headwork and secondary canals, command area development in perennial
                         irrigation, spate irrigation (Sailaba) and rainwater harvesting (Khushkaba) irrigation areas, and
                         construction of access farm tracks. The Project will support construction and rehabilitation of sixteen
                         village water supply schemes providing potable water supply to ~4,200 households. High-intensity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rain in the steep upper catchments generates high-energy flash flooding and there is a dire need for
                         flood protection works in five districts in the Nari basin and in two districts in the Porali basin. The
                         proposed works will protect ~14,600 ha of farmland and ~4,100 low-income family homes
                         benefitting ~10,200 households and protecting 31 km of village roads (with 18 bridges and culverts)
                         and various irrigation infrastructure.

                         Sub-component B2 will support a participatory approach to watershed management and rangeland
                         management at the irrigation scheme level, to complement the new infrastructure investments under
                         sub-component B1. Watershed management will include soil and water conservation measures,
                         drainage improvement, rainwater harvesting, rehabilitation/protection of irrigable land degraded/
                         endangered by erosion gullies and plantations. Rangeland management will focus on pasture and
                         biomass production through introduction of rotational grazing and stocking rate limits. Total sub-
                         component beneficiaries are ~280,000.

                         Sub-component B3 will improve on-farm and field irrigation water efficiency and farm productivity.
                         Community mobilization and Farmer organizations will be established. Beneficiary farmers will
                         contribute in-kind with labor for cost sharing of the development work. Matching grants will be
                         given to service providers and farmers for high-efficiency irrigation systems, land leveling, farm
                         machinery and diverse training. Training will encompass improved water management technologies,
                         improved crop management including Integrated Pest Management and crop diversification,


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         exposure visits, training for women in agriculture and livestock, and on the job and off-site training
                         for project/department staff. Total beneficiaries for this component are ~20,000 (within irrigation
                         beneficiaries).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component C: Project Management &Technical Assistance
                         This component will support project management, monitoring and evaluation and studies. The
                         component will finance expenditures associated with overall project implementation costs including
                         incremental costs associated with PMU and the PIUs, Project Supervision and Implementation
                         Assistance (PSIA) consultants, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) consultants, and implementation
                         of Management Plans and Strategic Studies including Environmental Management Plan, Social
                         Management Plan, Gender Action Plan, and strategic studies. Study tours will also be included with
                         piloting of new technologies and others that may be identified during project implementation, as well
                         as feasibility studies for other potential river basins.

                         These activities not only have a positive impact on the environmental sustainability but also build
                         resilience to climate change and associated impacts of floods and drought.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project is to be implemented in the two river basins of Nari and Porali in the water
                         stressed and highly arid province of Balochistan, where traditional irrigation dominates. The selected
                         basins are home to unique and fragile ecosystems. The Porali River to the Arabian Sea, supporting
                         coastal mangrove forests in the Lasbela district. Both river basins have extensive rangelands and
                         pastures that support grazing livestock and wild ungulate populations. There are two wildlife
                         sanctuaries and one game reserve in the Nari Basin and one wildlife sanctuary in the Porali Basin. As
                         the project aims to increase cultivated area and water diversions (including construction of new
                         irrigation schemes) there is a possibility of pasture land conversion, decreased freshwater flows to
                         mangrove forests, and possible introduction of newer crop varieties, for all of which, detailed
                         analysis of impacts is required. The project also include drought mitigation and flood protection
Public Disclosure Copy




                         measures that are expected to deliver environmental benefits; these need to be ensured and amplified.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (GEN06)
                         Chaohua Zhang (GSU06)
                         Maqsood Ahmed (GSU06)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            Multiple ecological zones to be affected, with possibility
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      of some irreversible change in the functioning of the eco-
                                                                     zones require detailed environmental assessment.
                                                                     Implementation of sub-projects will also have
                                                                     construction-related environmental impacts such as air
                                                                     quality deterioration, water and soil contamination, land
                                                                     use and land form changes, and impacts on biological
                                                                     resources. This policy is triggered to requiring detailed
                                                                     environmental assessment and prepare environmental
                                                                     monitoring and mitigation plan.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes            This policy is triggered because of the potential


                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                            4.04                                   environmental impacts of project activities on the natural
                                                                   habitats and protected areas in the two river basins. The
                                                                   EIA will identify and delineate areas of critical habitat
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   and ensure application of the mitigation hierarchy in
                                                                   accordance with this policy for all project works.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes        Juniper forests in Ziarat and Mangrove forests at the coast
                                                                   of Lasbela may be affected due to the presence in the
                                                                   project area of influence. Mitigation measures are thus
                                                                   proposed as part of the EMP.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            Major interventions planned to enhance agricultural
                                                                   productivity with a possible introduction of newer crop
                                                                   varieties that together may affect local pest population
                                                                   leading to increased use of pesticides and other agro-
                                                                   chemicals. A pest management plan is included in the
                                                                   disclosed ESA.
                            Physical Cultural           Yes        The social assessment revealed local significant heritage
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                   places such as religious buildings, graveyards and
                                                                   religious shrines. Mitigation measures have been
                                                                   incorporated into the EMP including provisions for a
                                                                   detailed Cultural Heritage Management Plan.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            No indigenous people as defined in the OP reside in the
                            BP 4.10                                Province.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes           Project schemes will require lands for their construction
                            OP/BP 4.12                             and this will trigger OP 4.12 through land taking and
                                                                   possible relocation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No         This policy is not triggered as the project will not support
                            4.37                                   the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will it
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   support other investments which rely on the services of
                                                                   existing dams. The project infrastructure investments,
                                                                   including irrigation, potable water supply and flood
                                                                   protection, will not rely on the performance of any
                                                                   existing dams.
                            Projects on International   No         This policy is not triggered as neither the Porali nor the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   Nari are international rivers as defined in OP7.50. The
                                                                   Nari basin is within the geographic extent of the Indus
                                                                   River Basin and the Indus is an international river.
                                                                   However, the Nari River terminates in inland lakes before
                                                                   reaching the Indus River, hence it is not a tributary of the
                                                                   Indus.
                            Projects in Disputed        No         No disputed territories exist in the Province.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify


                                                                     Page 4 of 8
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The project will divert floodwater for increased and improved irrigation. This may potentially
                           cause negative environmental impacts that can be mitigated through appropriate design and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           construction methods. Water diversion may impact ecological flows, biodiversity hotspots,
                           protected areas as well as livelihoods downstream. In addition, improvements in irrigation systems
                           may lead to the expansion of agricultural activity into traditionally non-agricultural lands (i.e.
                           forest and rangelands). The potential negative impacts would be associated with construction/
                           rehabilitation/operation of infrastructure for diversion of floodwaters for irrigation. The project is
                           expected to require land for its civil works investments. However, considering the linear nature of
                           the investments and low productive status of the lands, the impacts of land taking on livelihoods
                           are expected to be marginal in most cases. OP 4.10 is not considered triggered as the social
                           assessments indicate that there are no indigenous communities residing in the project area that fall
                           under the definition of indigenous people in the OP 4.10. Considering the challenges associated
                           with watershed management and potential impacts of infrastructure, the project has been classified
                           as Category A for environmental and social safeguards.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Overall, the project is expected to have environmental benefits, by encouraging integrated water
                           resources management promoting: (i) water savings technologies in irrigated agriculture, (ii)
                           improved agriculture practices and promotion of drought tolerant cropping varieties, (iii) improved
                           watershed and rangeland management to increase groundwater recharge, and (iv) contribute to the
                           conservation of Juniper forests in the Nari basin and mangrove forests in the Porali delta. These
                           activities will also build resilience to climate change and associated flood and drought impacts. A
                           cumulative impact assessment has been prepared as part of the ESA. It reviews plans for similar
                           water diversions, delay action and storage dams, and large scale dam projects for a 10-year time
                           horizon. It also evaluates the likely impacts of planned and future interventions in the two river
                           basins over this period.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           The EA considers alternative project approaches for watershed management in the two target river
                           basins.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Balochistan Irrigation Department, an institution of the Government of Balochistan, will be the
                           lead implementing agency. The department has developed a Resettlement Policy Framework to
                           guide the design and implementation of future program schemes. However, the department has
                           completed the design for Year One schemes and a Social Impact Assessment And Mitigation Plan
                           has been developed to identify and address the adverse impacts.

                           The Irrigation Department has limited capacity to implement safeguard requirements and will
                           require considerable support to implement the triggered safeguard policies. The ESA report will
                           propose an appropriate safeguards implementation arrangement that will involve collaboration
                           between the project management and implementation units. To achieve this, the PMU will hire
                           Environmental and Social Safeguard Specialists to enhance capacity and manage any
                           environmental or social issues that arise during implementation. M&E Consultants will provide
                           additional support and will monitor social issues. Training will be provided for project
                           management and implementation staff.


                                                                      Page 5 of 8
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders include government departments, communities and farmers from the target river
Public Disclosure Copy




                           basins. The ESA will consult these stakeholders, including NGOs, to obtain technical inputs.
                           Preliminary ESIA reports were prepared for both schemes as part of the previous project,
                           Balochistan Small Scale Irrigation Project. The reports propose a more focused consultation at the
                           command area, watershed and downstream community levels at project inception stage, and then a
                           final consultation at project completion. Consultation with government stakeholders will take
                           place at both inception and completion stages. The reports have been disclosed in-country and in
                           the Bank’s InfoShop
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                             18-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                          26-Jan-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive             18-Feb-2016
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                                25-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                             29-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                          09-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                                09-Feb-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                          Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                             18-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                          26-Jan-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                                25-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         While impacts on Physical Cultural Heritage were assessed to be minor, the EMP includes a specific
                         recommendation to develop a Cultural Heritage Management Plan (CHMP) during the first year of
                         project implementation, in addition to outlining the management actions to be taken for cultural
                         heritage likely to be affected by the project. These include: (i) in the unlikely case of discovery of
                         any artefact or site of archaeological, cultural, historical, or religious significance during
                         construction activities, the works will be stopped in that area, and the appropriate department will be


                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                         informed, (ii) if sites of religious significance are encountered during construction activities, the
                         works will be stopped in that area, and the appropriate department will be informed, as outlined in
                         the chance finds procedure included in the disclosed EA; (iii) and finalization of the CHMP within
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the first year of project implementation.

                         Terms of reference for the CHMP are included in Annex 3 of the disclosed EA.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [        ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [     ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mahwash Wasiq,Muhammad Riaz
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                               Date: 10-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                            Date: 10-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
