INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR15150
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Uzbekistan                 Project ID:  P146328
Project Name: Pap-Angren Railway (P146328)
Task Team       Jacques Bure
Leader(s):
Estimated       14-Oct-2014                Estimated    13-Feb-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT103                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector:         Railways (90%), Other domestic and international trade (10%)
Theme:          Trade facilitation and market access (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    1633.75            Total Bank Financing:  195.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                     1088.75
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          195.00
China Export Import Bank                                       350.00
Total                                                         1633.75
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 10


﻿The proposed project will support UTY to build a single 124 km track rail link between Angren and
Pap including a 19.2 km rail tunnel through the Kamchik Pass. It will also support the reconstruction
by UzEnergo (UZE) of Obihayot power substation and the construction of power distribution lines
from Obi-hayot power substation to traction power substations (TPS) at Koshminar and Pap, and
from power transmission line Angren - Obi-hayot to TPS Sardala to secure reliable power supply for
the new railway line. The government and UTY will provide the bulk of the financing for the project.
The Bank will finance the signaling, electrification of the railway line, electric power distribution
line, track maintenance equipment, and technical assistance to UTY.
Component 1. Rail Main Infrastructure (estimated total cost US$1,396.77million): UTY is
responsible for the construction of the new railway line main infrastructure including ballast, rail,
bridges and a 19.2 km long tunnel. The construction work was initiated in June 2013 and
commissioning is planned by July 2016. The proposed loan is not financing this portion of the
project.
Component 2. Rail Electrification, Signaling, Track Maintenance and Railway video surveillance
system (estimated total cost US$267.5 million, of which IBRD US$152 million): This component
will finance four investments to equip and maintain the new railway line as follows:
*      Signaling and Communications (estimated cost US$46 million). The component will finance
a microprocessor based train control system with fiber optic-based communications. The system
would be controlled from UTY's existing dispatching center in Tashkent. UTY will carry out the
related civil works (buildings, cable ducts and cable laying).
*      Electrification (estimated cost US$30 million). The component will finance (a) construction
of three traction substations and (b) a SCADA system for optimizing energy use. UTY will construct
the catenary structure and install the cabling.
*      Track Maintenance Equipment (estimated cost US$36 million). Track maintenance
equipment will be used to maintain the new Pap-Angren line and will consist of cranes, rods,
emergency and security trucks, and other machinery and maintenance equipment.
*     Railway video surveillance and broadcasting system (estimated cost US$20 million): The
O
U        component will finance surveillance system, and the broadcasting on any telecommunication
channels to inform railway users.
A US$20 million contingency is added to this component and embedded in the financing of the
project.
Component 3. Power Distribution Line (estimated total cost US$36.86million of which IBRD US$35
million): This component will finance three investments to bring energy to the new railway line as
follows:
*      Dismantling of overhead power lines: (estimated IBRD financing US$2.6 million), including
the removal of Angren-Obihayot 220kV power line of total 8.8 km length, of which 6 km in
Tashkent region and 2.8 km in Namangan region.
*      Equipment for the installation of new power lines (estimated IBRD financing US$13.3
million), including the procurement of concrete structures for 110-220kV power lines, respective
materials and communication equipment, protection relay, metering and controlling instruments,
general power equipment and others.
*      Construction works and commissioning of new power lines (estimated IBRD financing US
$17.6 million). The sub-component will finance the reconstruction of the 220 kV substation Obi-
hayot and the construction of 15 km and 48.8 km of 110kV power distribution lines to connect Obi-
hoyot power substation with TPSs Koshminar and Pap, and 5 km of 220kV power distribution line to
Page 2 of 10


﻿connect 220 kV power transmission line Angren - Obi-hayot with TPS Sardala
*      Other capital costs associated with construction works (estimated IBRD financing US 1.5
million).
O
U         Component 4. Technical Assistance to UTY for railway construction and long-term plan (estimated
total cost US$6.7 million, which will be financed by IBRD): This component will finance technical
assistance to be provided to UTY. It will provide UTY with options on how to better meet current
and future transportation needs, maintain its market share in freight and passenger transportation and
increase efficiency of its operations during the period of 20-25 years.
Component 5. Technical Assistance to UTY for improving railway logistics in the Ferghana Valley
and Angren region (estimated total cost US$1.00 million, which will be financed by IBRD): This
component will finance technical assistance to be provided to UTY. It will support UTY in
introducing sound logistics arrangements to allow the Pap-Angren railway link to reach its full
operational potential.
Component 6. Implementation support (estimated total cost US$0.3 million, which will be financed
by IBRD): This component will finance implementation support to UTY and UZE.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The railway start/end points are cities of Angren and Pap. Angren is located in Tashkent oblast and
has population of 127,000. The city used to be a center of Uzbek coal industry. Pap is a rayon center
with population of 25,000, located in the North-West of Fergana Valley. Within Angren, the project
will use the right of way of the existing railroad and new construction "greenfield" section of the
project will start from the coal mining area to the East of Angren. The Northern section of the
railway (i.e. section between Angren and tunnel portal at km 36) will go along Akhangaran water
reservoir and will cross/overpass (bridge or embankment) at least one of the reservoir's small bays.
The alignment runs through Akhangaran river canyon/ravine with very diverse and rough
topographic profile. The tunnel will start at km 36 and end at km 57 nearby the river Sansalak-Sai.
Between km 63 and km 85 the road will go along Gulistan, Altynkan and Chadak villages and the
territory of Almalyk ore mining works (non-ferrous metals). Within the Southern section (i.e. section
between Chadak and Pap) the railroad will go through agricultural land. Starting km 95, the rail road
will enter agricultural non-arable (currently classified as pastures). The last 20 km of the railroad
alignment before entering Pap will be through agricultural arable land.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSURR)
Ekaterina Romanova (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The EIA (Statement on Environmental Impacts in
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Uzbekistan) for railway and tunnel was prepared by the
Design institute Boshtransloiha. Following the
recommendations of the State Expert Review and the
Bank, the EIA was updated. The Client has also prepared
the EMF: independent consulting company "AL MAR
Page 3 of 10


﻿CONSULTING" LLC was hired. The advanced draft of
the EIA and EMF acceptable to the Government of
Uzbekistan and the World Bank were publicly disclosed
and consulted upon with interested stakeholders. The EIA
and EMF cover the following issues: (a) management of
radioactivity risk, (b) mitigation of negative
environmental impacts in sensitive areas (i.e. pollution of
rivers and streams, water protection zones), (c)
management of borrow pits and sites for waste material,
(d) management of geological risks and emergency
situations. Site-specific EIAs and EMPs are being and
will be prepared by the contractors for specific sections of
the alignment. These EMPs will be disclosed at specific
project locations and public consultations organized (for
sites in the proximity of villages) prior to works start. The
EIA for transmission line will be prepared by
Boshtransloiha. Based on this EIA, the EMP for
transmission line will be prepared, disclosed and
consulted upon. An Environmental Audit of works carried
out previously is being undertaken. Previous visits to
ongoing construction sites by the team's environmental
specialist indicated that there were no significant/
irreversible impacts that would require a suspension of the
works, but did identify some needed improvements. The
Environmental Audit will review progress in these areas
and provide specific recommendations for remedial
measures in an Environmental Action Plan. Both
Environmental Audit and Environmental Action Plan will
be included in the final EMF and disclosed by the Client.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes         OP 4.11 was triggered. The alignment goes through the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                historic/cultural heritage site "Settlement
Chilhudzhra" (IV century BC - IV century AC) nearby
Pap. This historic site was identified during
archaeological surveys in 2012. Limited archaeological
works on this site were done in 2013 and the site was
registered in the National Registry of Historic
Monuments. The works on the alignment in the fall of
2013 resulted in some damage to the site. The alignment
makes a cut through the central section of the historic site.
The dimensions of the cut are 50 m (width) x 120 m
(length). Approximately 10 % of the historic area was
damaged. When this became known, UTY was required
Page 4 of 10


﻿The Bank required from the UTY to stop the works to
prevent further damage and prepare the Action Plan for
Physical Cultural Resources. Such Plan was prepared and
consulted upon/agreed with authorities responsible for
protection of historic and cultural heritage. The site
Chilkhudzhra will be surveyed by specialists in
archeology according to legislation of Uzbekistan. If the
survey indicates the need for any additional protection
measures for other historic sites, these will be put in place
before any additional works are carried out that could
impact these sites. The Action Plan requires that the
alignment should avoid going through historic and
cultural sites as much as possible.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         As in the original project, the restructured project requires
OP/BP 4.12                           land acquisition (both residential and agricultural land)
and resettlement.
The Borrower has prepared a Resettlement Action Plan
(in Russian and English) which was publicly disclosed in
January 2015. The Resettlement Action Plan covers 33
households and 50 farmers (farm land). The Resettlement
Action Plan is under implementation.
A Resettlement Policy Framework (in Russian and
English) was also prepared and publicly disclosed in
January 2015. The Resettlement Policy Framework
provides direction for addressing any additional
involuntary resettlement identified during project
implementation. To date, no additional involuntary
resettlement requiring a new Resettlement Action Plan
has been identified.
In addition, under the original project, a Resettlement
Audit and Social Action Plan (RASAP) was prepared to
cover the gaps in the resettlement carried out by the
Borrower under their own legislation prior to approval
and adoption of the RAP (disclosed January 2015).
There were shortcomings in implementation of the
RASAP specifically regarding payment of compensation
for structures at replacement cost and mitigation measures
for livelihood impacts. These shortcomings have been
addressed through an addendum to the RASAP (disclosed
September 11, 2015) and the preparation of a Livelihood
Restoration Plan (disclosed September 11, 2015).
No
Page 5 of 10


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP
Pr27ects on International  No        The team has extensively discussed with the Uzbekistan
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 Railway Company (UTY) the applicability of OP 7.50 for
the Project regarding (i) water abstraction from a tributary
of an international waterway being planned and/or
occurred, and (ii) pollution or other downstream impacts
on a tributary of an international waterway due to river
channelization/straightening associated with the project
activities. The UTY formally confirmed that no
abstraction of water from the Akhangaran and Chadak
Rivers (tributaries of Syrdarya River that has a status of
international waterway) is planned or necessary. The
sources of water supply for all proposed construction
activities of the Project are reported to be existing wells
(stations Sardala, Razezd 2, Razezd 3 and Razezd 4),
water tanks (stations Razezd 1 and Temirjulobod), and
existing piped town water supply (stations Angren,
Uglesborochnaja and Pap). With this information
provided, it is concluded that the policy on international
waterways OP7.50 is not triggered. Also, the
channelization/straightening activities envisaged under
the Project would not trigger OP 7.50. The EMF and
project documents reflect this accordingly. The team will
work closely with the Client to monitor and supervise the
issue.
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed alignment of the railway goes through diverse plain and mountainous terrain and
both environmental (Environmental Assessment, OP 4.01) and social (Involuntary Resettlement,
OP 4.12) safeguard policies will be triggered. Scale of potential environmental and social
(resettlement) impacts is significant and this project should be classified as Environmental
Category A.
The alignment goes through the historic/cultural heritage site "Settlement Chilhudzhra" (IV
century BC - IV century AC) nearby Pap and OP 4.11 will be triggered. This historic site was
identified during archaeological surveys. Limited archaeological works on this site were done in
2013 and the site was registered in the National Registry of Historic Monuments. The works on
the alignment in the fall of 2013 resulted in some damage to the site. The alignment makes a cut
through the central section of the historic site. The dimensions of the cut are 50 m (width) x 120 m
(length). Approximately 10 % of the historic area was damaged.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Page 6 of 10


﻿Long-term impacts associated with future activities include potential pollution from railway,
tunnel, and associated infrastructure operation and maintenance. Also, pollution due to
emergencies and/or accidents on the railroad may cause spills of oil and oil products, chemicals or
other types of negative impacts. Potential radioactive hazard in the area of the tunnel has been
identified during project preparation, but sampling suggests that there is no excess of radiation
levels in the tunnel/shafts so far.
O
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Four alternative alignments were considered at initial stage of alignment identification and two
alignments were considered at pre-feasibility stage. The tunnel fall/decline in both options is
20/1000. Option A (preferred option) is 123 km long and has two tunnels (19.1 km and 0.2 km)
with the range of tunnel altitudes between 1320 m and 1485 m. Option B is 146 km long, has 14
tunnels with total length of 19.5 km with the range of tunnel altitudes between 1799 m and 1895
m. Option A was selected to minimize overall project costs and environmental and social risks
associated with project activities.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) for construction of the railway line and the tunnel
was prepared by the Borrower. There were 18 agencies/institutes/organizations that contributed to
preparation of the EIA. The EIA was updated taking into account comments from both the State
Expert Review and the Bank. The Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was prepared
by an independent entity ("AL MAR CONSULTING" LLC) and covers other components and
activities in the project not included in the EIA for the railway line and tunnel (e.g. borrow pits,
river channeling works, bridges and overpasses, power supply). All of these works will require
preparation of stand-alone EIAs under Uzbekistan law, and the EMF provides further guidance for
ensuring that these EIAs and site-specific EMPs also fulfill the requirements of OP 4.01. An
Environmental Audit and Environmental Action Plan covering works undertaken previously will
be included in the final version of the EMF. Supervision engineering company (Deutsche Balm
0
International) was mobilized and checks environmental performance of the tunnel contractor and
compliance with the action plan for radioactivity control on a regular basis.
The Action Plan for Physical Cultural Resources was prepared and consulted upon/agreed with
authorities responsible for protection of historic and cultural heritage. In order to document the
historic and cultural assets the site will be surveyed by specialists in archeology according to
legislation of Uzbekistan (the UTY will contract an organization with appropriate archaeological
expertize).
The Borrower has established the PIU within the UTY. The PIU will have designated safeguards
specialist to monitor the environmental performance of the project. Also, the UTY hired external
experts to help monitor environmental performance of the contractors.
On involuntary resettlement the Borrower prepared three resettlement instruments under the
original project. First, a Resettlement Audit and Social Action Plan (RASAP) details measures
required to bridge the gap in the resettlement carried out by the Borrower under their own
legislation prior to approval and adoption of the RAP. (Covers 191 households in two districts -
Pap and Akhangaran.) The RASAP was finalized and publicly disclosed in January 2015 and its
implementation was an effectiveness condition of the original project.
During the implementation of the RASAP gaps emerged, specifically payment of compensation of
Page 7 of 10


﻿structures at less than replacement cost and livelihood impacts that had affected more people than
originally identified. In order to meet these gaps, an addendum has been added to the RASAP.
The RASAP addendum specifies additional measures to be provided to affected households to
ensure compensation of structures at replacement cost. The RASAP with addendum was disclosed
O
on September 11, 2015. In addition, a stand-alone Livelihood Restoration Plan (LRP) has been
prepared. The LRP details measures that will be provided to all the affected people who suffered
negative impacts on their livelihoods as a result of the resettlement. The LRP was disclosed on
September 11, 2015.
The restructured project will require the implementation of the revised RASAP during the
implementation of the project by replacing the effectiveness condition related to the RASAP with
a dated covenant in the Legal Agreement. This will allow sufficient time to implement the
measures in the revised RASAP. In addition, a covenant in the Legal Agreement will require the
Borrower to carry out the Project in accordance with the LRP.
The Borrower has also prepared a Resettlement Action Plan (in Russian and English) which was
publicly disclosed in January 2015. The Resettlement Action Plan covers 33 households and 50
farmers (farm land).
A Resettlement Policy Framework (in Russian and English) was also prepared and publicly
disclosed in January 2015. The Resettlement Policy Framework provides direction for addressing
any additional involuntary resettlement identified during project implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key project stakeholders are the population of Uzbekistan broadly, who will benefit from the
railway, residents of the areas nearby the railway,
The EIA and EMF were disclosed on September 15, 2014 and will be consulted upon with
interested stakeholders. Site-specific EIAs and EMPs will be disclosed and consulted upon with
potentially affected communities.
The Action Plan for Physical Cultural Resources was prepared by the Institute of Archeology of
the National Academy of Science.
The draft RAP and RPF were subject to several rounds of consultations in September, October,
and December 2014. Stakeholders involved in the consultations included impacted households
(male and female members) and local authorities (hokimiyat).
The preparation of the RASAP addendum involved consultations with affected people
(consultations undertaken in August 24 & 25, 2015 in Pap raion and August 29, 2015 in
Akhangaran raion). The RASAP was disclosed on September 11, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank                              11I-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           08-Sep-2014
Page 8 of 10


﻿For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  29-Sep-2014
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Uzbekistan                                                05-Sep-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank                               20-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                            15-Sep-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Uzbekistan                                                15-Sep-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
o        OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[  ] No[  ]  NA[   ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ No      NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ No        NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
o          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes  No      NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [   No        NA
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jacques Bure
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                   Date: 11-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                  Date: 11-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


