                                  The World Bank
                                  Modernizing Production of Statistics in Vietnam




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23678




                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                             Page 1 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Modernizing Production of Statistics in Vietnam



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                      Project Name                  Environmental Category      Country
                                                           Modernizing Production of
                           P166158                                                       C - Not Required            Vietnam
                                                           Statistics in Vietnam
                           Team Leader(s)                  Estimated Date of Approval    Managing Unit               Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                     Investment Project
                           Obert Pimhidzai                                               GPV02
                                                                                                                     Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY             -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                    0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                       0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00


                           DETAILS  -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall development objective of this project is to enhance the capacity of the General Statistics Office to adopt
                           advanced methods of data collection and processing. This will be achieved through building a framework and piloting
                           use non-survey data to generate statistics and piloting use of CAPI in major surveys.

                           C. Project Description
                           Project Components

                           The project will consist of three main components as follows:

                           Component 1: Reviewing and updating the Vietnam Statistical Development Strategy 2011-2020 with vision
                           to 2030.

                           The Viet Nam Statistical Development Strategy 2011 - 2020 with vision to 2030 (VSDS) was approved by the
                           Prime Minister in 2011. The mid-term review of the VSDS in 2015 has indicated the need to update the VSDS,
                           thanks to changes in the external and domestic environment. Domestically, the biggest change is on legal
                           environment. In 2015, the new Law on Statistics was approved containing some new regulations on the

                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Modernizing Production of Statistics in Vietnam




                           production and use of statistics. The Law on Statistics 2015 may affect many activities in the current VSDS.
                           Now the GSO now needs to update the VSDS to reflect those changes. Secondly, there are also important
                           changes in the external environment, notably the introduction of the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs)
                           that Vietnam has committed to. The GSO has been actively involved in the development of a statistical
                           indicator system for evaluating the implementation of SDGs and has integrated some SDG indicators into the
                           national statistical indicator system in the Statistics Law 2015. The collection and compilation of SDG
                           indicators will be an important task of Viet Nam statistical system. Therefore, the VSDS needs to be updated
                           with additional activities related to SDGs.

                           This Component will focus on the following main activities (i) update the VSDS 2011-20 to be consistent with
                           the requirements of the new Law of Statistics passed in 2015 and new data requirements for monitoring the
                           SDGs, (ii) update the implementation plan for the updated VSDS and (iii) revise the monitoring and
                           evaluation system of the updated VSDS. Funding from this grant will pay for:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           National consultancies to review the impacts of changes in the legal framework and the introduction of SDGs
                           on the VSDS and proposing updates to the VSDS, revise the implementation plan and monitoring and
                           evaluation system for the updated VSDS and developing the proposed framework for the VSDS for the next
                           period 2021-2030

                           Workshops during consultations for updating the VSDS and developing a framework for the next VSDS 2021-
                           30



                           Component 2: Incorporation of administrative data into official national statistics.

                           The project will assist the GSO to comprehensively review the current needs of national statistics, based on
                           both the list of national indicators issued by the Prime Minister in 2010 and the SDG indicators that are
                           developed. The project will review the current use of administrative data in compiling the indicators and will
                           help improve the legal framework and the practice of incorporating administrative data.

                           The project will bring to fruition existing efforts by the GSO towards using administrative data. From August
                           2016 to April 2017, the GSO received support from UN-ESCAP to develop the software for extracting
                           economic statistics from tax data, while the General Department of Taxation has invested approximately
                           VDN 6 billion in the IT infrastructure for this purpose and a Memorandum of Understanding between the
                           GSO and the General Department of Taxation is already in place (issued on 10 November 2015). The GSO also
                           began working with the Statistics Denmark on the potential for using administrative data in education
                           statistics since Vietnam is planning, developing and implementing IT solutions to manage students and
                           student records. This started with a study visit by the GSO to Denmark, followed up by an initial situation
                           analysis by Statistics Denmark on the potential for using administrative data in education statistics. This
                           culminated in an agreement between the GSO and the Ministry of Education and Training (MoET) to
                           collaborate in this area.


                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                             Page 3 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Modernizing Production of Statistics in Vietnam




                           A central population register currently being designed and implemented in Vietnam offers a “golden
                           opportunity” for shifting certain types of statistics from surveys to administrative records. With advance
                           planning, a consistent use of unique ID’s will allow the GSO to create longitudinal time series in the area of
                           social statistics. In this process record keeping shifts from “paper and pen” to “bits and bytes” that can easily
                           be turned into statistics. This project will build upon the work of the GSO to mainly provide proof of concept
                           in the use of administrative data in generating economic and education statistics. The project will thus
                           finance activities to (i) facilitate inter-agency dialogue to deepen collaboration between the GSO and other
                           government agencies in the use of administrative data to produce statistics through workshops and study
                           visits, (ii) develop frameworks and operation manuals to produce selected statistics using administrative data
                           and (iii) produce pilot statistics using tax, customs and education administrative data.

                           While not exhaustive, the following activities are expected as part of the Component 2:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           National consultancy in incorporating tax and custom data obtained by administrative system into the
                           national statistics.

                           International/national consultancy: reviewing experiences in utilizing and incorporating administrative data
                           on education in official statistics and piloting the incorporation of administrative data on education into the
                           national statistics system.

                           Study visit on integrating administrative data into official statistics: A study visit will allow the GSO (and
                           preferably representatives from MOET and other stakeholders) to meet with register authorities, involved
                           line ministries, users of statistics and gain hands on experience with the relevant IT solutions.

                           Technical workshops and dissemination workshops.

                           In implementing this component, the GSO will partner with another statistical agency in a twining
                           arrangement with defined TORs. In addition to building up existing collaboration, the twining arrangements
                           allows the GSO to learn from the models widely seen as best practice models in the use of administrative
                           data combined with data / information sourced from national civil registration authorities, which they have
                           been using from the late 1960s.

                           Component 3: Support the adoption of Computer-Assisted Personal Interview (CAPI) for surveys

                           This component will finance activities to facilitate the adoption of a CAPI platform for survey data collection
                           by the GSO. This includes running a CAPI pilot of the VHLSS instrument to overlap with implementation of
                           the VHLSS 2018 in the last two quarters of the data collection period. That will allow both to assess the
                           feasibility of using CAPI in a major survey like the VHLSS and to compare the quality of data from the CAPI
                           pilot to the VHLSS data collected using paper and pen, as necessary to benchmark or analyze any
                           incomparability introduced by the use of CAPI. This component will also support a review of the VHLSS to
                           adopt to changing data demands. Without funding for the MICS survey, the GSO is currently reviewing the
                           design and implementation of the VHLSS to incorporate new indicators and improve its implementation. The
                           current VHLSS paper-based questionnaire is considered as too long and time-consuming. Using CAPI would

                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                                Page 4 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Modernizing Production of Statistics in Vietnam




                           greatly reduce the processing time and improve the accuracy of the data, alongside a careful review of the
                           questionnaire to eliminate redundancies and information that could be produced using administrative data
                           sources supported in the component 2 of this project.

                           The GSO is very enthusiastic about the application of CAPI in the whole VHLSS questionnaire after
                           experimenting with using CAPI as part of an extended module in 2016 VHLSS on Food Away from Home
                           (FAFH) consumption pilot supported by the World Bank. This pilot used the Survey Solutions developed by
                           the World Bank, but other departments have also experimented with different platforms for surveys they
                           run. For example, the Price Statistics Department is using a locally-developed CAPI platform for its monthly
                           price survey while another Department has been using a CSPro version in its survey. Thus, the GSO is looking
                           at CAPI platforms that can be used across the institution for different surveys.

                           The project will therefore finance activities to (i) develop a CAPI platform for use across different surveys,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (ii) piloting data collection using CAPI using the VHLSS instrument and (iii) review the VHLSS questionnaire to
                           meet the country’s data needs. The GSO will pay for the purchase of tablets. While not exhaustive, this
                           project will cover the following expenses:

                                 1. International consultancies to evaluate different platforms for CAPI and provide training and
                                    online/offline support to the GSO in using CAPI in the VHLSS;
                                 2. International/national consultancy in reviewing VHLSS sampling and VHLSS questionnaire to fit the
                                    needs of SDGs;
                                 3. Additional costs of piloting the use of CAPI in VHLSS in a sample of provinces;
                                 4. Technical workshops and dissemination workshops.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will finance data collection nationally when piloting data collection of the VHLSS instrument using
                          CAPI. It will also facilitate the use of individual level data already collected by other agencies, in particular the
                          Ministry of Education and Training (education data) and Ministry of Finance (customs and tax data). These
                          data are analyzed and reported at an aggregate level, thus maintaining confidentiality and anonymity of
                          individual responses. By using data collected nationally, the project will necessarily gather data from or
                          concerning vulnerable groups, including ethnic minorities and their communities. This enables closer
                          monitoring of social-economic outcomes among ethnic minorities to assess progress in achieving social
                          inclusion, challenges they face and opportunities to promote development. These are necessary inputs for
                          improving both the design of interventions and policies targeting ethnic minorities, lagging areas and other
                          vulnerable groups.



                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                                   Page 5 of 7
                                  The World Bank
                                  Modernizing Production of Statistics in Vietnam




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The project will not trigger any safeguard policies.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Giang Tam Nguyen, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Son Van Nguyen, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project               Triggered?             Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 The main activities of the grant include: i)
                                                                                                 reviewing and updating the Vietnam
                                                                                                 Statistical Development Strategy 2011-
                                                                                                 2020 with vision to 2030; ii) incorporation
                                                                                                 of administrative data into official national
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                No                  statistics; and iii) support the adoption of
                                                                                                 Computer-Assisted Personal Interview for
                                                                                                 surveys. These activities are to have
                                                                                                 minimal or no potential environmental and
                                                                                                 social implications, risks and impacts.
                                                                                                 Therefore, OP 4.01 is not triggered.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                            No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             No
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      No                  Data collected in this project includes data
                                                                                                 from ethnic minorities. However, as
                                                                                                 standard practice (for example in the
                                                                                                 VHLSS), only processed data is shared,
                                                                                                 adhering to principles of data anonymity
                                                                                                 and confidentiality. Therefore no negative
                                                                                                 impact of ethnic minorities is anticipated,
                                                                                                 on the contrary, they may benefit from
                                                                                                 overall improvements in policy making and
                                                                                                 monitoring of outcomes as a results of
                                                                                                 timely and increased availability of data.
                                                                                                 Given that the project will not adversely
                                                                                                 affect and no any risk to ethnic minorities is
                                                                                                 anticipated, hence the OP4.10 is not


                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                                   Page 6 of 7
                                   The World Bank
                                   Modernizing Production of Statistics in Vietnam



                                                                                                                      triggered.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                           No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Team Leader(s):                                  Obert Pimhidzai

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Surhid P. Gautam                                  26-Feb-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Salman Zaidi                                      26-Feb-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Feb 28, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 7 of 7
