                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon       approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSR22418
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Vanuatu                         Project ID:               P112611
    Project Name:                      Increasing Resilience to Climate Change and Natural Hazards in Vanuatu
                                       (P112611)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Habiba Gitay,Tevi Maltali Obed
    Estimated Appraisal                26-Mar-2012                     Estimated Board           04-Dec-2012
    Date:                                                              Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GEN2A                           Financing                 Specific Investment
                                                                       Instrument:               Loan
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                      Recovery) or OP               No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           11.52                              Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                            0.44
    Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                                                   5.58
    EC EUROPEAID Agency                                                                                                 2.77
    Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery                                                                 2.73
    Total                                                                                                              11.52
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Global Environmental Objective(s)
The objective of the Project is to help increase the resilience of communities in Vanuatu to the impacts of
climate variability and change and natural hazards on food and water security as well as livelihoods.
Proposed New GEO (from Restructuring Paper)
The objective of the Project is to help increase the resilience of communities in Vanuatu to the impacts of
climate variability and change and natural hazards on food and water security as well as livelihoods.
3. Project Description

                                                      Page 1 of 9
Following Tropical Cyclone (TC) Pam, and the changed context and priorities of the Government of Vanuatu
(GoV), it is proposed that the project activities be focused on piloting micro-project investments in areas
heavily affected by the cyclone, as well as supporting investments that are already underway including in
early warning, preparedness and water supply.

The focus of the majority of the remaining activities is proposed to be on micro-projects that enhance the
resilience and adaptive capacity of the communities (or villages) affected by TC Pam and vulnerable to other
climate related events such as droughts. These micro-projects are village- and provincial government-led
activities. It is also proposed that any further activities in agriculture and water-related components
(Component 3 and 4) are integrated within the micro-projects so as to benefit the communities affected by
TC Pam. It is proposed that the component focused on institutional strengthening continues without change
to ensure sufficient support and links between national-provincial-village institutional structures and to
facilitate effective implementation of micro-projects. The changed focus also means that going forward, all
the activities will be implemented through VMGD and supported by technical agencies including the
Department of Local Authorities (DLA), the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development (DARD)
and the Department of Geology, Mines and Water Resources.

Component 1 Institutional Strengthening for Climate Change Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management.
Sub-Component 1.1: Strengthening of the NAB Project Management Unit (PMU) by building capacity in
project management, procurement, financial management and monitoring and evaluation through: (i) the
effective implementation of the Project and of the Japan Human Resources Development (PHRD) Grant , (ii)
training for new or additional staff upon their assignment to the PMU, and (iii) the development of
Operational Manuals to guide overall PMU operation, Subproject selection, formulation, and
implementation.

Sub-Component 1.2: Strengthening the National Disaster Management Office by (i) reviewing the
Recipient’s National Disaster Management Act; (ii) developing a strategic plan and organizational structure;
(iii) developing the capacity of newly recruited staff; (iv) facilitating learning and twinning with the national
disaster management offices of the Solomon Islands and other Pacific Islands countries; (v) establishing fully
equipped provincial disaster coordination centers and provincial disaster risk management and climate
change adaptation plans in the provinces of Tafea and Torba; and (vi) developing volcano contingency plans
for Tanna, Gaua and other high risk volcanic islands.

Sub-component 1.3: Strengthened Early Warning Systems by (i) establishing real-time data communication
network linking the existing volcano, seismic and weather observing stations with the national data and
warning center; (ii) strengthening multi-hazard standard operating procedures, and iii) strengthen the capacity
of the national multi-hazard warning and emergency operations center to manage and respond to disasters,
especially from climate-related events.

Component 2: Increasing Community Resilience in Areas Affected by Tropical Cyclone Pam
This component will look at increasing the ability of national, regional and community-level stakeholders to
work together to enhance disaster and climate resilience in rural communities by;

Subcomponent 2.1: Strengthened Methods, Processes and Protocols for Climate Change Adaptation and
DRM to develop the ability of stakeholders at all levels. The component will include support on the
development, preparation, delivery and monitoring and evaluation of micro-projects. Micro-projects are
community level activities to be identified and implemented by the communities and/or provincial
government, monitored and evaluatedby VMGD in cooperation with villages and provincial governments.

Subcomponent 2.2: Enhancing Community and Ecosystem-based Adaptation and Disaster Risk Management


                                                   Page 2 of 9
in Coastal Areas and on Active Volcanic Islands by implementing the methods, processes and protocols
developed under Component 2.1 through the carrying out of Micro-Projects for communities affected by TC
Pam.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics               relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The sub-projects are small in scale and comprises two main types: 1) institutional strengthening (policy
changes, institutional arrangements, building and strengthening capacity) and 2) investments at village level
to build individual and community resilience. The focus of the restructured project will be to pilot village-
level investments in vulnerable areas on Tanna island, which was heavily affected by Tropical Cyclone Pam,
with possible additional investments on the Shepherd Islands.

Village-based developments may include: building evacuation centres, surface, ground and rain water
harvesting and storage (in tanks), and promoting climate-resilient crop varieties and farming methods. The
village based developments will be small in scale and to be implemented either at the household or village
level (typically <5ha plots). Sub-projects relating to improving reliability of water supplies and improved
agricultural methods will be beneficiary led and will mainly be implemented on their own land. There will
be examples where third party land or assets may be affected, such as sourcing of sand or aggregates for
construction or location of evacuation centres. Some villages may need to source and / or convey surface
water from other kastom (customary) land.

Justification for current Categorization;
The restructured project will retain the Category B categorization. The investments will be small scale and
be primarily driven by beneficiaries on their own land. Any potentially adverse impacts can be mitigated,
and no impacts are considered ‘irreversible’.

The PMU has been implementing the project Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
and Land Acquisition Framework (LAF) since 2013. Staff from each implementing agency received
workshop and field-based training on the ESMF, LAF and World Bank policies in 2013 and 2014.
Safeguards processes are satisfactorily integrated into the POM. Team members (usually the M&E
Specialist) have used the screening processes each time a sub-project is developed, and documented the
results. The screening forms have been tweaked over time based on feedback from the team. There has been
no requirement for the preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Plan or Land Acquisition
Plan as a result of work completed to date.

The ESMF has been updated to reflect the new development objective and the nature and scale of the new
activities relating to local resilience. The Land Acquisition Framework has been similarly updated and is
now called a Resettlement Policy Framework.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                  Team
 Penelope Ruth Ferguson( GENDR )

 Ross James Butler( GSU02 )

6. Safeguard Policies                        Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01          Y               The purpose of these activities is to mitigate the
                                                             negative impact of climate variability and
                                                             climate change. There will be long term social
                                                             benefits from improved community resilience.


                                                 Page 3 of 9
                                            Some impacts may occur to natural hazards,
                                            forests or PCR, if not screened early and
                                            mitigated during sub-project design and
                                            implementation.

                                            This policy remains triggered for the
                                            restructured project and the project remains
                                            categorized as Category B, as the impacts will
                                            be site specific in nature, and impacts will be
                                            readily avoided or mitigated.

                                            The ESMF has been updated to reflect the
                                            change in the nature of sub-projects. The
                                            ESMF (i) assesses the likely environmental and
                                            social impacts of the proposed sub-project
                                            activities; (ii) proposes measures embedded
                                            into each of the activities to minimize the
                                            expected impacts; (iii) formulates the steps,
                                            process and procedures for screening
                                            environment and social impacts of any
                                            activities to be supported by the project,
                                            including a negative list of ineligible sub-
                                            projects; and (iv) documents the institutional
                                            arrangements for carrying out the ESMF,
                                            including monitoring, training and capacity
                                            building.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   N             The policy was not originally triggered when
                                            project implementation started, since the
                                            proposed subprojects were to be concentrated
                                            on existing agricultural land, rather than
                                            unconverted habitat. Regardless, the original
                                            ESMF had processes to identify and manage
                                            potential natural habitat impacts. With the
                                            Government's renewed focus on delivering
                                            investments at village level (including for water
                                            security, feeder roads and agriculture),
                                            investments under the restructured project
                                            could include investments in the vicinity of
                                            forest or coastal habitats. To ensure protection
                                            of such habitats, as part of the ESMF, village-
                                            level investments will be screened for their
                                            environmental impact and community
                                            participation. Conversion of habitat on
                                            significant scale will not occur given the small
                                            scale of village-level investments that are
                                            planned, and the screening process will exclude
                                            sub-projects that convert or degrade habitat
                                            unless adequate mitigation is also put in place
                                            and the environmental and conservation gains
                                            clearly offset the potential losses. . The policy

                                  Page 4 of 9
                                                       remains not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       N             The Forests Policy was not triggered in the
                                                       original project and it remains not-triggered for
                                                       the restructured project. The proposed village-
                                                       level investments envisaged could include
                                                       interventions that take place in the vicinity of
                                                       forests, the most obvious being the
                                                       enhancement of traditional permaculture
                                                       methods where crops are inter-planted in
                                                       existing (modified) forest areas. There is the
                                                       potential for some conversion of small areas of
                                                       modified or natural habitat to agriculture as
                                                       noted above, albeit at a small / village-level
                                                       scale. The mitigation measures are managed
                                                       under the ESMF.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  N             This policy remains not triggered. The
                                                       restructured project and sub-projects will not
                                                       involve the purchase of pesticides and pesticide
                                                       equipment, or lead to increase usage of
                                                       pesticides. The use of pesticides and fertilizers
                                                       among farmers in Vanuatu is almost non-
                                                       existent. Village-level investments may
                                                       include support for crop diversification and
                                                       agroforestry. The project will focus on
                                                       promotion and adoption of disease resistant
                                                       varieties, climate-resilient crops and
                                                       intercropping techniques.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   N             The Physical Cultural Resources policy was not
                                                       triggered for the original project, although the
                                                       original ESMF had procedures to identify,
                                                       avoid and manage impacts on PCR. The policy
                                                       remains not triggered. The village-level
                                                       investments to improve resilience could take
                                                       place in areas where archaeological and
                                                       historical objects are found. Given the small
                                                       scale of the investments, and that most of the
                                                       projects will be beneficiary-driven on their own
                                                       land, the risk of any impacts on physical and
                                                       cultural resources is very low. Should the
                                                       project inadvertently encounter any object or
                                                       resource believed to have cultural, historical or
                                                       archaeological importance, chance finding
                                                       procedures in the EMSF will be followed.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            N             Indigenous peoples (IPs), as defined in OP4.10,
                                                       are not present in Vanuatu. More than 90
                                                       percent of the country’s population consider
                                                       themselves sharing the same ethnicity, which is
                                                       ni-Vanuatu or indigenous Melanesian.


                                             Page 5 of 9
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12             Y               This policy was not triggered for the original
                                                                project, although a LAF was prepared and
                                                                disclosed. The policy is triggered for the
                                                                restructured project and the LAF has been
                                                                updated as a RPF. Involuntary resettlement
                                                                will be avoided or minimized to the maximum
                                                                extent possible, and is unlikely because the
                                                                majority of activities will occur on land owned
                                                                by beneficiaries. The purpose of the RPF is to
                                                                clarify land acquisition principles and
                                                                organizational arrangements and ensure that
                                                                where land acquisition is unavoidable, the
                                                                borrower will consult project affected persons,
                                                                compensate for lost assets at replacement costs
                                                                and provide assistance to improve/ restore
                                                                livelihoods and standards of living to pre-
                                                                displacement levels in the event of
                                                                displacement. The RPF also includes
                                                                Voluntary Land Donation principles and
                                                                processes.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                       N               No dams will be supported under the project.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP N
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60           N

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The restructuring responds to the Government's request to refocus the project on delivering investments at
village level in order to enhance the resilience of communities. Investments will be piloted in an initial set of
villages that are selected based on climate and disaster risk, vulnerability and poverty criteria. It is anticipated
that these will focus on East and West Tanna, with possible additional investments in the Shepherds Islands.
Further outputs from the agricultural and water security work supported under initial project implementation
will be linked to the village-level investments. The eligible activities from which communities can select are
expected to include (i) uptake of improved agricultural practices; (ii) improved water supply, (iii) feeder
roads, and (iv) evacuation shelters.

The nature and scale of potential impacts will be at a similar scale to the original project. The profile of the
village-level and community-based projects investments remains small-scale. Based on initial screening of
eligible project options, and consultations with local stakeholders in the core implementation area of Tanna,
the expectation is for environmental and social impacts to be short-term, site-specific, and non-sensitive.

There are no anticipated large scale, significant and / or irreversible impacts. Potential short term impacts
from construction and water investments would include sustainability of aggregates and sand, ensuring land
owner approvals to avoid conflict, occupational health risks, and localized disposal of construction materials.
Localized areas under cropping could potentially increase or intensify, but this will be within the

                                                    Page 6 of 9
beneficiaries’ land. In the majority of cases where the selected priority of villages is water security, the
investments are expected to be in the form of rainwater harvesting systems. As such, the geographic footprint
and impact on habitat and land tenure is expected to be minimal. For other villages, it is expected that the
best technical solution for water security would be gravity-fed piped systems. This option would be
implemented on the basis of community participation and management, including land owners along the
pipeline, and other water users. Sustainability of water supply will be assessed at the scheme design stage to
ensure instream water flow is sufficient for downstream users and instream ecology.
The original ESMF has been updated by the Government of Vanuatu to guide the implementing agencies in
screening proposed activities for environmental and social impacts and in formulating relevant measures to
address the impacts where necessary.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Long term impacts from the project are expected to be positive such as improved water storage capacity in
vulnerable communities, the adoption of climate-resilient crops, and increased capacity of farmers to adapt to
the impacts of climate variability and change.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The project seeks to pilot investments to mitigate climate vulnerability of vulnerable communities in Vanuatu
and is therefore not expected to have any irreversible adverse negative impacts; no alternatives are relevant to
the project.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The VGMD PMU is responsible for implementation of the ESMF as the Project Implementing Agency, and
is responsible for ensuring that the Implementing Partners (Civil Society Organization Consortium, VARTC,
Dept of Local Authorities (provincial and area secretaries), Area Councils, Department of Water) are familiar
with the safeguards management measures and requirements for project implementation.

The PMU has been implementing an ESMF since the project inception, in 2013. Training was provided to
the PMU and Implementing Partners on two occasions by the World Bank task team safeguards specialists.
The ESMF is integrated into the Project Operations Manual and fully integrated into the work programme of
the PMU and the implementing agencies. Results to date show that the PMU are capable of implementing
the checklist screening process for each subproject, and no significant impacts or conflicts have arisen to
date. There has been no need for any stand alone EMP for any subprojects, based on the outcomes of the
screening processes. There has been no involuntary resettlement to date.

The World Bank safeguards specialists will continue to support the PMU during implementation supervision
missions, and will review capacity and provide specific training on an as-required basis.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The client has conducted a series of discussions through workshops, training and community dialog with the
various stakeholders of the project to engage their participation in the project to date, and participation in the
planning of the restructured project. Those specifically consulted on the safeguards instruments for the
restructuring process are the Department of Local Authorities, Department of Environmental Protection and
Conservation and the multi-agency Provincial Technical Advisory Commission (PTAC) on Tanna. Feedback
has been included in the final frameworks. Community engagement and empowerment is the cornerstone of
the approach to the subproject development and implementation. This has been done to date, and will
continue to be done, by the Implementation Partners, supported and supervised by the PMU. The outcomes
of the subprojects are to improve resilience in the communities, and therefore their engagement in the project

                                                   Page 7 of 9
    design and decision making is an integrated part of the approach.

    In addition, as part of the selection and preparation process of the micro-projects as well as during the
    project finalization ceremony, the government technical staff and community leaders will continue to
    emphasize the need to protect watersheds given their importance in the water sources in general and for the
    gravity fed systems in particular.

    Consultation with communities and institutions involved in project implementation includes, and will
    continue to include, information on the ESMF and RPF and how it will relate to their investment. Each
    village group / institution will be made aware of the ESMF and RPF, and the obligations for screening risks
    and mitigating potential impacts. They will be made aware of the ‘prohibited’ list of activities that cannot be
    funded under the IRCCNH because of the safeguards risks, and key mitigation measures prescribed in the
    ESMF. They will also be informed of the Grievance Redress Mechanism.
    .




B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                         19-May-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                      24-May-2017
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary
of the EA to the Executive Directors
 "In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




     Vanuatu                                                                      18-May-2017
 Comments: PHENVCOMM
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       06-Jun-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    06-Jun-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Vanuatu                                                                  06-Jun-2017
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes          [X]      No []         NA           []
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes          [X]      No []         NA           []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes          [X]      No []         NA           []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes          [X]      No []         NA           []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes          [X]      No []         NA           []

                                                      Page 8 of 9
          safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                Yes []      No [X]      TBD   []
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or        Yes []      No [X]      TBD   []
          access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or
          other means of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          the World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are
          understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
          and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
          reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):                Name: Habiba Gitay,Tevi Maltali Obed
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                 Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                  Date: 09-Jun-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:           Name:                                    Date:




                                                          Page 9 of 9
