The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Apr-2017| Report No: ISDSR16974




                       Regional Vice President:    Victoria Kwakwa
                              Country Director:    Rodrigo A. Chaves
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Julia M. Fraser
                            Task Team Leader:      Peter Johansen
        The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)



I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
                                                               Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power
P112158
                                                               (1040 MW) Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Peter Johansen                                                 Indonesia
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
26-May-2011                                                    Full Assessment (A)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GEE02


PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Bank Financing
800000000.00                                                   800000000.00
Financing Gap
0

Financing Source                                                                                            Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                  160000000.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development (IBRD)                                         640000000.00
Total                                                                                               800,000,000.00


2. PROJECT INFORMATION

 Current Project Development Objective
 The development objective is to significantly increase the peaking capacity of the power generation system in Java-Bali
 in an environmentally and socially sustainable way and strengthen the institutional capacity of the project implementing
 entity (PLN) in hydro-power planning, development and operation.



 Proposed New PDO
 The objective of the Project is to strengthen the institutional capacity of PT Perusahaan Listrik Negara (Persero) for
        The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)



 planning and preparation of pumped storage and hydropower projects.


3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The restructured project will support Feasibility Study and Preparation of Basic Design and Bid Documents for
Matenggeng Pumped Storage Power Project, and related Capacity Building. First, it will support the undertaking of a
feasibility study and the preparation of detailed design and bid documents for the future planned Matenggeng Pumped
Storage Project in Central Java with a planned installed capacity of approximately 600-900MW, including: (i) updating of
previous studies to verify engineering and economic feasibility and preparation of basic design and bid documents, and
(ii) preparation an environmental and social impact assessment study and the development of land acquisition and
resettlement plans. Second, it will provide capacity building assistance to PLN for the planning, development and
operation of hydropower projects, especially pumped storage hydropower projects.


4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
Under the cancelled Components 1 and 2 of the original project, the location of the Upper Cisokan Pumped
Storage Project (PSP) was on the boundary of West Bandung and Cianjur Regencies, at the upstream basin of
the Cisokan River in West Java. It would be located appx. 150km southeast of Jakarta, and 30km west of
Bandung. The Cisokan River is a major tributary of the Citarum River, which flows to the Java Sea on the
north coast of Java. This is no longer part of the restructured project. Under Component 3, the proposed
Matenggeng PSP will be located in the Cilojang River catchment, on the border of West and Central Java. The
scheme includes an upper and a lower reservoir, located respectively on Cimancing creek and on Citeuteul
creek, a tributary of the Cisubang River flowing into the Cijolang River. The Cijolang River lies in the east of
the Citarum River. The scheme is yet to be optimized through the Feasibility Level Design, but is likely to have
an average net head of 400 m and its installed power range between 600 and 900MW. The Matenggeng and
Upper Cisokan schemes are located on separate river systems in different regencies. The Matenggeng
scheme will be situated in rural / agricultural landscapes in forested landscapes at the eastern edge of the
Pembarasan Range. It falls predominantly within the Western Java Montane Rain Forest, which is classified
as critical / endangered as it is one of the few examples of Javan rain forest remaining. The Pembarisan
Range is unique on Java as a montane and lower montane range of mountains that is not connected to a
volcano nor comprising a volcanic geology. Most of the remaining forest within the project footprint is
classified as Limited Production Forest, which allows for forestry and other land uses. There is some
conservation forest at the western end of the Range, but that is beyond the footprint of the scheme. The
Cilojang River has been impacted by sedimentation from upstream and adjacent land uses, gravel extraction
and point source and diffuse pollution. Public Works Department proposed to build an irrigation dam several
kms downstream of the Matenggeng scheme on the River. The reservoir areas required for a PSP are much
smaller than those of a conventional project of similar capacity, and so have less significant environmental &
social impacts.



5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM
        The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)




 Name
 Sulistiowati Ms., Social Safeguards Specialist
 Warren Waters, Social Safeguards Specialist
 Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana, Environmental Safeguards
 Specialist
 Penelope Ruth Ferguson, Environmental Safeguards
 Specialist


6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

Safeguard Policies                         Triggered        Explanation

                                                           The Project was classified as Category A at project
                                                           appraisal. The ESIA and ESMP were prepared and
                                                           disclosed.    During implementation of the Upper
                                                           Cisokan Project, PLN has implemented the ESMP for
                                                           access road construction, routinely collected baseline
                                                           environmental      data,   undertaken      community
                                                           consultations, and prepared ESMP Subplans –
                                                           Watershed       Management       Plan,     Biodiversity
                                                           Mangement Plan, Social and Community Management
                                                           Plan. PLN has supervised the preparation and
                                                           implementation of the Access Road ESMP
                                                           Implementation Plan by the Access Road contractor,
                                                           and ensured that the ESMP was included in the
                                                           Contractors bid documents for the hydropower
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP
                                           Yes             scheme. Compliance to date has been mostly
4.01)
                                                           satisfactory.

                                                           The restructured project will not contain any further
                                                           activities relating to the Upper Cisokan Pumped
                                                           Storage Project, but will fund the safeguards document
                                                           preparation (ESIA, ESMP, LARAP) for the Matenggeng
                                                           Pumped Storage Project, which will become a
                                                           separate, stand alone project (to be funded under this
                                                           project). Early scheme layout options have been
                                                           screened for safeguards risks by PLN. The construction
                                                           and operation of the Matenggeng scheme is likely to
                                                           have significant, potentially irreversible, environmental
                                                           and social impacts that will require mitigation and
                                                           management. This includes encroachment into natural
        The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)



                                                           forest areas, involuntary resettlement, inundation of
                                                           land and modification of tributaries. Therefore, the
                                                           restructured project will remain a Category A project.

                                                           The potential impacts of Matenggeng will be assessed
                                                           under the ESIA.       The task team supports the
                                                           harmonization of the ESIA and the ‘AMDAL’ under
                                                           Indonesian regulations, and agreed that the
                                                           preparation of the KA ANDAL (detailed ESIA TOR) will
                                                           be will be submitted to the Bank for review and will be
                                                           subject to public consultation, prior to finalization,
                                                           consistent with OP4.01 and the Indonesian regulations.

                                                           At appraisal, the Natural Habitats Policy was triggered
                                                           because three endangered mammal species were
                                                           identified in the project area, located in remnant
                                                           forest.     During project implementation further
                                                           biodiversity surveys and assessments were completed
                                                           in the Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage scheme area of
                                                           influence, and a Biodiversity Management Plan was
                                                           prepared by PLN to protect and enhance the forest
                                                           remnants. Ten vulnerable species were identified in
                                                           the Biodiversity Management Plan. PLN has started to
                                                           implement the Biodiversity Management Plan, most
                                                           notably by forming a partnership with the State Owned
                                                           forest company Perhutani, to agree on the approach to
                                                           protect existing trees and implement a restoration
                                                           plan.
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)        Yes
                                                           In the restructured project, no further work will be
                                                           funded for the Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage
                                                           scheme.       The policy remains triggered for the
                                                           restructured project because the Matenggeng Pumped
                                                           Storage project is located at the edge of the
                                                           Pembarasan Range, which hosts one of the last
                                                           montane forest habitats on Java. A Preliminary
                                                           Ecological Assessment (PEA), funded separately by the
                                                           World Bank, has identified that the forest habitat is
                                                           critical / endangered as classified by WWF. The study
                                                           identified ongoing threats from agricultural
                                                           encroachment. At least six vulnerable mammalian
                                                           species, and a high level of endemism amongst birds,
                                                           are present.
        The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)




                                                           The ESIA studies will build on the PEA, and will
                                                           determine the nature of critical habitats in the project
                                                           area of influence and the nature and scale of
                                                           destruction and degradation as a result of the project.
                                                           If relevant and appropriate, the ESMP could include a
                                                           biodiversity management plan or similar type of
                                                           instrument.

                                                           The Forests policy was not triggered at Project
                                                           Appraisal because the ESIA for the Upper Cisokan
                                                           Project concluded that there would be no degradation
                                                           of critical forest habitats and there was no change to
                                                           forest management or access to forest resources.

                                                           For the restructured project the policy is triggered
                                                           because the preparation of the Matenggeng scheme
                                                           may lead to an investment decision which would result
                                                           in potential adverse impacts on natural forests. The
                                                           scheme is located at the edge of the forest on the
                                                           Pembarasan Range. This forest is mostly managed for
                                                           production purposes by the Government of Indonesia,
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                 Yes
                                                           and is a landscape of plantation, natural (modified) and
                                                           unmodified forest. The communities in the project
                                                           area rely on the forests for water supplies. The ESIA
                                                           will build on the PEA and study the nature of the forest
                                                           habitats and confirm whether there are critical
                                                           habitats. The ESIA will assess the potential impacts on
                                                           the forest and conclude whether there will be
                                                           significant degradation as a direct or indirect result of
                                                           the scheme. It will also study forest health and the
                                                           dependency on the forests by local people.
                                                           If relevant and appropriate, the ESMP could include a
                                                           biodiversity management plan or similar type of
                                                           instrument.
                                                           The Pest Management policy was not triggered during
                                                           project appraisal because the Upper Cisokan Project
                                                           would not purchase pesticides or cause potential
Pest Management (OP 4.09)              No                  increase in pesticide use. The policy remains not
                                                           triggered as there will be no pest management,
                                                           purchase or use of pesticides from the technical
                                                           studies funded under the project.
        The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)



                                                           The PCR policy was triggered at project appraisal. The
                                                           Upper Cisokan ESIA identified several PCR sites within
                                                           the project area of influence and a PCR Management
                                                           Plan was included in the ESMP to manage the removal
                                                           of mosques and grave sites and protect religious and
                                                           cultural sites from damage or degradation.

                                                           The PCR policy remains triggered for the restructured
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP                       project. The Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Project
                                          Yes
4.11)                                                      will not receive any further funding. The restructured
                                                           project will finance the preparation of the Matenggeng
                                                           scheme that could cause potential impact on PCR.
                                                           Some sites have been identified in the screening
                                                           process, such as grave sites and sacred groves. The
                                                           ESIA will assess and confirm the nature and location of
                                                           PCR and the ESMP will include methods to manage the
                                                           impacts from the scheme.

                                                           The Indigenous Peoples policy was not triggered at
                                                           project appraisal because the social assessment for the
                                                           Upper Cisokan Project concluded there were no
                                                           communities that met the definitions of the policy
                                                           within the project area of influence.

                                                           The policy remains not triggered for the restructured
                                                           project. Based on the List of Indigenous Peoples
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)         No
                                                           published by the Ministry of Social Affairs in 2010
                                                           compiled by the World Bank using EgiMap, screening
                                                           has concluded that there are no IP in the villages and
                                                           districts in or near the project area of influence, both in
                                                           West and Central Java Provinces. The ESIA studies will
                                                           confirm this.       Trigger for this policy is to be
                                                           determined.

                                                           The policy was triggered at project appraisal and
                                                           Resettlement Action Plans prepared for the Upper
                                                           Cisokan Pumped Storage Project. The total area of land
                                                           to be acquired for the project was approximately 833
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)   Yes              Ha of largely agricultural and forest areas. The total
                                                           population affected through land acquisition was 2205
                                                           households with 8230 people.

                                                           The policy remains triggered for the restructured
        The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)



                                                           project. The restructured project will no longer fund
                                                           any component related to the Upper Cisokan scheme,
                                                           but will fund the preparation of the Matenggeng
                                                           scheme, which will involve land acquisition and
                                                           resettlement. The total area of land to be acquired for
                                                           the project is still under investigation but is expected to
                                                           include about 20-40Ha of largely agricultural and forest
                                                           areas, of which less than one hectare of land is
                                                           expected to be flooded by each of the two reservoirs.
                                                           The total population affected through land acquisition
                                                           is not yet known, although only about 100 families are
                                                           expected to be relocated or physically displaced by the
                                                           two dams and reservoirs. A much larger number of
                                                           people will be affected by the quarries, access roads,
                                                           transmission lines and temporary facilities.

                                                           PLN will prepare the Land Acquisition and
                                                           Resettlement Action Plans under the restructured
                                                           project, in accordance with the policy.

                                                           The policy was triggered at project appraisal. The
                                                           original project involved the construction of two dams
                                                           as part of the Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Project.

                                                           The policy remains triggered for the restructured
                                                           project. The restructured project will fund the
                                                           preparation of the Matenggeng Scheme, which
Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)            Yes               includes the design of two dams. The TOR for the
                                                           feasibility study will include provisions to adjere to
                                                           OP4.27, and relevant sections of dam safety will be
                                                           included in the ESIA. As per OP4.37, the panel of
                                                           experts will be retained and will be fielded at key
                                                           milestones of the feasibility study, design and
                                                           preparation of the ESIA and LARAP.

                                                           The existing project and the restructured project are
Projects on International Waterways
                                         No                entirely within the island of Java, Indonesia. The policy
(OP) (BP 7.50)
                                                           is not triggered.

                                                           The existing project and restructured project are not
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60) No
                                                           located in disputed areas.
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)



II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES

1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
  potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
  While the restructured project will not finance the development of any hydropower projects, the studies and
  assessments financed can lead to an investment decision to develop the Matenggeng scheme which could potentially
  have significant, irreversible environmental and social impacts. It therefore remains a Category A project.

  The environmental and social screening activities undertaken by PLN and the Preliminary Environmental Assessment
  funded by the World Bank have identified several potentially significant impacts if the Matenggeng Scheme if funded
  in future. These impacts will be studied in the ESIA. Natural forest habitats will be damaged and degraded from
  construction activities and induced development / encroachment. The range of vulnerable species may be impacted,
  and this may increase the decline in populations. Community relationships with the forest and the forest ecosystem
  services (such as domestic and agricultural water supplies) may be degraded or lost. River habitats will be modified
  from the dam structures, reservoir inundation and the changes in the sedimentation and erosion potential of the
  downstream flow. Communities will experience construction-related hazards and risks, which can disproportionately
  affect women, children and vulnerable community members.

  The total area of land to be acquired for the project is still under investigation but is expected to include about 20-40
  hectare of largely agricultural and forest areas, of which less than one hectare of land is expected to be flooded by the
  two reservoirs. No census of affected people has yet been started however based on prefeasibility environmental and
  social screening some estimates of impacts are still possible. Although only about 100 families are expected to be
  relocated or physically displaced by the two dams and reservoirs, a much larger number of people will be affected by
  the quarries, access roads, transmission lines and temporary facilities, for none of which have locations been decided.
  OP4.10 has been triggered ‘TBD’. While initial screening found no presence of indigenous people living in the project
  area this must still be confirmed by the ESIA. For a full description of safeguards implementation progress, refer to
  Project Status in the Restructuring Paper.

  The remaining safeguards activities related to the Upper Cisokan Project have been documented in the Action Plan as
  agreed with PLN. This will mainly cover implementation of economic livelihoods programs, basic infrastructure
  provision, and resolution of social issues in the quarry areas, which are expected to complete by November 2018.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  A irrigation dam project is being now planned about 15km downstream from the pump storage project (Matenggeng
  Multi-purpose Dam Project of Ministry of Public Works) and land acquisition has begun, with impoundment planned in
  2023. Therefore, the ESIA will include analysis of cumulative environmental and social impacts.

3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  A recent pre-feasibility update study by Newjec, on behalf of PLN and funded by the project, identified several
  alternative lower dam locations, scheme configurations, quarry sites and access roads. The scheme will be further
  optimized during the restructured project. The Newjec study included environmental and social screening and a
  multi-criteria weighted analysis of the options (including environmental and social criteria). The preferred scheme
  configuration (with Lower Dam ‘C2’) has similar or more preferable environmental and social criteria to the other
       The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)



 options, including fewer people requiring resettlement, smaller volumes of quarry materials, less kilometers of new
 road required and less habitat being affected. The technical work funded by the restructured project will be informed
 by the PEA and the ESIA and as such should include design solutions to avoid significant impacts. This will include the
 location of quarries, roads and other supporting infrastructure, transmission line routes, operational features of the
 dams and construction methodologies. The ESIA will document the assessment of alternatives.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
 capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
 At project appraisal, the capacity assessment identified that PLN would need significant support to implement the
 ESMP and LARAP. The PLN UIP VI office in Bandung tasked with project management had no experience in the
 management of safeguards for the construction of a hydropower project. The ESMP had complex requirements to
 implement, such as an adaptive management approach to biodiversity and integrated catchment management
 objectives. The safeguards team at PLN has since developed significant skills and experience on the job during project
 implementation. Capacity was supplemented by consultants for specific tasks such as environmental monitoring,
 preparation of ESMP sub-plans, and grievance redress management. The team also received technical support at
 critical times from Bank's staff and consultants at critical times to build relevant skills. PLN set up a special unit under
 its Division of Health, Safety, Security and Environment for managing the preparation of the Matenggeng ESIA and
 LARAP, including contracting and managing the ESIA consultant, managing consultations, reviewing the ESIA, ESMP
 and AMDAL documentation. This team has been involved in the implementation of the Upper Cisokan ESMP and
 LARAP to date. It has also attended WB safeguards training workshops and learning centers.

 In response to the lessons learnt around capacity gaps, PLN adopted a Capacity Building Plan under Component 3,
 which is aimed at - inter alia - integrating safeguards management fully and systematically into both the planning and
 implementation of hydropower projects. This would enable PLN in implementing ESMP and specialized sub-plans and
 to supervise Contractor’s ESMP In future projects. Other lessons from Upper Cisokan include: i) to ensure the ESIA
 consultant have international hydropower experience; 2) integrate the feasibility and detailed design with the ESIA
 process, to ensure there is the opportunity to mitigate safeguards impacts through design; iii) develop a stakeholder
 engagement plan early on in the ESIA process that will facilitate meaningful participation throughout the project; and
 iv) improve bid documents and supervision contracts to ensure that Contractors are capable of preparing and
 implementing Contractor’s ESMP and mitigation is achieved on the ground.

 An Action Plan covering the remaining safeguards activities related to the Upper Cisokan Project which will continue to
 be monitored by the World Bank has been prepared and agreed with PLN. This will cover the implementation of the
 economic programs, provision of basic infrastructure and resolution of social issues in the quarry areas. The Plan has
 been included in the Restructuring Package.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
 an emphasis on potentially affected people.
 The KA ANDAL / detailed ESIA TOR for the Matenggeng ESIA study will be publicly disclosed in English and Bahasa
 Indonesia and meaningful consultations will be conducted in the project area by PLN. Consultations will continue
 throughout the ESIA and LARAP processes in accordance with a Stakeholder Engagement Plan. The type and
 frequency of consultation will be targeted for each stakeholder group. In general, the purpose of each meeting or
 interview will be to first convey information to the people regarding the project, and secondly to seek feedback to gain
 an understanding of their perceptions of the project, their aspirations and to receive their comments on how the
 project may affect them. Methods will include written documentation, maps and graphics, social and mass media,
 oral presentations, small meetings, interviews and public meetings
          The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)




    Stakeholders include those affected directly or indirectly, as well as the local governments, Conservation Department,
    Perhutani (State Owned Forestry Company), conservation NGOs, Public Works Department.. The draft ESIA, ESMP and
    LARAP will be disclosed locally in Bahasa Indonesia and English. They will be disclosed on the World Bank website as
    deliverables of the restructured project, but since there is no funding commitment for the construction of the
    Matenggeng scheme, they will not be disclosed as safeguards instruments as part of a project appraisal process.



 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS


Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
21-Oct-2010                                                    15-Apr-2010
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
13-Apr-2011
“In country? Disclosure
Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
Indonesia                                                      01-Mar-2010
Comments




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission for disclosure
03-Jan-2011                                                    25-Jan-2011
“In country? Disclosure




C. COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL


OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                       Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and
                                                                                                        Yes
approve the EA report?
         The World Bank                                                                        RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)



Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?               Yes


OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical natural
                                                                                                 Yes
habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other (non-critical)
                                                                                                 Yes
natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?


OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources

Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                              Yes
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse impacts
                                                                                                 Yes
on cultural property?


OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/process framework (as
                                                                                                 Yes
appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice Manager review
                                                                                                 Yes
the plan?


OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints been
carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include provisions for
certification system?


OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams

Have dam safety plans been prepared?                                                             Yes
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent Panel of Experts (POE) been
                                                                                                 Yes
reviewed and approved by the Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and arrangements been
                                                                                                 No
made for public awareness and training?
         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydro-Electrical Power (1040 MW) Project (P112158)



The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                                     Yes
disclosure?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local                 Yes
NGOs?


All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
                                                                                                     Yes
for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                   Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
                                                                                                     Yes
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and
                                                                                                     Yes
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?


 III. APPROVALS


  Task Team Leader(s)                       Peter Johansen


  Approved By

  Safeguards Advisor                        Peter Leonard                            19-Dec-2017

  Practice Manager/Manager                  Julia M. Fraser                          22-Dec-2017
