                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA15513
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                            Project ID:    P152851
                            Project Name:      Can Tho Urban Development and Resilience (P152851)
                            Task Team          Marc S. Forni,Hoa Thi Hoang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          30-Nov-2015                        Estimated   24-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU08                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (10%), Information technology (5%),
                                              Urban Transport (30%), Sanitation (10%), Flood protection (45%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (15%), Municipal governance and institution building (20%),
                                              Other urban development (25%), Natural disaster managemen t (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     312.00           Total Bank Financing:                  250.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          62.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      125.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                125.00
                              Total                                                                                      312.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to reduce flood risk, improve connectivity between
                           the city center and the new low risk urban growth areas, and enhance the capacity of city authorities


                                                                       Page 1 of 23
                         to manage disaster risk in Can Tho City.
                         Approximately 65 percent of the outcome is to reduce flood risk, while 25 percent is focused on
                         improving connectivity to lower risk parts of the City and 10 percent aims to increase the capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         manage disaster risk in the City. The core urban area is defined as the Ninh Kieu and Binh Thuy
                         districts.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will address the economic, social, environmental and financial dimensions of resilience
                         by strengthening the capacity of the City to manage flood risks on multiple fronts. Structured as a
                         physical planning program, the project includes a large technical assistance package to integrate both
                         the hard and soft facets of the investments. By protecting the urban core through infrastructure
                         investments to reduce flood risk, the economic impacts of flooding will be reduced, and private
                         capital investments will be stimulated. Road infrastructure investments will serve the dual purpose
                         of flood protection and transport connectivity and, when coupled with capacity enhancement in risk
                         assessment and urban planning, they will cultivate more sustainable and resilient growth into lower
                         risk elevated areas. Complemented with densification and improved public transport in the urban
                         core, the City will become more interconnected and resilient to disasters.

                         To manage the risks that cannot be reduced through physical planning and investment measures, the
                         project will support improved financial and social resilience to disaster events. Fiscal risk
                         management measures will provide liquidity, improve budget execution and ensure resources are
                         available to particularly vulnerable populations. For those outside the urban core that are
                         predominantly farmers, a disaster responsive safety net system program will be put in place to ensure
                         financial resources are available to households recovering from flood events. Citizens will be
                         engaged through the Open Cities program, which will play a key role in raising awareness of the
                         project and how to proactively address flood risk.

                         Component 1: Flood risk management and environmental sanitation (World Bank funding: US$120.9
                         million; SECO funding: US$1? million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this component is to reduce flood related risks in the urban core of Can Tho. This
                         component consists of a balance between structural and non-structural measures to help the city
                         manage urban flood risk. The structural measures are a combination of “low-regret” engineering
                         solutions, including surrounding embankment, tidal gates/valves and improved rainwater storage and
                         drainage system.

                         A polder approach will be taken for flood mitigation, which can be expressed as a structural system
                         consisted of a: i) closed “ring embankment with tidal sluicegates/valves” to protect area from high
                         water on outside rivers (river and tide floods); and, ii) drainage system including open canals, sewers,
                         storm rainwater retention, and pumps (if needed). Tidal gates are designed for “embankment
                         function” during closed time and “water discharge function” during gate opening. The drainage
                         system is designed based on rainfall intensity, basin area according to classification and
                         specifications issued by the government (for example, 1 in 10 year rainfall for open channel design).

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Priority Flood Control Investments in Urban Core (Ninh Kieu and Binh Thuy
                         Districts). A limited polder approach with combined-use road allows for a flexible and cost effective
                         approach. A combined system of an elevated road, embankments of Can Tho, Cai Son Rivers, and
                         tidal gates/valves along the line will be a “ring embankment” to protect the core urban area from
                         river and tidal flooding. The design of the level of flood protection will be based on 1 in 100 year


                                                                      Page 2 of 23
                         flood event.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Drainage and Waste Water Systems. This component will finance the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rehabilitation and improvement of canal, drainage and sanitation infrastructure and associated
                         management systems. This will include the dredging primary and secondary canal systems, the
                         creation of rainwater retention areas in the rural area of Binh Thuy District, and the installation of a
                         small pumping station (about 2 m3/s) in Tham Tuong drainage sub-catchment.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Operation of the City Integrated Flood Risk Management System and Early
                         Warning System. Institutional support will be provided to the help the city develop (a) improved
                         protocols in operating the city flood control and drainage systems in case of emergency (high tide,
                         river flood discharge, and so on); (b) an operations and maintenance (O&M) funding framework for
                         the systems; and (c) coordination and information exchange protocols with other Mekong provinces
                         for integrated river basin management and enhanced flood early warning system; and (d) improved
                         early warning information system, providing and public awareness raising through existing mass
                         media and organizations who have great experiences and network in the communities. Key to early
                         warning and response will be the women’s unions, which will be responsible for organizing multiple
                         training workshops.

                         Component 2: Urban corridor development (World Bank Funding: US$78.9 million; SECO funding:
                         US$1? million)

                         The objective of the transport investments is to increase regional connectivity and encourage
                         compact, mixed-use, pedestrian and public transport oriented urban development in the less flood
                         prone area of Cai Rang. Connectivity in Can Tho’s urban transport system would be significantly
                         improved, increasing transport-related efficiencies, and reducing transport costs. The urban transport
                         system of Can Tho is formed and oriented along vertical and horizontal axes. There are only a few
                         horizontal axes connecting to the vertical axes. These horizontal axes are far apart from each other
                         thereby limiting interconnectivity. Thus, transport flows through the urban center, creating increased
Public Disclosure Copy




                         traffic density in the urban core, increasing transport costs and subsequently product costs, reducing
                         investment attractiveness and competitiveness. Unlinked transport infrastructure also decreases
                         regional and interregional transport connectivity, lowering the speed of goods circulation and
                         subsequently affecting the economic development capability as well as access of residents to social
                         infrastructure.

                         Under this project, transport investments will be used to guide more resilient urbanization, * to low
                         risk areas on higher ground. Increased accessibility and connectivity as a result of the new and
                         improved transport infrastructure is likely to increase land values and investment opportunities along
                         transport corridors, which is value-creation that the government can capture using a variety of
                         mechanisms and convert into public revenue. In doing so, the city has the opportunity to proactively
                         guide urban growth to areas with lower flood risk, including the higher elevation areas near the heart
                         of the city.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Road and Bridge Links. The investments in transport infrastructure will connect
                         vertical axes of the city, facilitating connectivity between new and existing populated area in the city
                         center, improving connectivity between inter-regional urban areas and promoting public transport
                         scheme of Can Tho City. Three road links will be financed, including (a) the Quang Trung Bridge
                         crossing the Can Tho River; (b) the Tran Hoang Na Road, including NH1 side roads from Tran
                         Hoang Na to IC3 intersection; and (c) the Cach Mang Thang Tam to PR 918/Bui Huu Nghia road.

                                                                       Page 3 of 23
                         The last of these road links will serve the dual purpose of providing flood protection for the urban
                         core. In addition to physical investments, technical assistance on transport and land use, and the first
                         mass transit corridor will be included in the project. The three transport links will benefit from
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pedestrian Oriented Design (POD) and will be designed in such a way that they are walkable and
                         dense.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Construction of the Residential Area for Resettlement. The resettlement area is
                         within the protected urban core, which is currently un-developed. It is located in Ninh Kieu District
                         and is an area of 54.5 ha, adjacent to Hong Phat residential area. The area will be designed in line
                         with technical and social specifications ensuring good living conditions for residents. The design of
                         the resettlement areas have been consulted with project-affected households and beneficiaries. A
                         total of 2,140 plots with an area from 63 to 90m2 will be available at the RS. Social infrastructures
                         such as: 1 kindergarten, 1 primary school will also be built. Technical infrastructures include separate
                         sewage and drainage systems, solid waste collection and adequate power and road networks.
                         Sub-Component 2.3: Effective Transport Systems Management and Equipment: This sub-component
                         would support feasibility studies on the preparation of a pilot bus rapid transit (BRT) corridor and the
                         establishment of the Public Transport Authority. A second feasibility study will be undertaken to
                         identify opportunities for POD, which will help guide land use planning and the development along
                         integrated transport corridors. An analysis of the City’s urban transport system and its interaction
                         with land use and distribution of employment will be supported for land value capture along the road
                         corridors that will be built and upgraded under the project. Finally, a fleet of 50 buses to replace the
                         over-aged and poor existing buses. The public transport study will seek ways to incentive public
                         transport, in addition to the replacement of buses and upgrading of the city bus system. Finally, a
                         corridor development analysis will be financed under this subcomponent and will be implemented in
                         the road link investments in 2.1.

                         Component 3: Spatial planning platform and financial and social protection instruments (World Bank
                         funding: US$6.8 million; SECO funding: US$6.8? million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this intervention is to build management systems to improve spatial planning, data
                         and information management, post-disaster budget execution, and the responsiveness of safety nets
                         to flood events. These activities are expected to improve development planning in a climate and risk
                         informed manner, to strengthen financial resilience and to augment social protection.
                         In Can Tho, detailed area plans that provide guidance on infrastructure development are paper-based.
                         This slows the planning process, makes enforcement of construction permitting less transparent and
                         effective, and hinders the efficient sharing of information across departments. Therefore, a web/
                         based geospatial database will be built, which will serve as a single platform for spatial data and is
                         intended to be used across line departments for spatial planning and infrastructure development. The
                         Platform will be housed in the People’s Committee, above the line departments, to ensure a higher
                         level of ownership and commitment from the PC. Housing the Platform in the PC, instead of one of
                         the line departments such as the Department of Construction, will limit rivalries and competition,
                         which is often the key barrier in data sharing and usage. This Platform will have infrastructure assets
                         that include sectors such as transport, water, sanitation and energy, as well as buildings.

                         Subcomponent 3.1: Risk Informed Spatial Planning Platform. The subcomponent will finance a web-
                         based geospatial database which will serve as a single platform for spatial data and is intended to be
                         used across line departments for spatial planning and infrastructure development. The Platform will
                         be housed in the People’s Committee, above the line departments, to ensure high ownership and
                         commitment from the PC. This platform will include infrastructure assets that include sectors such as

                                                                       Page 4 of 23
                         transport, water, sanitation and energy, as well as buildings. The PC has confirmed in writing that all
                         future investment planning and budgetary allocations for urban investments in Can Tho will be
                         guided by the outputs of the Platform.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 3.2: Disaster responsive social assistance system: The objective of this sub-
                         component is to offer a more complete engagement on resilience through additional investments in
                         social protection resilience. This will be done by adapting the City’s existing social protection system
                         to become “disaster responsive”. A relatively minimal investment in improving and modifying these
                         existing systems (the soon to-be-strengthened social assistance system supported by Social
                         Assistance Systems Strengthening Project – SASSP) will ensure that they are able to be leveraged as
                         vehicles for the delivery of social assistance to households affected by flooding. Specifically, this
                         objective will be achieved by: (a) improving t he capacity of the City to provide timely and focused
                         social assistance - in more transparent manner, through disaster responsive social assistance system
                         that are targeted to affected vulnerable households in the aftermath of a disaster; (b) linking the
                         disaster responsive safety net with appropriate risk financing measures, in order protect the City’s
                         long term fiscal balance. A DRSN will mitigate the impacts of regular flooding on poverty reduction
                         outside of the City’s core and, by extension, boost shared prosperity by ensuring those not directly
                         benefiting from the investments in components 1 and 2 are adequately protected from flood risk.

                         This subcomponent will be done in collaboration with the social protection and labor global practice
                         (GSPDR), in close coordination with a project they are undertaking in parallel at the national level
                         (SASSP) to “support the government of Vietnam in strengthening the social assistance system by
                         developing innovations in management and service delivery nationwide” (PDO, P123960).

                         * Empirical estimates indicate that one new highway passing through a central city reduces its
                         population by about 18 percent in the United States. This implies that aggregate central city
                         population would have grown by about 8 percent had the interstate highway system not been built.
                         Baum-Snow, Nathan; “Did highways cause suburbanization?” 2006.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be located in twenty wards in four inner districts -Ninh Kieu, Cai Rang, O Mon and
                         Binh Thuy- in Can Tho city. Critical flood control and urban development works will take place in
                         the Ninh Kieu – Binh Thuy traditional urban area, located in center of Can Tho city, adjacent to
                         intersection of Hau river and Can Tho, and bordering Can Tho airport to the North.

                         Can Tho, located at the center of the Mekong Delta region, is a gateway city to the lower reaches of
                         the Mekong river. It is an industrial, commercial-service, education and training, technological
                         center, health and cultural center; serves as an important transport center; and holds a key strategic
                         position in the fields of national defense and security. Can Tho City has a slightly inclined
                         topography, contains a number of river systems and interconnecting canals, and has a common
                         ground elevation of 0.8 - 1.0m above the sea level.

                         The Mekong Delta, and by extension Can Tho City, is particularly vulnerable to hydro-metrological
                         disasters, particularly flooding. Flooding has significantly impacted the socioeconomic development
                         of the city and the entire Mekong Delta as a whole. Each year, about half of the Delta is flooded by
                         overflow of 1 m to 3 m in depth. As one of the 13 Mekong Delta provinces, and being located along
                         the Bassac River (Hau River), Can Tho City shares the hazards of the larger Mekong Delta. The City
                         is susceptible to flooding caused by Mekong alluvial overflow, high tides, and extreme rainfall


                                                                      Page 5 of 23
                         events. Seasonal flooding typically impacts 30 percent of the city area, but has recently increased to
                         50 percent. Close to 95 percent of the total land area is less than 1 m above mean sea level, except
                         for the built-up urban area located along the bank of the Hau River, which is about 2 m above mean
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sea level.

                         Can Tho, the economic center of the Mekong, suffers significant regularly occurring flood losses.
                         Recent flooding in Can Tho has affected an average of 2,000 ha (about 69 percent of the total core
                         urban area) and more than 200,000 people each year. In addition to the serious damages to assets,
                         flooding also interrupts economic activities in these core urban areas. According to the City’s
                         analysis, urban flooding caused direct economic damages of more than US$300 million in the last 5
                         years. A recent study by the International Institute for Environment and Development estimates total
                         (direct and indirect) annual economic losses due to flooding at US$642 per household, which
                         represents 11 percent of each household’s annual income. City-wide, this could represent some US
                         $130–190 million in damages and losses per year due to flooding. Yet the city does not have a
                         strategy or specific instruments to manage these costs efficiently and to reduce the negative
                         development impact from flooding.

                         In Can Tho the intrusion of agriculture and aquafarming has led to the depletion of biodiversity and
                         the degradation of natural riverine habitats. The commercial breeding of catfish, basa fish (Pangasius
                         bocourti) and hybrid catfish has contaminated the river system and is significantly brought negative
                         impacts to natural resources. When the survey was conducted in Can Tho in August 2015, the
                         dominant phytoplankton in the project area was cyanophyta 40-98.7%. This is highly toxic algae,
                         suited to a high nutrient (in other words, heavily polluted) aquatic environment. Distribution of
                         plankton is relatively high and ranged from 1,175-34,243 cells/ L. The highest density of cells in the
                         Can Tho River and the lowest found in the Hau River. The unbalanced development of plankton
                         flora has been detrimental to the number and variety of native freshwater fish in the Can Tho and
                         Hau Rivers.

                         Given the heavy urbanization of the region, Can Tho’s diversity of species has already been reduced
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in recent years. There are no known threatened flora or fauna in the project area. The forest resources
                         of Can Tho city are extremely limited. According to the results of a land inventory in 2010, the city
                         only has 227 hectares of plantations with the majority of these being an exotic species -- eucalyptus
                         trees. Even this plantation area will be converted for other agricultural uses.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Hoa Thi Mong Pham (GSURR)
                         Noreen Beg (GENDR)
                         Pierre Arnoux (GSU02)
                         Thuy Cam Duong (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            OP 4.01 is triggered and the project is classified as a
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       category A due to the potentially significant and
                                                                     potentially irreversible environmental and social impacts
                                                                     associated project interventions under three components,
                                                                     although the social impacts due to relocation of over one
                                                                     thousand households has a greater impact than the



                                                                      Page 6 of 23
                         temporary environmental impacts caused by construction
                         activities, which effects will be mitigated by appropriate
                         mitigation measures. The significant environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                         impacts are largely positive, as flood risk management
                         investments and the rehabilitation and improvement of
                         canal, drainage and sanitation infrastructure will greatly
                         reduce the pollution load on the Can Tho and Hau Rivers,
                         with resultant significant benefits to community health
                         and safety.

                         As the project is classified as a Category A, a full scale
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) has
                         been prepared to ensure the project will be implemented
                         in accordance with the requirements of the World Bank
                         (WB) and applicable national legislation and regulations
                         of Vietnam. The Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessment provides an overview of the environmental
                         and social baseline conditions on the direct impacted
                         areas, summarizes the potential impacts associated with
                         the proposed project and includes an Environmental and
                         Social Management Plan (ESMP) which sets out the
                         management measures required to mitigate any potential
                         impacts. The ESMP, contains both site-specific and
                         generic measures, including the Environmental Codes of
                         Practice to manage constructions related impacts. The
                         ESMP also includes the monitoring plan, institutional
                         arrangement and budget for safeguard implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project has numerous positive environmental and
                         social impacts. It will, under all technical scenarios,
                         reduce flooding in Can Tho’s urban core, and will
                         strengthen and improve the capacity of existing and
                         drainage and sanitation systems. In addition, the
                         investment will reduce drain overflows, thereby
                         improving public health, reducing traffic congestion, and
                         leading to an improved standard of living for urban
                         residents. The enhanced aesthetics of the city and
                         improved functionality of roads and pavements will be
                         beneficial to the local tourism and business sectors.
                         Wastewater treatment undertaken under the Project will
                         lessen the pollutant load in the Cai Son and Can Tho
                         Rivers. The Project will also improve the welfare of the
                         Project Affected Persons living on the river, who will be
                         relocated to new sites with improved amenities.

                         The main negative impacts during construction include
                         noise, dust emission, impacts to water quality, traffic



                          Page 7 of 23
                         management, and generation of solid waste and disposal
                         of about 322,000 m3 of organic contaminated sludge.
                         These impacts are temporary, varying from moderate to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         significant in scale, and can be mitigated via good
                         construction and management practices. At the
                         operational stage, the environmental concerns are related
                         to the operations and maintenance activities of the
                         invested works. In addition, according to the hydrological
                         analysis, after project, the level of water in Can Tho river
                         and surrounding area outside the protected urban core
                         area will be enhanced by only 3 mm compared to the
                         existing situation, and will therefore result in minimal
                         environmental impact, and will not affect the ecological
                         flow of the waterways.

                         The ESMP is to be utilized by the contractor to be
                         commissioned by the ODA Project Management Unit,
                         Can Tho City, and will form the basis of site-specific
                         management plans that will be prepared by the contractor
                         and sub-contractors as part of their construction
                         methodology prior to works commencing. These ESMPs
                         will be approved and disclosed by the World Bank and
                         the relevant Vietnamese authorities prior to the start of
                         civil works. The ESMP include requirements on adequate
                         allocation of budget for O&M of project investment to
                         ensure their sustainability.

                         Social assessment as a part of the ESIA, has been focused
Public Disclosure Copy




                         on project impact other than involuntary resettlement,
                         especially on the poor and vulnerable people who likely
                         suffer more from flooding and environmental pollution.
                         The proposed social measures have been incorporated in
                         the ESMP as mentioned above

                         Given the existence of unexploded ordnances throughout
                         the Mekong Delta, a mine clearance program must be
                         undertaken prior to the start of civil works, and all
                         workers undertaking dredging must operate with
                         appropriate protective measures, including sandbagging
                         of cranes, etc.

                         Further, OP 4.01 applies also to component 3 investments
                         linked to development of protocols for operating the city
                         flood control and drainage systems in case of emergency;
                         and technical studies on transport management for which
                         the TOR will include requirements to follow applicable
                         safeguard provisions.



                          Page 8 of 23
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   The project interventions under Component 1 and 2
                         4.04                           include strengthening and construction of river
                                                        embankments, construction of tidal sluice gates, canal
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        dredging and extension of the sewage system, bridge
                                                        construction. Although there will be changes in the
                                                        hydrology of the Can Tho and Cai Son rivers, due to
                                                        flood risk management measures, there will be no net
                                                        abstraction of water from the rivers, therefore maintaining
                                                        riverine ecological integrity. Aquatic flora and fauna will
                                                        not be affected except temporarily during construction,
                                                        and mitigation measures will be followed to minimize
                                                        these impacts. Given the heavy urbanization of the
                                                        region, Can Tho’s diversity of species has already been
                                                        reduced in recent years. There are no known threatened
                                                        flora or fauna in the project area.

                                                        An innovative measure to be adopted by the Project is an
                                                        ecological bank protection and tree plantation scheme. In
                                                        addition to preserving existing indigenous trees and
                                                        vegetation along canals, the Project will use indigenous
                                                        species (including mangrove apple and Nipa plans) as a
                                                        “green” soft embankment protection. In addition to
                                                        adding to Can Tho’s canopy cover, these plants have
                                                        excellent erosion protection properties.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The project is implemented in the urban core and will not
                                                        impact forested areas or plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project activities are not expected to use pesticides,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        nor lead to increased usage of pesticides. Manual clearing
                                                        measures will be employed for civil works.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Preliminary site screening has not identified any PCRs in
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           the project location that could be potentially affected by
                                                        the project. The project does not have any direct impact
                                                        on historical and cultural monuments, and religious
                                                        facilities. However, in the construction phase,
                                                        construction material transportation and construction
                                                        activities may temporarily affect access to pagodas and
                                                        churches. The closest affected religious institutions are
                                                        the Cathedral; the Ong church; and the Giác Thiền
                                                        pagoda. The mitigating measures have been included in
                                                        the ESMP and will be conducted by respective
                                                        construction contractors.

                                                        The policy is also triggered as the project includes
                                                        dredging and excavation activities under Components 1
                                                        and 2, which may result in chance finds. The Contractor
                                                        will be responsible for familiarizing themselves with



                                                         Page 9 of 23
                                                        “Chance Finds Procedures”, in case culturally valuable
                                                        materials are uncovered during excavation, including:
                                                        •        Stop work immediately following the discovery
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        of any materials with possible archeological, historical,
                                                        paleontological, or other cultural value, announce findings
                                                        to project manager and notify relevant authorities;
                                                        •        Protect artifacts as well as possible using plastic
                                                        covers, and implement measures to stabilize the area, if
                                                        necessary, to properly protect artifacts
                                                        •        Prevent and penalize any unauthorized access to
                                                        the artifacts
                                                        •        Restart construction works only upon the
                                                        authorization of the relevant authorities
                                                        •        All contracts will include a Chance Finds
                                                        Procedure clause
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    The surveys prepared for the RP and for the SA
                         BP 4.10                        conducted by the third party indicated that there are 11
                                                        HH belonging to an ethnic minority affected by the
                                                        Project. However these HH are urbanized and integrated
                                                        into the urban mainstream way of life. This has
                                                        considerably reduced their relative vulnerability and
                                                        cultural distinctiveness relative to the dominant Kinh
                                                        community. The 11 HH are spread in the City and do not
                                                        comprise and EM community, so OP4.10 is not triggered
                                                        for this project.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   According to the inventory of loss conducted for the
                         OP/BP 4.12                     preparation of the Resettlement Plan (RP) for component
                                                        1 and 2, land acquisition of about 135.4 ha would affect
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        4,539 households (about 17,700 persons), of which 1,814
                                                        would need to be relocated; a Resettlement Site will be
                                                        built under the Project in An Binh ward for these
                                                        relocated households; 37 companies (mainly construction
                                                        materials companies located along the Can Tho River)
                                                        will also be affected as well as 1 market in Tan An ward.
                                                        826 HH would lose more than 20% of their agricultural
                                                        land and 709 would have business affected of which 573
                                                        will have to relocate. Therefore, OP/BP 4.12 is triggered
                                                        for this project and a full RP was prepared.
                                                        A large number of vulnerable HH (444) have also been
                                                        identified as well as a large number of relocated HH (219)
                                                        encroaching on the canals/River banks with no rights or
                                                        claims on land. Specific measures to ensure support and
                                                        secure tenure for these HH have been identified in the RP.
                                                        As part of the RP, an Income Restoration Program (IRP)
                                                        was prepared for HH severely affected (losing more than
                                                        20% of their productive land or more than 10% for the
                                                        vulnerable) and for relocated business. The IOL and SES


                                                        Page 10 of 23
                                                           have identified 1,402 households eligible to the IRP.

                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No    The project will not finance the construction/rehabilitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4.37                              of any dams nor will the project rely on any existing
                                                           dams. The project will only involve the construction of
                                                           new embankments and rehabilitation of existing
                                                           embankment. As a result, the policy is not triggered.
                         Projects on International   Yes   The project triggers OP 7.50 as the interventions in
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              Component 1 are located in a tributary of the Mekong
                                                           River, the Can Tho River, and a river further inland – the
                                                           Cai Son River.

                                                           However, the proposed investments are river bank
                                                           embankment works on existing schemes to protect the
                                                           core urban area from fluvial and tidal flooding, and
                                                           prevent river bank erosion. A combined system of roads,
                                                           embankments, and tidal gates along the Can Tho and Cai
                                                           Son rivers and tidal gates will protect the core urban area
                                                           from river and tidal flooding. According to the hydraulic
                                                           analysis, the water level in the Can Tho river will be very
                                                           minimally affected (less than 1mm of increase), and there
                                                           will be no more than 5mm increase in water level in the
                                                           surrounding areas. The project will upgrade, improve, or
                                                           rehabilitate existing urban schemes for storm-water
                                                           drainage, wastewater sewerage, and canal embankments.
                                                           Given the general scope of work, the task team is of the
                                                           view that (i.) the project will not adversely affect the
                                                           quality and quantity of water flows to the other riparians
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           and (ii.) it will not be adversely affected by other
                                                           riparians’ possible water use. According to the hydraulic
                                                           analysis, the water level in the Can Tho river will be very
                                                           minimally affected (less than 1mm of increase), and there
                                                           will be no more than 5mm increase in water level in the
                                                           surrounding areas. It is the Task Team’s determination
                                                           that the exception to the riparian notification under
                                                           paragraph 7(a) applies to the project. In addition,
                                                           considering that (i) the interventions in Component 1 are
                                                           located in a tributary of the Hau (Mekong) River -the Can
                                                           Tho River, which runs exclusively in Vietnam- and a river
                                                           further inland which also runs exclusively in Vietnam–
                                                           the Cai Son River, and do not harm to the natural
                                                           discharge flow of neither Hau nor its tributaries of Can
                                                           Tho and Cai Son rivers; and (ii) the project does not cause
                                                           appreciable harm to other states, it is the Task Team’s
                                                           determination that the exception to the riparian
                                                           notification under paragraph 7(c) also applies to the
                                                           project. Based on the foregoing, the Task Team has



                                                           Page 11 of 23
                                                                       sought RVP approval for exception to the riparian
                                                                       notification requirements under paragraphs 7(a) and 7(c)
                                                                       of OP 7.50.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project is not located in a disputed area.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Project’s environmental and social impacts are largely positive, with the exception of air and
                              water pollution during construction, which will be minimized by mitigation measures outlined in
                              the ESMP and ECOPs. The Project will, under all technical scenarios, reduce flooding in Can
                              Tho’s urban core, and will strengthen and improve the capacity of existing and drainage and
                              sanitation systems. In addition, the investment will reduce drain overflows, thereby improving
                              public health, reducing traffic congestion, and leading to an improved standard of living for urban
                              residents. The enhanced aesthetics of the city and improved functionality of roads and pavements
                              will be beneficial to the local tourism and business sectors.

                             Wastewater treatment undertaken under the Project will lessen the pollutant load in the Hau and
                             Can Tho Rivers. The Project will also improve the welfare of the Project Affected Persons living
                             on the river, who will be relocated to new sites with improved amenities.

                             In Can Tho the intrusion of agriculture and aquafarming has led to the depletion of biodiversity
                             and the degradation of natural riverine habitats. The commercial breeding of catfish, basa fish
                             (Pangasius bocourti) and hybrid catfish has contaminated the river system and is significantly
                             brought negative impacts to natural resources. When the survey was conducted in Can Tho in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             August 2015, the dominant phytoplankton in the project area was cyanophyta 40-98.7%. This is
                             highly toxic algae, suited to a high nutrient (in other words, heavily polluted) aquatic environment.
                             Distribution of plankton is relatively high and ranged from 1,175-34,243 cells/ L. The highest
                             density of cells in the Can Tho River and the lowest found in the Hau River. The unbalanced
                             development of plankton flora has been detrimental to the number and variety of native freshwater
                             fish in the Can Tho and Hau Rivers.

                             The project interventions under Component 1 and 2, which include canal dredging and extension
                             of the sewage system, will in the first instance, remove existing high levels of plankton, and in the
                             second instance, will reduce the pollutant load into the Can Tho and Hau Rivers to a certain extent.

                             Although there will be changes in the hydrology of the Can Tho and Cai Son rivers, due to flood
                             risk management measures, there will be no net abstraction of water from the rivers, therefore
                             effecting negligible change in the ecological flow, and maintaining riverine ecological integrity at
                             the current state.

                             Given the heavy urbanization of the region, Can Tho’s diversity of species has already been
                             reduced in recent years. There are no known threatened flora or fauna in the project area. The
                             forest resources of Can Tho city are extremely limited. According to the results of a land inventory
                             in 2010, the city only has 227 hectares of plantations with the majority of these being an exotic


                                                                       Page 12 of 23
                         species -- eucalyptus trees. Even this plantation area will be converted for other agricultural uses.

                         An innovative measure to be adopted by the Project is an ecological bank protection and tree
Public Disclosure Copy




                         plantation scheme. In addition to preserving existing indigenous trees and vegetation along canals,
                         the Project will use indigenous species (including mangrove apple and Nipa plans) as a “green”
                         soft embankment protection. In addition to adding to Can Tho’s canopy cover, these plants have
                         excellent erosion protection properties.

                         In terms of temporary construction activities, canal dredging and embankment protection will lead
                         to increased turbidity during works.. It will be necessary to ensure that wastewater from
                         construction activities and worker camps not be released into natural waterways and canals.
                         Nevertheless, it should be noted, that at present, most of the canals already receive domestic
                         wastewater from surrounding residential areas, thereby limiting the incremental impact from
                         construction works.

                         Land acquisition of about 135.4 ha would cause severe impact on the affected people.
                         Specifically, land acquisition would affect 4,539 households (about 17,700 persons), of which
                         1,814 would need to be relocated; 826 would lose more than 20% of their agricultural land and
                         709 would have business affected.

                         The 13 canals expected to be dredged at Ninh Kieu district and Can Tho river embankment are
                         places where poor people live in temporary houses with poor sanitation conditions. Source of
                         income of these HH are informal business (motorcycle taxi, selling lottery tickets, food stall etc.).
                         A large number (219) of these HH has no rights or claims on land. Based on the resettlement
                         policy for the project, they will be entitled to assistance and to a minimum plot of land in the
                         resettlement site. They could also take arrangement to pay the plot of land on a long period (5
                         years). This will guarantee security of tenure for these HH.
                         Loss of livelihoods will also be a major impact of the project. A total of 826 HH will lose more
                         than 20% of their productive land, (10% for vulnerable HH) and 709 households with have their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         business affected (580 registered and 129 non-registered) and 573 will have to relocate. 35
                         companies (mainly construction material companies) will also be affected.
                         Loss of livelihoods for HH losing productive land and HH losing small business will be addressed
                         through the preparation and implementation of an Income Restoration Program (IRP) as part of the
                         RP.
                         Tan An market along the Can Tho River, will also be affected by the Project by the construction of
                         Can Tho embankment. The Project will rebuild a new market on the same site. Shopkeepers will
                         be allocated a temporary plot during the construction period.

                         The surveys prepared for the SA indicated that there are 11 HH belonging to an ethnic minority
                         affected by the Project. However these HH are urbanized and integrated into the urban mainstream
                         way of life. This has considerably reduced their relative vulnerability and cultural distinctiveness
                         relative to the dominant Kinh community. The 11 HH are spread in the City and do not comprise
                         an EM community. Therefore OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples will not be triggered.

                         Disposal of excavated sediment: Due to the rapid urbanization process of Can Tho city, (the
                         change of land use purpose from agricultural to a built environment) a huge demand for land fill
                         material has been created. . According to the EA, the estimated amount of excavated soil in the
                         project (lake construction, road behind the embankment, pipeline construction) is approximately
                         592, 000 m3. These are non-contaminated soil and will be used for levelling at needed places or to

                                                                    Page 13 of 23
                           be levelling at Cai Sau disposal site. The domestic waste during construction period of total 20
                           tons (about 80kg/d) will be treated at the O Mon waste treatment area. The dredged sewage sludge
                           from canal dredging (about 322,000 m3), which is organic contaminated will be disposed at Cai
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sau sewage sludge disposal site. In addition, during the implementation period, based on the
                           detailed design, a detailed Dredged Material Management Plan; which include all aspect of
                           dredged management process i.e. sludge quality testing, dredging and transportation plan, disposal
                           methods and sites; will be prepared and carried out by contractors, supervised closely by
                           construction supervision consultant to ensure that the sludge will be safely disposed of.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Induced impacts. The project developments will lead to increased urbanization and densification
                           in the city core as the flood risk decreases. This will result due to two key reasons. First,
                           additional investment will be made in the urban core due to the reduction in negative impacts
                           associated with flooding, such as direct physical damage to buildings and associated infrastructure,
                           and business interruption. This additional investment expected to result in greater economic
                           activity and growth, which will therefore draw an increased number of the surrounding population
                           into the urban core. Second, the negative impacts of climate change, such as increased flooding
                           and salinization will impede or reverse agricultural growth, at an increasing rate. Rural
                           households, particularly farmers, from across the Mekong Delta are expected to move to the urban
                           core of Can Tho’s they are increasingly unable to maintain their existing livelihoods.

                          By protecting the urban core of the city from flooding and through increasing transport
                          connectivity, the project is likely to lead to densification of the city. From a resilience perspective,
                          densification allows the city to concentrate its resources on protecting a smaller area against
                          flooding, which has numerous other co-benefits. First, compact cities facilitate more efficient and
                          sustainable modes of transport. The population densities are high enough to support public
                          transport and people can live near to their work place and leisure facilities so that people can walk
                          and cycle easily. Second, the approach will reduce sprawl while land in the countryside is
Public Disclosure Copy




                          preserved and land in towns can be recycled for development. Third, in social terms, compactness
                          and mixed uses are associated with diversity, social cohesion, and good accessibility. Fourth,
                          compact cities are argued to be economically viable because infrastructure, such as roads and
                          street lighting, can be provided cost-effectively per capita. Also, population densities are sufficient
                          to support local services and businesses.

                          This greater urbanization and densification, of the project area will therefore have significant
                          positive impacts. However, it will also put a greater strain on basic services. Over time, the City
                          will need to increase investment in wastewater treatment, water supply, electricity supply, traffic
                          management, schools, and health facilities in order to manage the potential negative impacts of
                          increased urbanization and densification. In the coming years, the City will need to follow a
                          disciplined capital investment plan based on realistic forecasts of increased urbanization, and
                          enhance maintenance of existing and planned infrastructure services, in order to limit pressure on
                          services that play a key role in limiting flow of emissions into groundwater and surface water, as
                          well as into the urban airshed, such as wastewater treatment and solid waste management.
                          Deviation from such an investment program would lead to increased pollution and decreased
                          human welfare. City planning should also focus on promotion of Bus Rapid Transit (BRT)
                          schemes, and increased and more efficient public transport, to reduce traffic congestion and
                          minimize air emissions, particularly the carbon monoxide, hydrocarbons, and particulate matter
                          emanating from two stroke engines. Electricity demand will grow as the city grows in size and


                                                                     Page 14 of 23
                         affluence, and the use of energy efficient lighting for public streetlights and for commercial,
                         industrial, and residential use should be encouraged. It is critical that zoning laws be strictly
                         monitored and enforced to ensure that there is no repeat encroachment along the river banks.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Cumulative impacts. Over the past years, Can Tho city, with the support of the Vietnamese
                         Government, donors and international funding institutions, has been implementing various
                         development programs and projects for the Mekong River Delta region in general and Can Tho
                         city in particular. Key infrastructure projects are as follows:
                         -        Can Tho drainage and wastewater treatment project (financed by KfW)
                         -        Cai Sau sludge landfill project financed by (Cai Rang district)
                         -        Mekong Delta Transport Infrastructure Development Project (financed by the WB)
                         -        Mekong Delta Water Resources Management for Rural Development project (financed by
                         the WB)
                         -        Vietnam Urban Upgrading project (VUUP) from 2002-2014, (WB funded project).
                         -        Mekong Delta Urban Upgrading project (MDR-UUP) from 2012 - 2017 (VUUP2)
                         (financed by the WB)
                         -        Mekong Delta Urban Upgrading project (MDR-UUP) from 2012 - 2017 (VUUP2)
                         In assessing cumulative impacts, in addition to assessing the positive and negative impacts of
                         urban infrastructure projects, the impacts of industrial facilities on the city’s en vironment must
                         also be evaluated.

                          Can Tho City has 5/8 industrial parks which contain 211 existing and proposed investment
                         projects in force, of which 188 projects are operating, 15 projects are being built, and 5 projects
                         have not been implemented. Under Decision No. 22/2012/QĐ-UBND dated 08/24/2012 of Can
                         Tho City People's Committee, the industrial park management units are responsible for organizing
                         plan preparation, construction investment, managing and operating the drainage systems in
                         industrial parks under their management.

                         According to the current regulations, all wastewater from industrial parks must be collected and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         treated to meet discharge requirements before discharging into the receiving water. In order to
                         solve environmental problems in industrial parks, the city has implemented the construction of a
                         centralized wastewater treatment plant in Tra Noc Industrial Park, Hung Phu Industrial Park and
                         Thot Not, of which, the centralized wastewater treatment plant in Thot Not Industrial Park Phase 1
                         was inaugurated in August 2013 and officially came into operation from February 2014. The phase
                         1 wastewater treatment plant in Thot Not Industrial Park has the capacity of 2,500m3/day, with
                         total fund of 52.7 billion dong, mainly serving seafood companies operating in the industrial park.

                         The centralized wastewater treatment plant in Tra Noc Industrial Park was started on April 18,
                         2013, with capacity of 12,000m3/day and a total investment of 213 billion dong. The plant in
                         Phase 1 has the capacity of 6,000m3/day. By the first quarter of 2014, construction of central
                         treatment tank, settling tank and disinfection tank was completed. Administration house
                         construction progress gained 85%, sludge treatment house 60%. In the second quarter, the
                         construction unit is urgently finishing construction of pipelines to collect wastewater in Tra Noc 2
                         Industrial Park in order to take wastewater from the processing plants to the concentrated
                         wastewater treatment plant.

                         When the two wastewater treatment plants in Thot Not and Tra Noc Industrial Parks come into full
                         operation, they will help the city solve part of the environmental pollution problems in industrial
                         parks. Construction of wastewater treatment plants in Industrial Parks is mandatory, because

                                                                    Page 15 of 23
                           industrial parks not having a concentrated wastewater treatment plant will be closed, under a
                           directive from the Prime Minister.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           -        Given this context, cumulative impacts in the ESIA report focused on impact, in oder of
                           magnitude, on the most relevant Valuable Ecological Components (VECs) that may be affected by
                           the CTUDR project. These VECS have been selected and assessed against other related and
                           ancillary projects (both industrial and in urban infrastructure) that may have a cumulative impact
                           on the Hau and Can Tho rivers:
                           a.       Water quality
                           b.       Aquatic Bio-diversity
                           c.       The quality of life of local communities
                           d.       Downstream water use

                           -        In summary, most potential urban infrastructure projects are likely to have largely positive
                           impacts, through improving water treatment, solid waste management, and drainage along major
                           roads, reducing water and air pollution, and improving the urban environment as well as
                           performing vital flood control functions. While the industrial parks do impose significant impacts
                           on groundwater and surface water quality, these can be mitigated to some extent by the proper
                           operation and regular maintenance of the treatment plants under construction. The CTUDR itself
                           has largely positive impacts, as there is no net abstraction from the river, therefore preserving
                           riverine ecological integrity. The wastewater treatment measures lessen the pollutant load in the
                           waterways.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           In the absence of the Project, flooding and tidal surges would continue unabated. There would be
                           deterioration of environmental sanitation conditions -air pollution, solid waste, accretion of sludge,
                           and other negative environmental impacts -- that would have detrimental effects on the welfare of
                           the citizens of Can Tho. During the modeling exercise, proposed design alternatives were analyzed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           based on technical, economic, social and environmental considerations.
                            “Without project”: In the absence of the Project, flooding and tidal surges will continue unabated.
                           There will be deterioration of environmental sanitation conditions: air pollution, solid waste,
                           accretion of sludge, and other negative environmental impacts, that would have detrimental effects
                           on the welfare of the citizens of Can Tho.
                            “With project”
                           Analysis of the 5 proposed flood control options was undertaken. : Multi Criteria Analysis (MCA)
                           considered technical, economic, environmental, social, and resettlement aspects and cost-
                           effectiveness analysis at a preliminary level to select a feasible option.
                           Alternatives for Flood Control System
                           Under component 1, the alternatives for flood control system have also been analyzed:
                           Alternatives for selecting engineering and technology options for Can Tho embankment; and
                           Alternatives for selecting engineering and technology options for construction road and park
                           behind embankment: Option 1 was selected for economic and technical reasons, and to enhance
                           urban aesthetics as it will be constructed in line with the prior embankment system and can
                           increase elevation, reducing flood risk in the future. The road will connect with other areas of the
                           City.
                           Alternatives for selecting engineering and technology options for Dau Sau and Cai Khe tide sluice
                           gate: The most environmentally friendly and aesthetically pleasing option was selected.
                           Alternatives for selecting engineering and technology options for five ship locks: Option 1 has


                                                                     Page 16 of 23
                           been selected due to as it was judged to have the greatest impact on water pollution and odour
                           control.
                            Alternatives for Environmental Sanitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Four alternatives have been taken into consideration namely: (1) Alternative 1: Continue to build
                           separated drainage system to drain 100% of storm water; (2) Alternative 2: Construction of
                           separately drainage system. Rehabilitation of the existing drainage system to ensure the capacity
                           of 30% storm water and newly construction of storm water drainage system, ensure to drain 70%
                           remaining storm water; (3) Alternative 3: basically, Alternative 3 is similar to Alternative 2,
                           drainage direction and receiving sources for the catchments; (4) Alternative 4: Storm water is
                           collected maximally to Xang Thoi Lake, only small volume near Cai Khe Canal ( Route of Mau
                           Than, Tran Hung Dao, Xo Viet Nghe Tinh, Nguyen Trai) drain to Cai Khe Canal.
                           Alternative No 4 has been selected due to lowest possibility of flood risk and the creation of an
                           improved environment and landscaping around the drainage system
                           Alternatives Of Investment Scale For Urban Corridor Development
                           Alternative for Quang Trung Bridge: To ensure the connection between the old bridge and the new
                           bridge, creating a focal point for the southern gate of the city of Can Tho. Alternative 2 was
                           selected due to its having the shortest construction period, therefore negative impacts are reduced.
                           Alternative for the connecting road to the August Revolution road to provincial road 918: Two
                           options have been analyzed. Option 2 has been selected due lower costs and reduced need for
                           resettlement.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The PMU will be responsible for the overall implementation of the resettlement plan (RP) and
                           environmental and social management plans (ESMP); coordination among agencies (City peoples
                           Committee and local government agencies); and the preparation of progress reports and project-
                           related information, with the involvement and consultation of project affected people. Most of the
                           PMU officials are familiar with the Bank's safeguards policies and requirements as they have been
                           working for two Bank-funded Urban Upgrading projects, though they have committed to hire
Public Disclosure Copy




                           more experienced staff for project preparation and implementation, including dedicated
                           environmental and social specialists as needed.

                          The PMU has been provided with training on the Bank's social and environmental safeguard
                          policies and practices. Moreover, additional training will be undertaken. The scope of the technical
                          assistance would cover support from experts and training that would cover both the knowledge on
                          safeguards requirements and procedures for the project as well as training that covers both specific
                          knowledge on safeguard procedures and requirement for the project staff, consultants, and national
                          contractor would be important. This would include, for example, assistance in the preparation of
                          documents and implementation of training program on environmental management and
                          environmental monitoring for contractors, CSC and relevant staffs of PMU (environmental staffs
                          and coordinators of packages) to do their tasks. It would also include assisting the PMU’s
                          environmental staffs with the review of contract documents on the bidding packages for
                          construction items of the project to ensure compliance with environmental protection policies and
                          impact mitigation and monitoring requirements as well as provide general environmental guidance
                          as requested by the PMU to enhance overall project implementation and performance.

                          Given the nature, locations, and scale of construction, it is anticipated that the safeguard technical
                          assistance support and training will be provided at least during the first 3 years of the project
                          implementation. The WB safeguard specialists will participate in the capacity building in


                                                                     Page 17 of 23
                         particular in the training activities as appropriate.

                         Can Tho City’s experience in earlier Bank-financed urban projects (VUUP1 and VUUP2) has
Public Disclosure Copy




                         demonstrated ability to implement environmental and social mitigation measures and resettlement
                         plans as required by the Bank.

                         Mitigation measures will include :
                         Construction phase:
                         (i) Noise and Vibration: Setting up appropriate operational schedule of noise generate equipment;
                         Use modern and new construction machineries and equipment which generate lower noise level
                         and carry out equipment maintenance as regulated by the Government; Usage of machines
                         generate noise level over >55 dBA at night (from 22:00 to 6:00) is strictly prohibited at the
                         location nearby residential area; Heavy truck transportation, loading/unloading shall not allow to
                         operate at night (from 22:00 to 6:00);
                         (ii) Air pollution: Spraying water to maintain certain moisture levels, and to prevent or minimize
                         dust dispersion. The watering activities are proposed at least one a day during rainy season and
                         twice a day during dry season. Storing the excavated soil storage areas must be placed in the
                         designed areas far from any residential area, keeping a distant to the surrounding sensitive
                         receptors and not allow to stay on site over 24 hours;
                         (iii) Domestic waste: Domestic waste generated on the site shall be managed as the following
                         steps: i) provide dustbins at work site; ii) waste category for reuse; iii) domestic waste and
                         garbage from worker camps need to be collected by hygienic manner through service provision of
                         local companies.
                         (iv) Construction-generated solid waste: Wherever possible, materials used or generated by
                         construction shall be recycled such as excavated soil for regulatory lake, embankment, pipeline
                         installation could be reused for levelling purpose on the sites, Construction wastes will be disposed
                         at area where are approved Can Tho’ PC on the disposal construction waster; Dredged sludge will
                         be transported to Cai Sau sludge landfill. According to PPMU, The location to construct Cai Sau
                         landfill has enough land for disposal of dredging sludge and material of CTUDR project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Operation phase:
                         To reduce risks of flooding, odor, salinization and disruption to the activity of inland waterway:
                         •        Ensure implementation of an adequate operation and management plan budget allocated
                         •        Ensure that traffic safety provisions, including signs, lights, and pavement markings, that
                         were installed during construction are permanently and effectively maintained, and renewed as
                         necessary
                         •        Ensure the city’s operations and maintenance plan, and related budget, includes the work
                         and resources required to maintain the road in its as-completed condition
                         •        Ensure, with the assistance of the traffic control authority, that overloaded vehicles do not
                         use the road.

                         An innovative measure to be adopted by the Project is an ecological bank protection and tree
                         plantation scheme. In addition to preserving existing indigenous trees and vegetation along canals,
                         the Project will use indigenous species (including mangrove apple and Nipa plans) as a “green”
                         soft embankment protection. In addition to adding to Can Tho’s canopy cover, these plants have
                         excellent erosion protection properties.

                         OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement
                         During the project preparation, technical options were carefully analyzed in all components to

                                                                     Page 18 of 23
                         minimize the scope of land acquisition and its consequent impacts. As agreed at the PCN stage, A
                         Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared to comply with the Bank OP4.12 to serve as a
                         legal basis for compensation and resettlement activities of the project (as required by the Land
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Law). Changes in design may also occur during detailed design and construction. The RPF will
                         guide the preparation of resettlement documents in case of change of design. .As all the project
                         activities will be known during project preparation, a Resettlement Plan (RP) has been developed
                         before the project appraisal to be in line with the prepared RPF. The RP will have to be updated if
                         there will be substantial changes in the project design and/or in the scope of the project impact
                         during project implementation. If there are substantial changes, the RP will need to be submitted
                         and cleared by the Bank.

                         There is an on-going compensation and resettlement activities for the Government funded C an
                         Tho river embankment project (started in 2008) in Ninh Kieu district, the civil work of which will
                         be included in the proposed CTUDR. For the time being, 432 out of 580 affected households
                         (about 75%) have received the compensation payment during 2011-2015 with the total amount of
                         VND 101 bill.. All 175 relocated households have been allocated a land plot in two city’s
                         resettlement sites. A due diligence review of compensation and resettlement activities for these
                         HHs has been conducted to identify the gaps between the applied and the proposed project policies
                         to determine additional measures to fill in the gaps. The review with proposed additional
                         compensation and resettlement measures for these affected households is attached as a part of the
                         RP (Annex 12) to be monitored both internally and externally during the project implementation.

                         The city has agreed to use the proposed RPF and RP for CTUDR in conducting land acquisition in
                         advance for the project resettlement site to meet relocation needs of the affected people in a timely
                         manner. A due diligence review will be conducted for compensation and resettlement activities
                         once the CTUDR RPF/RP will have been approved to ensure the project policies are properly
                         applied for the resettlement site land acquisition activities.
                         The screening of linked activities showed that there are three linked projects, two of which were
                         reviewed (in 2011-2012) during preparation of the Bank-funded Mekong Delta Region Urban
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Upgrading project (MDR-UUP) and the due diligence review results had showed that there were
                         no outstanding issues and no further actions were required. The third one is MDR-UUP itself, all
                         land acquisition activities of which have followed the agreed RPF and RP of the project, so no
                         further action will be needed.

                         Independent asset valuation. The PMU will engage professional asset valuators during RP
                         implementation to conduct an asset market price survey to be the basis for compensation rates at
                         full replacement value.

                         A resettlement site of about 54.5 ha in Ninh Kieu district will be developed to accommodate the
                         needs of relocated households, most of which currently live in Ninh Kieu district. In addition,
                         more options of uti lizing the available residential land plots in the city will be provided to the
                         affected people.

                         Independent resettlement monitoring. The PMU will contract an experienced independent
                         resettlement monitoring agency (IMA) for external monitoring of RP implementation. The IMA
                         will submit bi-annual reports to the PMU and to the Bank. The IMA will also conduct an
                         evaluation of resettlement implementation 6-12 months after the completion of all resettlement
                         activities. Additional assistance will be provided to those who would not be able to restore the lost
                         assets and livelihood.

                                                                   Page 19 of 23
                           Grievances redress mechanisms (GRM). The RP describes the procedures and responsibility of
                           related agencies in receiving, redressing and recording all grievances and complaints from the DPs
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and their resolutions. Project affected people will be provided information on the GRM and
                           related agencies in charge of solving project complaints on land, assets acquisition, physical
                           relocation and income restoration.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The communities in the core Can Tho urban area affected by the project works are the key
                           stakeholders. Other stakeholders include the local authorities and infrastructure services agencies.
                           In accordance with Vietnamese requirements and Bank policy, the potentially affected people have
                           been consulted twice.

                          To implement the ESIA report of the CTUDR, the ODA-PMU organized consultation meetings
                          with the People’s Committees and Vietnam Fatherland Front of 20 wards in 4 districts of Ninh
                          Kieu, Binh Thuy, Cai Rang and O Mon.

                          Before consulting at wards, the ODA-PMU held general meetings at each district to introduce
                          about the project and collect opinions for the project, including the meeting at office of Ninh Kieu
                          DPC on 01 June 2015, the meeting at office of Binh Thuy DPC on 02 June 2015, the meeting at
                          office of O Mon DPC on 03 June 2015 and the meeting at office of Cai Rang DPC on 08 June
                          2015. The participants at these meetings consist of representatives of DPC, WPC and some
                          divisions.

                          After holding the general meetings at districts, the ODA-PMU carried out consultations in each
                          ward to introduce the project, identify the zone/population group in the project area, collect
                          information about the status of environmental sanitation at the locality, discuss potential
                          environmental and social impacts and mitigation measures as well as coordinate with the local
Public Disclosure Copy




                          authorities in holding public consultation in the project area. Simultaneously, the ODA-PMU also
                          sent the dispatches for applying for consultation for the relevant agencies.

                          Generally, public consultations in the project area indicated that the authorities and local people
                          support the project and desired the project to be implemented early. However, they requested that
                          the construction be carried out rapidly, and that environmental management and regular
                          environmental monitoring be undertaken, as well as that labor, community, and traffic safety
                          measures be followed.

                          The local people requested the local authorities and the project to make proper compensation and
                          arrange resettlement for them at their expectation.

                          The People’s Committees and Vietnam Fatherland Front as well as representatives of people in the
                          project will jointly discuss and solve issued raised during the project implementation.

                          For environment, communities will also be involved during implementation, as it proposed that the
                          construction works will be monitored on a regular basis by the affected local communities; simple
                          checklists for community environmental monitoring will be provided to the affected communities.
                          The detailed ESIA reports, as well as the “Summary ESIA and ESMP” will be disclosed locally in
                          the Vietnamese language and will also be available at the PMU and city website for review by


                                                                    Page 20 of 23
                           local and international NGOs.

                           The drafts of the ESIA/RPF/RP in Vietnamese have been disclosed locally (at city's People's
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Committee office and project district, wards/communes) on 23 November 2015. The English
                           versions have been sent to InfoShop in Washington, DC on 23 November, 2015 for ESIA and 24
                           November, 2015 for RPF/RP. All final versions of the ESIA/RPF/RP will be re-disclosed locally
                           and at the Bank's InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Nov-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   23-Nov-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          23-Dec-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Nov-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Nov-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          23-Dec-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources


                                                                   Page 21 of 23
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                             7000 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                             18,000 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                        Page 22 of 23
                         Task Team Leader(s): Name: Marc S. Forni,Hoa Thi Hoang
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)             Date: 10-Dec-2015
                         Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)        Date: 10-Dec-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 23 of 23
