                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC18225

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             World                          Project ID:       P160275
                            Project Name:   Harmonization of Price Statistics & National Accounts in LAC Countries and
                                            Supporting the Estimation of PPP Time Series
                            Team Leader(s): Maurice Nsabimana
                            Estimated Date 25-May-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       DECDG                          Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Analysis of economic growth (25%), Economic statistics, modeling and
                                                 forecasting (50%), Macroeconomic management (25%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.4147                         Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                               0.4147
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall objective of the project is to build the capacity of pilot countries in the areas of price
                           statistics and national accounts, in order to advance the data foundation for measuring sustainable
                           development, and to support evidence based policymaking and effective monitoring. Specific
                           objectives include:
                           ➢❨¢ Improving country statistical capacity in the compilation of detailed disaggregated national
                           accounts expenditure data, and addressing gaps identified in the 2011 ICP round. Efforts would focus
                           specifically on improving difficult to measure areas, such as housing, financial services, net
                           purchases abroad, services provided by non-profit institutions serving the households, etc;
                           ➢❨¢ Improving the quality, comparability and consistency of consumer price data across the ten
                           pilot countries, by advancing harmonization of CPI and ICP regional and sub-regional lists and
                           survey activities; and
                           ➢❨¢ Filling identified data gaps in price statistics and national accounts, and introducing a new
                           approach to allow the production of regular annual estimation of PPPs for LAC countries.
                           Promoting partnerships and strengthening the sense of ownership of the international comparison
                         between national statistical offices (NSOs) and regional and international agencies by sharing good
                         practices and building human capital.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Recent assessments carried out in LAC countries by UN-ECLAC➢❨ s Statistics Division on the
                         status of national accounts, consumer price indices and basic economic statistics have shown that,
                         although significant progress has been achieved in the last few years, substantive improvements are
                         still needed in terms of reliability, accuracy, timeliness and completeness of the information provided
                         to users.
                         The two areas ➢❨ national accounts and consumer prices ➢❨ are closely linked, as the consumer
                         price index is the reference series for estimation of national accounts at constant prices. Therefore,
                         the synergies that might emanate inside the project should be taken into due consideration as a factor
                         that can substantially improve the comparability of economic statistics over time and across
                         countries, a factor of major concern at the international level.
                         For national account activities, the project aims to address the main issues encountered by member
                         countries in providing high-quality national accounts expenditure data. More specifically, and in line
                         with the technical assistance provided during the 2011 ICP, efforts will be dedicated to the estimation
                         of detailed expenditures, following international requirements that shall advance the previous efforts
                         for compilation of national accounts data. The objective of the project proposal is to maximize the
                         appropriate use of available statistics and source data in all pilot countries to obtain detailed
                         expenditure estimates based on ICP classification, thus reducing to a minimum the use of imputation.
                         The project also aims at improving the quality, comparability and consistency of consumer price data
                         across the ten pilot countries, and ultimately across the entire LAC region. This objective will be
                         achieved through further developing a comprehensive and standardized survey framework, and using
                         better standardized quality and consistency control procedures.
                         Finally, the project will pilot a new approach in the estimation of PPP time series, which would
                         constitute a breakthrough in the process of updating regional and sub-regional PPPs.

                         Project Activities:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         To enhance the capacity of countries➢❨ national practices and methodologies in the fields of
                         national accounts and prices statistics, and to produce indices in line with established international
                         standards, the project activities will cover:
                         ➢❨¢ Regional and sub-regional workshops with focal points in prices and national accounts aimed
                         at: (i) identifying data gaps and difficult to measure areas in price statistics and in national accounts
                         and discussing the concrete steps to improve them; (ii) discussing methods for harmonizing
                         collection, validation and estimation of results; (iii) supporting quality assurance processes; (iv)
                         developing a new approach for producing annual estimates of regional PPPs; and (v) facilitating the
                         sharing of best practices in the production, reporting and dissemination;
                         ➢❨¢ National seminars and technical assistance designed to: (i) improve detailed national
                         accounts expenditure data and filling gaps; (ii) address issues related to survey sample design, data
                         collection, validation and processing procedures; and (iii) support national data validation and other
                         quality assurance processes; and
                         ➢❨¢ Development of training materials and manuals on data collection, validation, estimation,
                         and reporting, as well survey materials and guidance in both Spanish and English. The materials will
                         contain guidance on international recommendations and best practices on both consumer prices and
                         national accounts.

                         Project Phases:
                           The project will be implemented in six stages:
                           ➢❨¢ Phase 1 - Preparation: Assessment of price and national accounts situation in pilot countries;
                           analysis of available economic data for non-pilot countries; definition of a regional list of Household
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Consumption items for the ten pilot countries;
                           ➢❨¢ Phase 2 - Price data collection: Collection of at least two quarters of consumer prices per
                           year during 2016-2017 per pilot country; price data collection and estimation based on regional list
                           of items with available information for years 2005-2015;
                           ➢❨¢ Phase 3 ➢❨ National Accounts: Use of latest available vintages on national accounts to
                           update the national accounts expenditures for years 2005-2016; estimation of Household
                           Consumption expenditure structures for years 2005-2016;
                           ➢❨¢ Phase 4 ➢❨ PPPs estimation for pilot countries: PPPs estimation for pilot countries for years
                           2005-2016;
                           ➢❨¢ Phase 5 ➢❨ Sub-regional and Regional PPP estimation: Mining of available price data for
                           non-pilot countries for the overlapping common products in national CPI and regional lists;
                           estimation of PPPs by sub-region and LAC for years 2005-2016; and
                           ➢❨¢ Phase 6 ➢❨ Forecasts to 2017: Preliminary estimates of national consumption data and
                           structure based on available information for both pilot and non-pilot countries; use of quarterly price
                           data collected to estimate preliminary PPPs at sub-regional and regional levels.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              The project is proposed to be as classified as
                           BP 4.01                                              Category C, given no environmental impacts are
                                                                                expected since the project consists of training
                                                                                activities that do not have potential negative
                                                                                environmental impact/risk associated issues.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              The project does not contemplate rehabilitation
                                                                                or new works in areas of natural habitats or that
                                                                                would significantly impact natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No              The project will not finance activities in forests
                                                                                or that could potentially affect forest resources
                                                                                or their management.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No              The project does not involve purchase or use of
                                                                                pesticides or finance any activities that could
                                                                                lead to changes in pesticide use or pest
                                                                                management practices.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No                   The project does not contemplate rehabilitation
                           BP 4.11                                                           or new works that could potentially affect
                                                                                             physical cultural resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No                   The project will strengthen the statistical
                                                                                             capacity of government institutions, and as such
                                                                                             will not not finance any activities affecting areas
                                                                                             where indigenous communities are present or to
                                                                                             which they have a collective attachment.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No                   The project will strengthen the statistical
                           4.12                                                              capacity of government institutions and as such
                                                                                             will not finance any activities that might lead to
                                                                                             land acquisition, resettlement, or the restriction
                                                                                             of access to natural resources.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   The project will neither support the construction
                                                                                             or rehabilitation of dams nor will it support
                                                                                             other investments which rely on services of
                                                                                             existing dams.
                           Projects on International                    No                   The project will not finance activities involving
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              the use or potential pollution of international
                                                                                             waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The project will not finance activities in
                           7.60                                                              disputed areas as defined in the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Maurice Nsabimana
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                                      Date: 18-May-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Grant James Cameron (PMGR)                                   Date: 23-May-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
