                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA13029
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-May-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P154847
                            Project Name:      Andhra Pradesh Disaster Recovery Project (P154847)
                            Task Team          Deepak Singh
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          29-Apr-2015                        Estimated   15-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%), General energy sector
                                              (30%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%), General
                                              transportation sector (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%),
                                              Climate change (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     370.00           Total Bank Financing:                 250.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        120.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               250.00
                              Total                                                                                     370.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to restore, improve and enhance resilience of public
                           services, environmental facilities, and livelihoods in targeted communities of Andhra Pradesh, and
                           increase the capacity of the State to respond promptly and effectively to an eligible crisis or

                                                                       Page 1 of 21
                         emergency.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Background. The World Bank is a key partner of the Government of India (GoI) in general and of the
                         Govt. of Andhra Pradesh (GoAP) in particular, in their disaster risk mitigation and management
                         efforts. The current National Cyclone Risk Mitigation Project-I (NCRMP-I) has been supporting the
                         Governments of Andhra Pradesh and Odisha since 2010 towards improving their capacity to manage
                         hydro-meteorological hazards, which contributed to the limited impact of Cyclone Phailin’s damage
                         in comparison with earlier events of comparable magnitude.

                         Beneficiaries. The project, through its different components, will provide both direct and indirect
                         benefits to the State of Andhra Pradesh and its 49.4 million inhabitants. Direct beneficiaries include
                         inhabitants of the coastal areas affected by cyclone Hudhud, specifically the four heavily impacted
                         districts of Srikakulam, Vizianagaram, Visakhapatnam and East Godavari with a total population of
                         about 13.3 million.

                         Project Components. The project has seven components: i) Resilient electrical network; ii)
                         Restoration of connectivity and shelter infrastructure; iii) Restoration and protection of beach front;
                         iv) Restoration of environmental facilities and livelihood support; v) Technical assistance and
                         capacity building for disaster risk management; vi) Project implementation support; and vii)
                         Contingency emergency response.

                         Component 1: Resilient electrical network - US$120 million

                         This component will finance investments to improve the electrical infrastructure in the city of
                         Visakhapatnam. The objective of this component is to reduce the vulnerability of the city’s electrical
                         network by laying the power distribution system underground. Eastern Power Distribution Company
                         of Andhra Pradesh Ltd. (EPDCL) will be the implementing agency for the component.
                         Approximately 700 km of 33kV, 11 kV and 415 volts network lines will be converted to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         underground cable network. The implementation will be taken-up from the consumers meter board
                         and going to 11 and 33 kV feeders, starting from the beach road and going towards the landward
                         side. EPDCL has already appointed a consultant to carry out necessary survey of all the existing
                         33KV, 11 KV and 415 volts network (up to the consumer point) and prepare a detailed project report.
                         An additional consultant is being appointed to carry out environment and social assessment (ESIA)
                         and prepare the safeguard plans (EMPs and/or RAPs) as required in the light of findings from the
                         impact assessment studies.

                         Component 2: Restoration of connectivity and shelter infrastructure - US$105 million

                         This component will finance investments to restore and upgrade roads and cyclone shelters for
                         increasing resilience from future disasters. Scope of this component will include all four Hudhud
                         affected districts - Visakhapatnam, Vizianagaram, Srikakulam and East Godavari. The Line
                         Department for implementation of rural roads and cyclone shelter works will be Panchayati Raj
                         Department (PRD) and for Major District Roads (MDRs), the Roads and Building Department
                         (R&BD) will be involved.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Restoration of rural roads and cyclone shelters (US$60 million): This sub-
                         component will finance restoration, reconstruction, strengthening and bituminous surfacing of about
                         800km of damaged rural roads including cross-drainage structures, following the Indian Roads


                                                                       Page 2 of 21
                         Congress (IRC), Ministry of Rural Development (MoRD) and Prime Minister’s Gram Sadak Yojana
                         (PMGSY) standards, which will also involve widening of the road embankments. It will also include
                         repair of old cyclone shelters with friendly design features for the elderly, women, and children,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         wherever feasible.
                         Sub-component 2.2: Restoration of Major District Roads (MDRS) (US$45 million): This sub-
                         component will finance restoration, reconstruction, strengthening and widening (mostly single-lane
                         to double-lane) of about 250km of damaged MDRs including cross-drainage structures, following the
                         IRC and Ministry of Road Transport and Highways (MoRTH) standards. Widened MDRs with
                         proper pedestrian pathways, will help the state to conduct its operations at the time of any such
                         disaster in future.

                         Component 3: Restoration and protection of beach front - US$65 million

                         This component will support priority investments along the beachfront in the city of
                         Vishakhapatnam. The Greater Vishakhapatnam Municipal Corporation (GVMC) and the
                         Vishakhapatnam Urban Development Authority (VUDA) will be responsible for implementation of
                         this component.

                         Sub-component 3.1: Shore protection works (US$25 million): To finance appropriate solutions for
                         the protection of the shore, this intervention will be planned taking into account the impact it may
                         have on the coastal environment and will be based on the findings/outcome of the on-going high
                         level study commissioned by GVMC that includes specialists from multiple disciplines, include
                         coastal engineering.
                         Sub-component 3.2: Beach front restoration (US$40 million): This sub-component will finance
                         enhancement of urban public spaces and upgrading/improvement of the beachfront. This will
                         include, creation of pedestrian walkways, street furniture, street lighting, public toilets, parking
                         arrangements and landscaping along the beachfront. The component will also support rehabilitation
                         of key damaged urban infrastructure, including drainage and sewage treatment plants, selected
                         historic buildings and landmarks; and coastal city roads. This sub-component will be jointly
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implemented by the GVMC and VUDA. While restoring and developing the beach front, design
                         features that are environmental friendly (on account of natural/ecological features that includes
                         nesting sites of Olive Ridley Turtles) and suited to the needs of women, children, elderly and
                         differently-abled will be given due consideration.

                         Component 4: Restoration of environmental services/facilities and livelihood support - US$20
                         million

                         This component will finance reconstruction of the severely damaged Indira Gandhi Zoological Park
                         (IGZP) and Eco-tourism Park at Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary, located within the city limits of
                         Visakhapatnam. Support under this component also includes restoration/creation of shelter belts/
                         windbreaks; support to farm forestry/plantations through re-construction/re-development of damaged
                         nurseries for poor/vulnerable coastal families towards restoring/ supporting livelihood opportunities
                         in the affected areas and; regeneration of critical patches of mangroves along the coast to build
                         natural buffers and increase disaster resilience. The Andhra Pradesh Forest Department with its
                         partner agencies will be responsible for implementation of this component and works/activities
                         would cover all four affected districts.

                         Sub-component 4.1: Restoration of environmental services and facilities (US$8 million): To restore
                         damaged environmental services facilities including: a) the Indira Gandhi Zoological Park and b) the

                                                                     Page 3 of 21
                         Eco-Tourism Park at Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary. Apart from the environmental functions
                         (ecological; conservation and; environmental education/awareness related), both these areas/facilities
                         witness substantial footfall of visitors/tourists from within and outside the state and serve as vital
Public Disclosure Copy




                         green/open/recreational spaces for the city’s population. Both parks and facilities there in suffered
                         substantial damage as the eye of the storm crossed over this part of the city.
                         Sub-component 4.2: Livelihoods support (US$12 million): This sub-component will support
                         livelihood restoration for coastal families, including vulnerable, poor and women headed households
                         through supporting re-construction and re-development of nurseries that would supply saplings for
                         farm forestry and for creation of shelter belts/wind breaks apart from re-generation of mangroves in
                         critical patches for increasing resilience.

                         Component 5: Capacity building and Technical Assistance for Disaster Risk Management - US$35
                         million

                         This component will support investments to enhance the capabilities of GoAP entities in managing
                         disaster risks, enhancing preparedness, and achieving resilient recovery. This component will include
                         the following interventions:

                         Sub-component 5.1: Capacity augmentation for disaster management (US$22 million): This sub-
                         component will support strengthening of state’s disaster response system and mechanism. Develop
                         the capacities of the SDMA for the newly bifurcated state of Andhra Pradesh in performing its core
                         functions. This will be done in coordination with the relevant state and national agencies by setting-
                         up the State Advisory Committee and State Resource Centre for Disaster Management. The
                         component will also include strengthening and establishing the emergency response and
                         communication system of the state agencies such as fire department, the state disaster response force
                         and other immediate key response agencies in responding adequately to disaster situations through
                         better search and rescue equipment, wireless communication, enhanced training, etc.
                         As part of this sub-component, the State Government will announce a strategically chosen date
                         before the annual cyclone season as the State Disaster Management Day. It will be made official
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through an appropriate Government Order and made a part of the State Government’s official
                         calendar, with a series of activities such as mock-drills and other preparedness related activities.
                         Sub-component 5.2: Community Based Disaster Risk Management Program (CBDRM) (US$2
                         million): A CBDRM program targeted at the four cyclone affected districts will help communities
                         better utilize risk mitigation infrastructure and work with local governance system while mobilizing
                         themselves to be better prepared as well as respond to any disaster event.
                         Sub-component 5.3: Curriculum development on disaster risk reduction for Schools and
                         Governmental Training Institutions (US$1 million): This will involve a review of the current DRR
                         related school curriculum of the Board for Secondary Education Andhra Pradesh (BSEAP) and
                         Government Training Institutions. Based on the findings and international best practices, a DRR
                         curriculum for schools and Governmental Training Institutions will be devised and implemented.
                         Sub-component 5.4: Technical assistance for risk reduction and response preparedness (US$10
                         million): The component will include activities such as: (i) preparing a detailed vulnerability analysis
                         of the cities and model various risks for effective mitigation planning and disaster response
                         preparedness in consultation with community representatives and by applying local knowledge; (ii)
                         carry out an in-depth assessment of the GoAP’s Apathbandhu Insurance scheme (Accident Insurance
                         Scheme for Below Poverty Line families) , Agriculture risk insurance, social safety nets and other
                         such risk transfer mechanisms and develop recommendations for establishing an integrated program
                         for risk transfer protecting the lives and livelihoods of the vulnerable populations, including women
                         headed, poor, SC and ST and low-income households; (iii) update the design guidelines for

                                                                      Page 4 of 21
                         infrastructure in several key departments by evolving better design standards that factor in the
                         expected peak wind speeds and rainfalls, including material specifications for the infrastructure in
                         coastal region; etc.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 6: Project Implementation Support - US$25 million

                         This component will support the incremental operating costs of the Project, including establishing
                         and operating the Project Management Unit (PMU), the Project Implementation Units (PIUs) and
                         other partner agencies. In addition, the component will include consultancies required for the
                         preparation and supervision of specific activities, monitoring and evaluation, trainings, exposure
                         visits, studies on safety net practices in post–disaster situations, inclusive and gendered practices in
                         disaster mitigation planning, preparedness and responsiveness and knowledge exchange programs.

                         Component 7: Contingency Emergency Response - US$0 million

                         Following an adverse natural event that causes a major natural disaster, the respective governments
                         may request the Bank to re-allocate project funds to support response and reconstruction. This
                         component would draw resources from the unallocated expenditure category and/or allow the GoAP
                         to request the Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other project components to
                         partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could also be used to
                         channel additional funds should they become available as a result of an emergency.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The state of Andhra Pradesh, India. Most of the physical works and activities will be concentrated in
                         the four districts affected by cyclone Hudhud, namely, Visakhapatnam, Vizianagaram, Srikakulam
                         and East Godavari. However, the softer components, including capacity building and certain studies,
                         would cover all the nine coastal districts of the state.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Andhra Pradesh is one of the most natural hazard prone states in India because of its long coastline
                         and geographical location. About 44 percent of the state is vulnerable to tropical storms and related
                         hazards . In particular, the section between Ongole and Machilipatnam along the Andhra coast is the
                         most vulnerable to high surges. In addition to cyclones and its related hazards, monsoon depressions
                         bring heavy to very heavy rains causing floods in the inland rivers between June and September .
                         Andhra Pradesh is also exposed to earthquakes, though the State lies in low relatively risk zones
                         (Zone I, II and III) . In the recent past, earthquakes have occurred along and off the Andhra Pradesh
                         coast and in regions in the Godavari river valley. Coastal erosion is an important problem, out of the
                         total coastal length of about 974 km, about 440 km faces coastal erosion.

                         The state has a population of 49.4 million (population density – 308 persons/sq.km), out of which
                         proportion of rural population is 70.4 percent while that of urban is 29.6 percent. Visakhapatnam is
                         the most urbanized district of the state having 47.5 percent as urban population. The state with about
                         974 km of coastline, has the second longest coastline in the country after Gujarat. Out of the 13
                         districts, nine are coastal districts in the state account for approximately 69 percent (34.19 million) of
                         its total population.

                         Visakhapatnam, Vizianagaram and Srikakulam, the three northern coastal districts of Andhra
                         Pradesh severely affected by Cyclone Hudhud, is where the Eastern Ghats meet the Bay of Bengal,
                         making these areas a combination of marine, coastal and ghat ecosystems. Along with East Godavari


                                                                       Page 5 of 21
                         which was also affected by the cyclone, the coastal zone in these districts is classified as high
                         vulnerability zone and plays an important role in long-term sustainability of the hinterland. These
                         areas contributes significantly to economy of the state. Some salient environmental features of these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         districts have been listed below.

                         Forestry plays an important role in the economy of the cyclone affected districts. The forest type
                         found in these districts includes southern tropical mixed deciduous forests, northern tropical dry
                         deciduous forests, southern tropical dry mixed deciduous forests, dry deciduous green forests and dry
                         evergreen forests. In terms of administration, Vishakapatnam Forest Circle with Paderu,
                         Vishakapatnam, Narsipatnam, Srikakulam and Vizianagaram divisions covers the three severely
                         cyclone affected districts. The Forest Department has involved Vana Samarakshan Samiti (VSS) in
                         management of forests in the entire circle.

                         Visakhapatnam city, where the eye of the storm made landfall, is famous for its natural harbour, ship
                         building unit, steel plant, oil refineries, Dolphin's Nose hills and Ramakrishna beach. It is the
                         industrial city in Andhra Pradesh. The city has large environmentally important urban public spaces
                         in form of Kailashgiri (155 hectares), VUDA Park (22 hectares), Rani Chandramani Biodiversity
                         Park (2 hectares) and 50km of beach front from Bhimili to the Fishing Harbour.

                         Kambalakonda Wildlife Sanctuary, located within city limits of Visakhapatnam and facing high
                         urban pressures, is home to Panthers and other wildlife. It is a dry evergreen forest mixed with scrub
                         and meadows and covers an area of 70.70 sq. km. There is diverse flora and fauna in this sanctuary
                         representing the diversity that exists in the Eastern Ghats. Two Eco-Tourism projects are active in
                         these cyclone affected districts. Contiguous with the Kambalakonda sanctuary is the Kambalakonda
                         Eco-tourism Area (1 sq.km) managed by Eco-Development Committee of Shambuvan Palayam. The
                         second eco-tourism park at Thatipudi in Vizianagaram, is run by the Van Samrakshan Samiti (VSS)
                         of Nakkalavalasa, Rallagaruvu, Panasalapadu, Addatheega and Diguvakondaparti villages.

                         The Indira Gandhi Zoological Park, spread over 625 acres is one of the two Zoological Parks of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         state. It is located in Visakhapatnam city and was severely affected as the eye of the storm made
                         landfall and crossed over the park . It houses 104 Species and about 683 specimens of animals and
                         birds in 65 enclosures with open moats. It has been designated as the nodal center by the Central
                         Zoo Authority (CZA) for ex-situ conservation of the Indian Wild Dog and has also seen successful
                         breeding of tigers, hog deer, black buck and other animals. It also has an interpretation center, which
                         was used for creating awareness on environmental education and conservation of biodiversity of
                         Eastern Ghats, including its wildlife. The Zoological Park has an aviary that was designed by Salim
                         Ali, a well-known Indian ornithologist and naturalist. The Forest Department runs an Animal Rescue
                         Centre located opposite the Zoological Park. It primarily houses lions and tigers rescued from circus.

                         The three cyclone affected districts together have an area of 41,140 hectares of plantations, out of
                         which, shelter belts along the coast cover 7991 hectares. The primary plantation species include
                         Teak, Silver oak, Cashew, Eucalyptus, Pine, Bamboo and other Non-Teak Secondary Hardwood
                         Species (NTHS), while the shelter belts mostly comprise of Casuarina and some Palmyrah.

                         Mangroves are found in Srikakulam district at Nuvvalarevu and Bhavanapadu - both of these fall
                         within Coastal High Vulnerability Zone (as defined by INCOIS), further underlying their role in
                         disaster resilience and the need for restoration of such areas. These patches fall under the jurisdiction
                         of Revenue Department. A large patch of about 250 hectares of mangroves at Bangarammapalem
                         village in Visakhapatnam district has been taken over by the Naval Alternate Operating Base.

                                                                       Page 6 of 21
                         Visakhapatnam district has about 60 hectares of mangroves within the city limits, which are now
                         under the control of the Port Trust. Additionally, there are mangrove patches at Gangavaram and
                         Kotha Kordu in this district.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         There are two ‘Important Bird Areas’, namely Telikunchi and Telineelapuram, which are located in
                         Srikakaulam district. Telikunchi is the largest heronry in India with about 10,000 Asian Open bills
                         nesting. Telineelapuram has Pelicans and Painted storks with the Kakrapally Creek playing an
                         important role. The Kondakarla Ava, a large freshwater lake, with an area of 1600 acres. It is cradled
                         in the foothills of the Eastern Ghats and is located about 50 km from Vizag on Sankaram (Buddhist
                         Place) - Etikoppaka (Craft Village) - Kondakarla Ava tourist circuit. It has been recognized as eco-
                         tourism destination and is another important site for birds.The coastline of the three cyclone affected
                         districts witnesses nesting by Olive Ridley Turtles, categorized Vulnerable by IUCN. Fauna in all the
                         three severely affected districts is threatened due to shrinkage of habitat and uncontrolled human
                         activities.

                         Under the provisions of Disaster Management Act 2005, the Andhra Pradesh Disaster Management
                         Rules 2007 were issued. As part of the rules, the Government of Andhra Pradesh has constituted the
                         Andhra Pradesh State Disaster Management Authority (AP SDMA). It is the nodal agency for
                         disaster management at the state level and has two distinct objectives: i) develop and update plans
                         and strategies to handle any type of disaster as pre-disaster efforts – this includes the development of
                         disaster preparedness plans for the State, multi-hazard disaster response plans and district disaster
                         management plans; ii) undertake projects for restoration and strengthen of infrastructure damaged by
                         disasters during post-disaster scenario. The AP SDMA has made long strides towards improving
                         disaster preparedness and response standards of the state through construction of disaster resistant
                         infrastructure along the coast and has initiated number of efforts and response mechanism to meet
                         both natural and manmade disasters.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Neha Pravash Kumar Mishra (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Venkata Rao Bayana (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            Out of the seven proposed components under the project,
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       five components, namely creation of resilient electrical
                                                                     network (Component 1); restoration of connectivity and
                                                                     shelter infrastructure (Component 2); restoration and
                                                                     protection of beach front (Component 3); restoration of
                                                                     environmental services and livelihood support
                                                                     (Component 4) and some capacity building and technical
                                                                     assistance activities for disaster risk management
                                                                     (Component 5), have a bearing on the approach and
                                                                     design of environment management and safeguard aspects
                                                                     of the project.

                                                                     While the project is expected to benefit the coastal
                                                                     communities in the state of Andhra Pradesh by reducing
                                                                     their vulnerability to cyclone and other hydro-
                                                                     meteorological hazards through restoration/ creation of


                                                                      Page 7 of 21
                                                        more resilient infrastructure and strengthening of disaster
                                                        risk management capabilities, the proposed investments
                                                        are likely to generate some adverse environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        impacts. Since the proposed activities/works would be
                                                        largely carried out in the coastal realms of the state that is
                                                        marked by various degrees of vulnerability and sensitive
                                                        environmental features. There are issues and risks that
                                                        need to be managed through appropriate planning and
                                                        upfront care during the sub-project selection and
                                                        preparation/design phase to ensure that significant adverse
                                                        impacts do not arise on account of proposed project
                                                        interventions. However, there are also several
                                                        opportunities to build better, more resilient and
                                                        environmentally sensitive/appropriate infrastructure and
                                                        other facilities.

                                                        OP 4.01 has been triggered to facilitate creation/
                                                        strengthening of mechanisms whereby sub-projects can be
                                                        planned, designed and maintained in an environmentally
                                                        sound manner through integration of appropriate
                                                        approaches into the over-all decision making process of
                                                        the project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   While the proposed project interventions are not likely to
                         4.04                           cause significant conversion or damage to natural
                                                        habitats, OP 4.04 has been triggered as some of the sub-
                                                        projects are likely to be located within/very close a critical
                                                        natural habitat (owing to the fact that the coast line is
                                                        dotted with several ecologically sensitive areas, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        those defined as ‘critical’ under the policy). Management
                                                        measures, particularly diligence in appropriate site
                                                        selection would be required for avoiding/ minimizing
                                                        disturbances, particularly during the planning and design
                                                        stage.

                                                        The screening exercise to be taken-up for each sub-project
                                                        will ensure that activities that are likely to cause
                                                        undesirable impacts are largely not supported by the
                                                        project. Only interventions that strengthen protection and
                                                        regeneration of damaged environmental areas and
                                                        facilities or those that are needed to protect a large
                                                        number of people (such as shore protection works
                                                        required due to heavy coastal erosion in certain stretches
                                                        making a large population vulnerable) would be taken-up
                                                        following the requirements of the Bank policies, including
                                                        those related to consultations with general public/experts
                                                        and preparation of comprehensive sub-project
                                                        management/mitigation plan/s.



                                                         Page 8 of 21
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes    OP 4.36 has been triggered for this project as some
                                                        interventions are envisaged in/around forest areas,
                                                        including some mangrove plantations that are categorized
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        as Forests by the Govt. of Andhra Pradesh. While no
                                                        significant conversion/degradation of this natural resource
                                                        is expected to occur, screening mechanism that has been
                                                        formulated for the project enables in early identification
                                                        of such issues. Based on the screening result, site
                                                        assessment and the availability of alternative sub-project
                                                        site/s, further decision about inclusion/exclusion of a
                                                        specific sub-project/s will be made. Activities envisaged
                                                        under the project include, but not limited to, minor
                                                        realignment of roads and change of bridge locations might
                                                        result in some minor impact on adjoining forest areas. No
                                                        commercial logging will be supported under the project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    OP 4.09 is being triggered for this project as use of
                                                        biological/environmental control methods is being
                                                        envisaged for shelterbelt plantations, landscaping and
                                                        nursery support interventions. Primary reliance on
                                                        synthetic chemical pesticides is not being encouraged and
                                                        if required, shall be governed by requirements set forth
                                                        under the Bank policy. A IPM plan (basic guidance/
                                                        elements included in the ESMF) will be prepared and
                                                        implemented for all such activities.
                         Physical Cultural       Yes    The implementation of the project/program is not likely to
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           affect religious structures of local significance or other
                                                        physical cultural resources. Impacts, if any would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        addressed through appropriate design interventions. Since
                                                        some civil works are involved, ‘chance finds’ at work
                                                        sites is a likely impact that has to be managed through
                                                        appropriate provisions in the relevant (safeguards as well
                                                        as bidding) documents.

                                                        However, under Component 3, as part of financing re-
                                                        construction and enhancement of urban public spaces,
                                                        rehabilitation of key damaged urban infrastructure that
                                                        includes among other things, selected historic buildings
                                                        and landmarks is envisaged. For any such restoration and
                                                        rehabilitation work, a specific plan (for each building)
                                                        will be prepared in line with requirements spelt under OP
                                                        4.11 by engaging appropriate experts.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   OP 4.10 is triggered in view of the presence of tribal
                         BP 4.10                        groups in project districts.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   OP 4.12 is triggered keeping in view of the likelihood of
                         OP/BP 4.12                     involuntary resettlement impacts emerging out of civil
                                                        works such as roads, cyclone shelters, electrical



                                                         Page 9 of 21
                                                                      underground cabling and urban improvement works
                                                                      proposed under the project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            OP 4.37 is not being triggered for this project as there is
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.37                                      no construction of new dams or activities that are
                                                                      concerned with safe functioning of existing dams.
                            Projects on International   No            OP 7.50 will not be triggered for this project as there are
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      no interventions planned/proposed over or around an
                                                                      international waterway that could cause a potential
                                                                      conflict. There are also no activities that may affect the
                                                                      use or pollute such a waterway.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            OP 7.60 is not being triggered as the project is not
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          proposed in any disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Issues/Impacts. Out of the seven proposed components under the project, five
                              components, namely creation of resilient electrical network (Component 1); restoration of
                              connectivity and shelter infrastructure (Component 2); restoration and protection of beach front
                              (Component 3); restoration of environmental services and livelihood support (Component 4) and
                              some capacity building and technical assistance activities for disaster risk management
                              (Component 5), have a bearing on the approach and design of environment management and
                              safeguard aspects of the project.

                             While the project is expected to benefit the coastal communities in the state of Andhra Pradesh by
Public Disclosure Copy




                             reducing their vulnerability to cyclone and other hydro-meteorological hazards through
                             restoration/ creation of more resilient infrastructure and strengthening of disaster risk management
                             capabilities, the proposed investments are likely to generate some adverse environmental impacts.
                             Since the proposed activities/works would be largely carried out in the coastal realms of the state
                             that is marked by various degrees of vulnerability and sensitive environmental features, there are
                             some issues and risks that need to be managed through appropriate planning and upfront care
                             during the sub-project selection and preparation/design phase to ensure that significant adverse
                             impacts do not arise on account of proposed project interventions.. Specifically, due diligence
                             during site selection and appropriate engineering/ design is required for most sub-projects/
                             activities owing to their location on/along the beach front; close to the shoreline or high tide line
                             influence area; and/or in low lying area/s.

                             Potential adverse impacts on account of activities/works proposed under Components 1 to 4 of the
                             project may include: (i) direct/indirect environmental and social impacts resulting from poor site
                             selection and inappropriate engineering/designs (beach restoration and shore protection works are
                             specifically critical); (ii) impact on sediment and wave movement, including the risk of erosion or
                             accretion in surrounding areas (in case of hard shore protection works, which may be piloted based
                             on recommendations from a comprehensive study currently being undertaken by a large team of
                             ocean and coastal engineering experts to address the heavy erosion of the Visakhapatanam city
                             beach); (iii) impact on the drainage pattern of the area, including impact on coastal flora and/or


                                                                       Page 10 of 21
                         fauna due to changes in tidal water flow; (iii) felling of trees and clearance of vegetation for sub-
                         project construction; (iv) impact on certain/specific endangered species like the Olive Ridley
                         Turtles, including on their nesting areas (from inappropriate design of shore protection work and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         beach development activities ); (v) safety and health concerns for general public, both urban (more
                         vulnerable due to higher densities) and rural from construction activities; (vi) occupational health
                         and safety concerns for workers involved in construction; (vii) inconvenience and temporary
                         disruption to services and access to certain public places and facilities; (viii) impacts due to
                         construction material (sand, water, earth, aggregate) sourcing and transportation and; (ix) concerns
                         arising out of improper disposal of debris and other construction wastes.

                         On the other hand, there are several opportunities to build better, more resilient and
                         environmentally sensitive/appropriate infrastructure and other facilities, which is being given
                         equal importance in the design of the project. The project interventions will directly benefit more
                         than 13 million residents in the four Hudhud affected districts of Srikakulam, Vizianagaram,
                         Visakhapatnam and East Godavari in addition to the communities in the other five coastal districts
                         of the state. Restoration of roads and cyclone shelters (to restore/improve access to markets, health
                         and education facilities and facilitate evacuation/emergency response during disaster/s); shore
                         protection (critical given the high rates of erosion making several communities/residents/
                         properties vulnerable in the city of Vishakhapatnam); development of beach front and
                         environmental services/areas (used by a large number of local residents and visitors/tourists and
                         linked to livelihoods as well); creation and restoration of shelterbelts (to act as wind breaks and
                         reduce damage in future events); support to farm forestry/ (to help restore losses and augment
                         livelihoods of several families, including farmers, women-headed and socially marginalized
                         families who are economically dependent on income from plantations); building of resilient power
                         distribution system (currently over the ground and prone to high winds, rains, thunderstorms, and
                         storm surges) and; enhancing the capabilities of GoAP and other agencies in managing disaster
                         risks and enhancing preparedness – all directly and indirectly would help in improving services for
                         the affected urban and other coastal communities and in building a more resilient path to economic
                         and environmental recovery.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         In view of the potential impacts on the environment, Bank’s OP 4.01 on Environmental
                         Assessment, OP 4.04 on Natural Habitats, OP 4.36 on Forests, OP 4.09 on Pest Management and
                         OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources have been triggered, and the project is designated as
                         Category A. On the whole, with proper planning/design and implementation of management
                         measures, any large scale, significant and/or irreversible damage to natural and/or physical
                         environment can be avoided/ minimized and managed. Therefore, an appropriate combination of
                         avoiding and minimizing negative impacts on one hand and tapping on opportunities to enhance
                         and increase positive impacts on the other, will remain central to environmental management and
                         safeguards for the project.

                         Specific details will emerge once the sub-project list is drawn for each component, which is an
                         exercise that is currently underway. So far, only for component 2, the list of sub-projects has been
                         prepared (214 roads) and preliminary environment screening exercise has been completed.

                         Social Issues/Impacts. Out of the seven proposed components under the project, five
                         reconstruction components, namely - i) resilient electrical network; ii) restoration of road
                         connectivity and shelter infrastructure; iii) restoration and protection of beach front; iv) restoration
                         of environmental facilities and livelihood support for especially poor coastal families, widows,
                         unemployed youth (boys/girls); (v) capacity building and Technical Assistance for Disaster Risk

                                                                    Page 11 of 21
                           Management - would involve safeguard aspects that need to be avoided and/or minimized through
                           developing and placing appropriate safeguard provisions and systems in the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The results from preliminary screening exercise conducted for sub-projects during February and
                           March 2015, indicates that the reconstruction and strengthening of the affected roads/bridges may
                           involve some involuntary resettlement impacts on land owners, lease holders, and squatters. So
                           far, proposed sub-projects under road infrastructure improvement (Component 2) have been listed
                           out and these are 214 in number. Out of this, only 12 sub projects would have social issues and
                           these are proposed to be taken-up in the second year of the project cycle after the due diligence on
                           the technical (engineering design) and safeguards side (ESAs and EMPs/RAPs) is completed. The
                           sub-projects which have no social and environmental issues are being considered for inclusion in
                           the first year works, for which the detailed design preparation is to be initiated.

                           Other components, such as underground electrical cabling works and beach front development,
                           would not involve land acquisition but may result in temporary disturbances to neighborhood
                           population and may affect some squatters. Therefore, OP 4.12 has been triggered. Further, OP
                           4.10 has been triggered in view of the presence of scheduled tribe groups living in the project
                           districts where some of the project activities will be undertaken.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Most significantly, the reduction in the vulnerability of coastal communities, in the four
                           participating districts of the state, to the adverse impacts of cyclones and climate related hazards
                           will be a desirable long term impact from the project. This long-term generally positive impact of
                           the project will help in bringing development in the targeted areas, particularly in the local context
                           and help in resilient recovery due to the proposed project interventions. Considerations of
                           environment and social dimensions in site selection, design, construction and operation cycle of
                           assets would help in ensuring the soundness and sustainability of the program from an
                           environmental perspective.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Several proposed investments have a direct bearing on building resilience, supporting livelihoods/
                           employment and building improved urban facilities/infrastructure. Restoration of roads, shelters,
                           beach front, environmental services, and other public buildings will benefit poor, vulnerable,
                           women, the elderly, children, differently-abled, and socially marginalized populations, more than
                           anybody else. The long-term impacts will therefore be generally positive as the project will help in
                           rebuilding the damaged infrastructure and facilities such as roads/bridges and urban spaces,
                           including the beach front.

                           The proposed livelihoods component will support restoration of mangroves, shelterbelts, and farm
                           forestry for the benefit of poor and vulnerable coastal families, including widowed, women-
                           headed and socially excluded households. This intervention is likely to minimize impoverishment
                           risks of these groups who have lost agriculture and horticulture crops along with forest produce
                           due to the cyclone. Improvement in cyclone resistant infrastructure will also reduce the people’s
                           exposure to hazardous environments conditions caused due to drainage problems and urban
                           flooding.

                           Further, with the experience gained through NCRMP I and through the implementation support of
                           the APDRP, the key implementing agencies in the State, will be able to better address
                           environmental and social issues more systematically in their regular operations. The project’s


                                                                      Page 12 of 21
                           treatment of environmental and social issues specifically with regard to the approach used for
                           screening sub-projects, which is based on robust and scientific methodology can set an important
                           precedent for non-project activities/areas now and in the future.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           At the same time, long-term/indirect adverse environmental and social impacts may result if road
                           and beach front infrastructure are designed and implemented without due considerations to local
                           environmental and social features.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Most of the project interventions are related to restoration/reconstruction of damaged
                           infrastructure, facilities and public spaces, albeit with a concept of building better and more
                           resilient assets and systems. Since this is an emergency operation and sub-projects have not yet
                           been chosen, specific locations, including their alternatives (both site and design related) shall be
                           decided, as and if required in line with the provisions set forth in the Environment and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF).

                           However, the environment and social screening tool developed as part of the ESMF for NCRMP I
                           has been used effectively for early identification of key environmental and social issues associated
                           with sub-projects in the state of Andhra Pradesh. This exercise, carried out in parallel with the
                           technical assessment, has also helped in precisely identifying the location for a sub-project. For
                           location/s falling within the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) line or within sensitive environmental
                           zones/areas, an alternative location is explored. For sub-projects with significant social issues, land
                           acquisition and displacement issues and/or the ones falling within the CRZ with no alternative
                           sites, were either dropped or considered for Phase II, depending on the nature and scale of
                           identified issues. The already established methodology for environment screening exercise,
                           supported by use of scientific tools such as GIS and remote sensing techniques, has helped in
                           avoiding/minimizing adverse environmental impacts on sensitive habitats and in finding
                           alternatives, wherever possible. The same process will apply to APDRP as well since the state has
Public Disclosure Copy




                           developed the necessary experience and capacity to undertake such exercises using in-house
                           expertise.

                           An environmental and social impact assessment study (as the case may be depending on findings
                           from the screening exercise) will be undertaken for investments such as shore protection works
                           and underground electric cabling (or in exceptional cases for roads with major re-alignments).
                           These sub-projects will undergo an analysis of alternatives, especially in terms of their proposed
                           location and/or design as required under standard EA practice. For sub-projects requiring
                           regulatory clearances (including the Coastal Regulation Zone (CRZ) clearance), alternative site/s
                           will be explored, and for those with no viable alternatives, permissions will be sought in line with
                           regulatory requirements.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental and Social Management and Safeguards Instrument: In order to ensure effective
                           environmental management in a scenario where multiple sub-projects/activities are proposed at
                           different locations along the coast of Andhra Pradesh and their specific locations are not known (at
                           this stage of project preparation), an approach involving preparation, application and
                           implementation of an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF) is being adopted
                           for the project. It includes: (a) Environment and Social Screening approach and methodology and;
                           (b) Environment and Social Assessment for certain type of sub-projects (such as shore protection

                                                                      Page 13 of 21
                         works and underground electric cabling works); (c) provides specific guidelines and generic
                         management measures for all category of works/activities proposed under the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environment Management and Safeguards

                         Despite the emergency nature of the operation and very limited time available for project
                         preparation, the client has prepared an ESMF in line with Bank’s requirements. Following the
                         review of the draft document and suggestions received from the Bank, the document has been
                         revised/updated.

                         The ESMF serves as a comprehensive and a systematic guide covering policies, procedures and
                         provisions, which are being/will be integrated with the over-all project cycle to ensure that the
                         environmental concerns/issues are systematically identified and integrated into the project/sub-
                         project cycle. It will also support compliance with applicable laws and regulations of GoI and
                         GoAP apart from meeting the requirements of the relevant Bank policies. The ESMF is also
                         drawing experience and lessons from NCRMP I, wherein it was applied and implemented in
                         Andhra Pradesh along with Odisha for a similar operation (but ex-ante) that is currently well into
                         implementation.

                         Appropriate measures will be/are being developed to enhance positive impacts and to avoid,
                         minimize and mitigate adverse impacts through generic/standard activity-specific Environmental
                         Management Plans (EMPs), which form a part of the ESMF. Activity-specific EMPs will help in
                         addressing various construction and operation-stage impacts. However, critical environmental
                         issues, which may result on account of improper site selection (an important factor of
                         consideration in a coastal area), would be considerably avoided and/or minimized by effectively
                         using results from the Environment Screening Exercise. This will ensure that no sub-project with
                         the likely possibility of creating significant or irreversible adverse impact on environment is taken-
                         up without a proper study (environment assessment/analysis). Accordingly, sub-projects or
                         activities without significant or irreversible adverse impacts will be selected for investment under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Phase I while others, which are located in/close to environmentally sensitive zones will be either
                         dropped from the project scope or will be considered only after duly completing the environment
                         assessment studies. This over-all environment management approach for the project has been
                         elaborated below and will include the following key steps:

                         (i)     Environment screening, which helps in early identification of key environmental issues at
                         the sub-project level. The screening process forms the first step in the environment management
                         process for the project and has been/is being carried out in parallel with the project identification/
                         engineering feasibility studies for the sub-projects under consideration for inclusion in the project.
                         Proposed investments have been/are being screened and sub-projects with no significant adverse
                         environmental impact are being identified for implementation under Phase I.

                         The environment screening process for the project will use/is using a robust methodology
                         supported by use of scientific tools such as GIS and remote sensing techniques, which has helped
                         in avoiding environmentally sensitive sites/features to a large extent. The results will be collated
                         component-wise in the form of Screening Reports. The process and documentation structure for
                         environment screening exercise was developed under NCRMP I (currently under implementation
                         in Andhra Pradesh as well) and was found to be quite effective in identifying issues early-on even
                         in a scenario where a large number of sub-projects were being considered across a long coastline.



                                                                    Page 14 of 21
                         (ii)For sub-projects with a potential for significant adverse environment impacts (as identified
                         from the screening results), an Environment Assessment (EA) and sub-project specific
                         Environment Management Plan (EMP) will be prepared in accordance to Bank’s OP 4.01. The EA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will include an assessment of baseline conditions, analysis of alternative options, assessment of
                         potential impacts, identification of mitigation measures and preparation of sub-project specific
                         environmental management plans. However, it is expected that sub-projects with the potential for
                         significant adverse environment impacts will be few in number. These are primarily expected to be
                         limited to beach/shore protection works and underground electric cabling works.

                         (iii)Based on screening results, if a sub-project does not require an EA, the generic/standard
                         activity-specific EMP, developed as part of the ESMF, will apply. These generic/standard activity-
                         specific EMPs provide over-all guidance on avoidance, minimization and mitigation measures to
                         be adopted during the planning/selection, design, implementation and operation stages of a sub-
                         project.

                         (iv)For ensuring compliance to specific Bank policies, particularly for activities that trigger OP
                         4.04 on natural habitats or OP 4.09 on Pest Management or OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural
                         Resources, sub-project specific comprehensive management plans will be prepared in line with
                         principles and requirements set forth under the applicable policy by bringing-in appropriate level
                         of expertise, as required.

                         (v)Integration of Environmental Requirements in Bidding Documents. The considerations/
                         requirements will be mainstreamed as part of the over-all decision making and execution process.
                         For environment, health and safety requirements to be followed by the Contractor during
                         construction, the requirements in form of conditions/specifications and Bills of Quantities (as
                         required/relevant) will be integrated into the Bidding Documents.

                         The ESMF describes institutional arrangements, including roles and responsibilities of various
                         players and monitoring requirements, required for effectively managing the environmental aspects
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of project planning and execution. These arrangements include Independent/Third Party
                         Consultants to assess the application and implementation of the ESMF and its instruments such as
                         generic or sub-project specific EMPs, as the case may be. Also, mid-term and end-term project
                         assessment/evaluation will be undertaken by the PMU and the report will be shared with the Bank.

                         Social Safeguards

                         For the management of social issues, the ESMF, includes RPF, IPF and GESI Guidelines and
                         institutional arrangements for implementing the same. The RPF sets out principles and procedures
                         for carrying out social screening, and preparing and implementing Resettlement Action Plans
                         (RAP) based on safeguards categorization during screening. The sub-projects will be selected after
                         detailed/appropriate level of assessment, including consultation with concerned key stakeholders.

                         Legal and Policy Framework for Land Acquisition and R&R: The recently legislated Right to Fair
                         Compensation and Transparency in LA and Resettlement and Rehabilitation Act of India (RFCT-
                         LARRA, 2013) has been ratified by the State government. The State government has specific
                         legislations, polices, and schemes for protection and welfare of the scheduled tribes, women,
                         children, and other vulnerable groups.

                         The Government of Andhra Pradesh has established strong capacities in designing and

                                                                  Page 15 of 21
                         implementing R&R programs. The capacities were built over a period of long association of the
                         Bank with the state, as several Bank assisted projects were implemented and presently are under
                         implementation. LA is carried out through special Collectors assigned the responsibility at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         district and specific project areas. The State Government has established State level
                         Commissionerate, R&R office.

                         Indigenous Peoples Framework: The IPF requirements include: (i) recording of consultation
                         carried out for the project, (ii) a framework for free, prior, and informed consultations with the
                         primary stakeholders including the tribal people, (iii) specific strategies for ensuring that positive
                         benefits are delivered to the tribal groups living in project area by addressing their socio-economic
                         needs in a culturally sensitive manner and through their participation, and (iv) measures to
                         mitigate adverse impacts, if any, in complia nce with Bank safeguards policy.

                         OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples has been triggered because of presence of schedule tribe
                         population in the project districts. The preliminary screening of road sub-projects reveals that out
                         of a total of 214 proposed works, about 202 sub-projects will not require land or will have other
                         adverse social impacts. The population living there-in have no separate language from that of the
                         majority population (Telugu), nor do they have political institutions that separate them from the
                         rest of the population. They do not have a historically based collective attachment to the land in
                         the project area. Therefore, an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan has not been prepared for
                         first year sub projects identified so far. For any activity, if a requirement is identified going
                         forward, the work will not be taken-up unless the policy requirements that includes assessment,
                         plan preparation and consultations have been completed.

                         Gender Equality and Social Inclusion: Recognizing the vulnerabilities of women and children in
                         disaster situations, the project emphasizes attention to gender equity and social inclusion in the
                         implementation process. The restoration of urban infrastructure will have design features that will
                         pay special attention to the needs and interests of vulnerable people including children, women,
                         and aged, physically disabled, and other social groups.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Citizen Engagement Strategy: The key elements of the citizen engagement strategy for this
                         operation include the following: (i) suo motu disclosure of important project related information
                         by the government on its website and at the appropriate local level, (ii) framework for consultation
                         with the key stakeholders including the scheduled tribes (IPs); (iii) ensuring free, prior, informed
                         consultation with the Scheduled Tribe groups and their representatives for obtaining broad
                         community support as a part of preparation of specific sub-projects relevant to that area; (iv)
                         upgrading the established Grievance Redress Mechanisms (GRM) at PIU and SPIU levels to meet
                         specific grievance redress requirements of this operation; (v) promoting community based risk
                         reduction initiatives with the participation of and networking with relevant stakeholders.

                         Borrower Capacity and Implementation Arrangements

                         Capacity: The PMU under the Revenue and Disaster Management Department, GoAP will be the
                         key implementation and coordinating agency for this project. It is familiar with the Bank’s
                         safeguard requirements, through its involvement in NCRMP-I (an on-going Bank funded
                         operation in the state). On the environment and social management aspects, the Unit has gained
                         basic familiarity with regard to the Bank’s safeguard requirements through their involvement in
                         the said on-going operation. Insights into typical issues/problems have been developed at the state
                         level and reporting and other monitoring mechanisms have been put into place. The Unit already

                                                                   Page 16 of 21
                           has social and environmental specialists and but will need to bring-in additional expertise as may
                           be needed for specific activities (such as those under Component 3 and triggering requirements of
                           OP 4.11 and 4.04).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           However, this proposed operation will also involve GVMC, VUDA and electric utility company
                           for whom the environmental and social dimensions are new and will require capacity building
                           support and hand-holding both from the PMU and the Bank. More so, some sensitization/
                           awareness among implementers in the field (consultants, contractors and line agency staff) will
                           also be required so that project specific requirements set forth in the ESMF are understood clearly
                           by all concerned. The Bank will continue its oversight on aspects pertaining to institutional
                           arrangements and staff capacity, as with a large number of implementing entities that are involved
                           in the operation, staff turnover during the course of project implementation is expected.

                           Institutional Arrange ments: The State level Project Steering Committee constituted at apex level
                           for NCRMP I will oversee and monitor the overall progress of this project as well. Likewise, the
                           State Project Implementation Unit (SPIU) for NCRMP I will act as the Project Management Unit
                           for this project. The PMU will be supported by sector experts drawn from each of the Line
                           Departments (LDs) implementing the project investments. The LDs shall be responsible for actual
                           execution of the works and maintenance of the infrastructure created. Each LD will appoint/
                           designate nodal officer and will execute the project through respective field offices. Further, the
                           LD will designate an officer/appoint expert for environment and social management/safeguard
                           activities.

                           Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM): A GRM will be established at all levels with clear
                           guidelines agreeable to the Bank. At PIU, a Field Level Grievance Redress Committee (FLGRC)
                           will be established. The senior level GRC (SLGRC) will be established at the District and State
                           (SPIU) levels. The grievances can be communicated by letter, e-mail, or phone, which will be
                           registered by GRCs and acknowledged with a receipt/tracking number, and resolve the grievances
                           within two weeks. In case of land acquisition, there is a multi-layered GRM prescribed in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           RFCTLARR 2013.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders: The key stakeholders in the project are those are vulnerable to cyclone, storm
                           surges, and floods in the coastal areas of the state. The primary beneficiaries will be the coastal
                           communities in the four participating districts of Andhra Pradesh, benefitting from targeted risk
                           mitigation and recovery interventions. The secondary stakeholders include officials from Revenue
                           and Disaster Management Department, GoAP, local governments/village Panchayats; NGOs; and
                           selected government departments such as Public Works, Panchayati Raj, Forest, VUDA, GVMC,
                           and other administrative officials/staff in the four affected districts of the state associated with the
                           planning, design and implementation of APDRP.

                           Consultation. Stakeholder involvement mechanisms are/will be central to the design and
                           implementation of the project and provide opportunities for information sharing, consultation and
                           collaboration measures. Guidance for this purpose has been provided in the Environment and
                           Social Management Framework to ensure proper consultation and involvement of key
                           stakeholders during key stages of sub-project preparation and implementation.

                           In accordance with the applicable Bank policies, public consultations at the local level (in areas


                                                                      Page 17 of 21
                           where specific investments will be made) are being/will be carried out. The consultation process
                           for the project includes a range of formal and informal on-site discussions, focus group
                           discussions/meetings and targeted stakeholders such as local residents; roadside and beach-side
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communities; local bodies like village Panchayats; and selected government departments such as
                           Public Works, Electric Utility Company, Marine Engineering and Other Experts and Forest
                           Department. The public consultation is being designed in a way that: (i) affected people are
                           included in the decision making process; (ii) public awareness and information sharing on project
                           alternatives and benefits are promoted; and (iii) views on designs and solutions from the
                           communities are solicited.

                           Inputs/feedback on the draft ESMF and views of stakeholders on the approach towards
                           minimization/ mitigation of potential negative impacts on people and environmental resources
                           have been sought. Expert opinion on specific issues related to over-all design/components of the
                           project and applicability of environmental regulations is also being sought during meetings/
                           workshops. Outputs from this process will be integrated into the project/sub-project design, where
                           technically feasible.

                           As part of the on-going project preparation, extensive public consultations are being carried out by
                           the SPIU (with support from concerned line agencies and district administration) to inform about
                           over-all project objectives, scope and for obtaining feedback on sub-project selection process and
                           on the draft ESMF. Four district level and one in Vishakhapatnam city consultation has been
                           completed so far and more are being carried out as part of the on-going screening exercises. Public
                           involvement and participation process will continue through the project implementation stage as
                           well. The sub-project specific EA/s (environmental assessment) and SA/s (social assessment) and
                           Resettlement Action Plan/s (RAP/s), where required, will be prepared in consultation with affected
                           communities and the draft/s will be disclosed to solicit feedback.

                           Disclosure. The ESMF incorporating comments from the Bank’s review has been disclosed in the
                           Bank’s Infoshop and in Project Authority’s website. Other relevant project documents (including
Public Disclosure Copy




                           screening reports and EAs) will be disclosed on the state website and at other places accessible to
                           the general public/interested individuals/groups in line with the requirements of Bank’s
                           Operational Policies.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        10-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-May-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        11-May-2015
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                              20-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        10-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     04-May-2015




                                                                     Page 18 of 21
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            20-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-May-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            20-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      10-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   04-May-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            20-Apr-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]




                                                                   Page 19 of 21
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?



                                                                    Page 20 of 21
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Deepak Singh
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)            Date: 04-May-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 21 of 21
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
