                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA13047

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Apr-2015, 01-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Lao People's Democratic                          P153401
                                                        Project ID:
                      Republic
                                                        Parent         P123480
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      LA-Poverty Reduction Fund II - AF (P153401)
   Parent Project     LA-Poverty Reduction Fund II (P123480)
   Name:
   Task Team          Satoshi Ishihara,Miki Terasawa
   Leader(s):
   Estimated          06-Apr-2015                       Estimated   23-Jun-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     GSURR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (50%), Other social services (50%)
   Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Other social development (50%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:         14.00                 Total Bank Financing:        11.60
   Financing Gap:                0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                               11.60
     Lao PDR - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                                                 2.40
     Total                                                                                     14.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          Yes
   Repeater
   project?


                                             Page 1 of 16
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project Development Objective is to improve the access to and the utilization of basic
   infrastructure and services for the Project's targeted poor communities in a sustainable manner
   through inclusive community and local development processes.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   Help improve the access to and the utilization of basic infrastructure and services for the Project's
   targeted poor communities. The PDO would be achieved through inclusive community and local
   development processes with emphasis on ensuring sustainability.
3. Project Description
Strategic context. Poverty remains high in Lao PDR despite an eight percent annual economic
growth over the past several years, with a current Gross National Income (GNI) per capita (Atlas
method) at US$ 1,460 in 2013. The incidence of poverty is highest in the southeast and the central
mountainous areas (along the border with Vietnam) as well as northern midlands and highlands.
There also is an increasing gap in poverty levels between urban and rural areas: the poverty level is
10 percent in urban areas, while it is 28.6 percent in rural areas. Ethnic groups and women are
particularly vulnerable: 15 percent of Lao-Tai people are poor, while the poverty rates for Mon-
Khmer people and Hmonglu-Mien people are 42.3 percent and 39.8 percent, respectively. Less than
60 percent of women in poor households can read and write, compared to over 80 percent for men.
About two thirds of Mon Khmer and Hmong ethnic groups lack formal education.

Access to and utilization of infrastructure and services are limited for many rural poor. Although
about 80 percent of all villages have road access, 55 percent of villages in mountainous areas do not
have year-round access. The net primary school enrollment of 85 percent in all villages drops to 79
percent and 82 percent respectively for girls and boys in villages without road access. Travel time to
reach a nearest health dispensary is at least two-hours on foot for about 30 percent of rural villages.
Among households below the poverty line, access to improved toilets and electricity is 43 percent
and 59 percent respectively, compared to 85 percent and 91 percent among households whose
consumption level is twice higher than the poverty line. Stunting among children is more pronounced
in rural areas due to food and nutrition insecurity, among other issues, and in particular among ethnic
minorities in remote mountainous areas.

The draft 8th National Socio-Economic Development Plan (NSEDP) maintains the graduation from
the Least Developed Country (LDC) status by 2020 as the overall policy goal, and sets out
addressing rural – urban inequality as one of the key objectives. It recognizes that tailored
interventions are necessary to improve access to infrastructure for the poorest groups, and puts
forward various measures to lift them out of poverty, including the construction of basic education
infrastructure, rural access roads and improvement in access to safe water. It also recognizes that
poverty reduction must be tailored to ethnic people’s specific needs and capabilities, and address
gender issues among various ethnic groups.

Original Project. The Board of Executive Directors approved an IDA Grant of SDR15.8 million
(equivalent to US$25 million) for PRF II on June 9, 2011 . The Project Development Objective
(PDO) is to improve the access to and the utilization of basic infrastructure and services for the
Project's targeted poor communities in a sustainable manner through inclusive community and local
development processes. DFAT co-financed A$20 million through MDTF, while SDC gave a


                                             Page 2 of 16
complementary financing of about US$13.6 million . The Government of Lao (GOL) has committed
$10 million to provide complementary financing to PRF II sub-projects.

PRF II covers 42 poor districts in ten provinces: Huaphanh, Xiengkhouang, Luang Namtha, Luang
Prabang, Oudomxay, Ponsalay, Savannakhet, Sekong, Attapeu and Salavan. It has financed about
1,000 sub-projects (including the construction of small scale water supply systems, additional
classrooms and dispensaries, and the spot improvement of rural roads) and has benefited more than
450,000 rural poor in about 850 villages. Benefits include increases of: 37 percent in use of health
services; 76 percent in access to safe water resources; and 30 percent in access to all weather roads in
target villages. About half the direct beneficiaries are women, and ethnic minorities account for 72
percent of direct beneficiaries. The quality of participation of women and ethnic minorities
improved significantly since the Mid-Term Review (MTR) in February 2014, by deepening
community driven development (CDD) approach. Additional female facilitators, mostly from ethnic
minorities, were hired in each kumban; additional village meetings were held in all distant
settlements; and many information, education, and communication (IEC) materials developed. Sub-
projects completed over two years ago are being used and maintained reasonably well, and
beneficiary satisfaction levels are high at about 80 percent. The Project has been rated Satisfactory
(S) on both IP and DO for the past 12 months, and is expected to fully meet the Project objective.
Disbursement of IDA Grant currently stands at 88 percent, while that of DFAT is 65 percent . The
Project is fully compliant with legal covenants as well as Bank fiduciary and safeguards
requirements. There are no overdue audits and there are no qualifications to the audit reports.

The contribution of PRFII goes beyond directly financing the improvement of tertiary infrastructure.
The Ministry of Planning and Investment (MPI) developed a Participatory Planning Manual (PPM),
in collaboration with the PRF, based on the PRF bottom-up planning processes, which is being used
for their Northern Upland Development Plan (NUDP).

The Kumban Development Plans (KDP), developed based on the priorities identified by villages that
constitute the respective kumban, are increasingly recognized by GoL agencies and development
partners as useful resources that include many high priority investments. About 20 percent of
priority investments in KDPs have been financed by development partners or government agencies
(as of November 2014). Also, the PRF is increasingly recognized by GoL, development partners,
and private sector as a useful platform to deliver last mile services cost effectively. The PRF will
provide facilitation services to the National Center for Environmental Health (Nam Saat) under the
Ministry of Health (MoH) for their Open Defecation Free (ODF) program, which would allow the
Nam Saat to deliver ODF services at more than 50 percent lower cost. A rural employment program
supported by the International Labor Organization (ILO) is also using PRF staff for community
mobilization. The PRF platform is also used to implement the JSDF-financed Livelihood
Opportunities for Nutrition Gains (LONG) pilot.

GoL requested the Bank to provide additional financing to scale up the positive outcomes of the
Project by financing additional sub-projects using the PRF developed bottom-up planning processes.
It would cover the cost of implementing the final cycle of sub-projects (Cycle XIII) in seven
provinces where the PRF would otherwise complete all planned activities with the completion of the
current cycle. The proposed AF would help PRF maintain its well established implementation
capacity in all PRF provinces for a seamless transition to the potential PRF III. Such a bridging
financing would allow further improving the access to infrastructure and services among rural poor
in ways that are tailor ed to the needs of ethnic groups and women, and help the GoL achieve the
objective of the draft 8th NSEDP.

                                             Page 3 of 16
AF proposes the following changes: clarifying PDO and adjusting RF; financing about 210
additional sub-projects; adding a new component to take over the JSDF-financed livelihood and
nutrition pilot in selected villages; supporting community engagement and facilitation under GoL’s
Open Defecation Free (ODF) program on a pilot basis; and triggering three additional safeguards
policies (Natural Habitat, Safety of Dams, and Projects on International Waterways). The closing
date of December 31, 2016 would remain unchanged. The proposed four components are as follows:

Component 1: Community Development Sub-Grants (US$6.70 million): About 210 community
block grants would be newly provided to build or improve tertiary infrastructure identified by the
beneficiary villages in the seven provinces where the PRF would otherwise complete all planned
activities with the completion of the current Cycle XII. Activities to be financed under the
Component would be open except for items specifically excluded through the project's negative list.
The sub-grant ceiling remains at 60,000USD. This Component would also continue to finance
participatory planning processes and roll out strengthened CDD approach in 10 more districts in
three additional provinces.

Component 2: Local and Community Development Capacity Building and Learning (US$1.10
million): This component would further strengthen bottom-up planning processes in ten AF
provinces through enhancing the quality of Kumban Development Plans (KDP) as a planning tool for
local spatial development and improving the Operation and Maintenance (O&M) of PRF
investments. This Component would also support a pilot partnership with rural sanitation program
with the National Center for Environmental Health (Nam Saat) under the Ministry of Health (MoH)
to deliver rural sanitation services.

Component 3: Livelihood and Nutrition Pilot (US$2.20 million): This new component would
incorporate the livelihood and nutrition pilot which has been financed in complementary under the
funding of the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF). This pilot would continue to strengthen the
Self-Help Groups (SHGs) and the Village Nutrition Centers (VNCs) in 150 villages including 64 that
would be newly added, based on the experience gained and through the provision of seed funds to the
SHGs and nutrition grants to VNCs .

Component 4: Project Management (US$1.60 million): Finance project implementation costs,
including: salaries and fees of national, provincial and district PRF staff; associated equipment and
operating costs; accounting; procurement assessments; and auditing.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The original PRF II has provided assistance to approximately 274 rural kum bans in 37 districts and
10 provinces. Specifically, the Project has provided support to villages in Savannakhet, Saravanh,
Houaphanh, Luang Namtha, Sekong, Xiengkouang, Phongsaly, Oudomxay, Luangphabang, and
Attapeu provinces. The AF would mainly provide bridge financing to allow the PRF to continue to
implement the same project activities in the same districts of seven project provinces where all
planned activities would be completed about a year prior to project closure in the absence of an
additional financing. The AF would also finance the same livelihood and nutrition activities which
the PRF has been implementing with the financing of the Japan Social Development Fund (JSDF) as
part of the RPF II, following the closure of the JSDF funding in April, 2015, in eight districts
including four new districts. The AF would also finance the cost of travel and per diem for
community facilitators and Village Implementation Team (VIT) who will support the GoLs water


                                             Page 4 of 16
and sanitation program in 40 villages of four PRF provinces. All activities will be carried out in the
same geographical areas where the original project has been implemented, and no geographical
expansion is anticipated under this AF. The AF would close at the same time as the original project –
no extension of the closing date is proposed.

Key physical and social characteristics of these areas are summarized below.

The southern part: The southern area covers five provinces (Saravanh, Sekong, Attapeu and
Savannakhet). Saravanh, Sekong, and Attapeu are located in the most southern part of the country.
The eastern part, along the Vietnamese border, is mostly mountainous areas and form part of the
watershed of the Sekong river basin. Forest and upland agriculture are the major land use. Both
Sekong and Attapeu are small provinces (about 10,000km2), sparsely populated, with a total
population of about 100,000 in each province. Most of these populations belong to vulnerable ethnic
groups that are part of the Mone-Khmer group. They tend to live in remote areas with limited access
to roads and infrastructure. The majority of this ethnic population is not self-sufficient in rice and
shifting cultivation is a common practice. Nearly half (45 percent) of the total population of these
provinces live below the poverty line. Savavankhet is located along the Mekong River and form part
of the Mekong flood plains. Most of the areas are flat, including a number of large and small islands
and rice farming is the major land use. Local people comprise of Lao Tai, Phouthay as well as
various ethnic groups including Makong, Katang, Tri, Xuay, Sadang under the, Mon-khmer
linguistic family. Although they are better off compared to those live in Saravanh, Sekong, and
Attapeu, poverty remains dominant in many remote areas, especially in the eastern part of
Savannakhet.

The northern part: In the north, PRF would continue to cover the provinces of Luang Namtha,
Xiengkhouang, Huaphanh, Oudomxay and Luangphrabang. Most of the areas are mountainous with
extensive slash and burn practices. Upland agriculture is the major land use in the northern part,
particularly shifting cultivation of rice, corn and cassava, which are mainly for household
consumption. An increasing amount of corn and cassava is being exported to Vietnam and China.
Rapidly growing land concessions for private investments in agribusinesses, hydropower
development and mining have brought about issues related to land and forest access restriction for
local community. The largest amount of land concession is granted for rubber tree plantation. The
majority of ethnic groups belong to the Mon-Khemer, Hmong Iu Mien and Chine-Tibet linguistic
families. These ethnic groups are mostly concentrated in remote upland areas with limited access to
social services and market.

The project kum bans include villages that are located in designated protected areas and/or zones
known of high conservation value.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Peter William Crawford (GENDR)
Sybounheung Phandanouvong (GSURR)

6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental               Yes            Safeguard review of the original project found that most
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      civil works financed under the project were new
                                           construction, rehabilitation or improvement of small-scale
                                           rural infrastructure, such as gravity-fed water supply


                                             Page 5 of 16
systems, school buildings, rural roads (only spot
improvement), footbridges, and dispensaries, which could
be mitigated through good construction practices.. No
major environmental issues were found to have occurred
under the original project. Minor issues were identified
with regard to monitoring and reporting of environmental
safeguard implementation as well as minor environmental
impacts such as felling of trees.

The rating of environmental safeguard was downgraded to
Marginally Satisfactory (MS) during the Mid-Term
Review (MTR) which found gaps in the monitoring and
recording of environmental impact. The recent
implementation support mission found that the PRF has
strengthened the environmental monitoring and recording
mechanism. The rating on environmental safeguards
would revert back to Satisfactory (S) upon the
confirmation that the newly introduced monitoring and
recording mechanism are adequately implemented on-site.

The ESMF has been revised and updated for the AF to
address issues found during the original project
implementation.

The AF would continue to finance similar types of civil
works.. Negative impacts are expected to be minor and
localized as under the original project and could be
mitigated during the planning and implementation of the
project. The ECOP developed under the original project
has been updated and will be used for the AF.

The AF would also support the production of small
livestock and vegetables which the PRF had been
implementing with the funding of the Japan Social
Development Fund (JSDF), following the closure of the
JSDF. The AF would provide additional small grants (<
$100 per grant) and technical guidance to Self-Help
Groups (SHG) and “Village Nutrition Centers” (VNC) in
eight districts including four new districts. Like under the
original project, small grants would be used by
beneficiary villagers to start production of small livestock
(poultry, catfish, etc.) and vegetables mostly for
consumption by beneficiary villagers themselves,
although a small portion of meats produced is sold to
external markets. The VNC would also continue to
receive grants and provide special meals to malnourished
infants and pregnant/ lactating mothers. Some portions of



 Page 6 of 16
                               the grants were and may continue to be used to build
                               small structures such as sheds for livestock and roofing
                               for VNCs.The total number of villages expected to be
                               supported under the AF would be about 100. The ESMF
                               and ECOPs has been updated accordingly. The Pest
                               Management Policy will continue to be triggered for this
                               activity.

                               The AF would also pilot a partnership with the National
                               Center for Environmental Health (Nam Saat) under the
                               Ministry of Health (MoH) to support their Open
                               Defecation Free (ODF) campaign in 40 selected PRF
                               beneficiary villages, using Community-Led Total
                               Sanitation (CLTS) approach. The travel cost of koumban
                               facilitators and village leaders to receive training in ODF
                               and facilitate behavioral change of villagers would be
                               financed by the AF. No civil works would be financed for
                               this activity. Villagers would build latrines by themselves.
                               Nam Saat recently developed the Environmental Code of
                               Practice (ECOP) for the construction of latrines, which
                               the AF would ensure that villages would use.

                               The AF would continue to be classified as Category B.
                               Subproject screening criteria developed for the original
                               project would continue to be used to exclude subprojects
                               with potential large and/or significant impacts using the
                               "non eligibility criteria" and to prepare and implement
                               appropriate mitigation measures according to the nature
                               and extent of the potential impacts.

                               An Environmental and Social Management Framework
                               (ESMF) prepared for the original project has been
                               updated for the AF, taking into account the lessons learnt
                               under the original project. The ESMF describes clear
                               requirements for safeguard screening and actions to be
                               carried out according to potential impacts of the
                               subprojects and a general environmental code of practices
                               which applies to subprojects.

                               Implementation of the ESMF will continue to be
                               integrated directly into the planning and implementation
                               process and the monitoring results will be included as part
                               of the progress report. The revised and updated ESMF
                               have been disclosed to and consulted with the public
                               before appraisal, and further revised based on any
                               comments received.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   There are 4 villages eligible for AF funds located in



                                Page 7 of 16
4.04                           designated protected areas. This policy is triggered
                               because of the potential negative impacts that proposed
                               subproject activities might have on natural habitats, for
                               example the construction of new access road in a known
                               reserved forest or established protected area. While these
                               activities are expected to be small-scale, typical for CDD
                               operation, and with overall limited impacts manageable
                               through application of mitigation measures, the policy is
                               triggered for precautionary reasons to ensure that any
                               physical interventions (including those proposed in
                               known reserved or declared national forests zones) will
                               not lead to degradation of critical or other natural habitats.
                               The ESMF provides for the screening of potential project
                               impacts and how safeguard issues under 4.04 should be
                               addressed during project implementation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The policy is not triggered since the project will not
                               finance activities that will affect forest, forest health and
                               forest-dependent communities.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    The AF would continue to support community livelihood
                               activities which will involve agricultural production.
                               The AF would not procure and promote use of chemical
                               pesticides and fertilizers, which will continue to be
                               included in the non eligibility list as under the original
                               project, and would continue to promote organic farming.

                               However, beneficiary farmers may apply pesticides,
                               herbicides and insecticides. A simplified Pest
                               Management Plan (PMP) developed under the original
                               project would continue to be applied, which outlines clear
                               regulations and procedures for the management of
                               pesticides and/or toxic chemical as well as provides
                               knowledge and training on health impacts and the safe use
                               of pesticides and/or, when possible, promotion of non-
                               chemical use alternatives such as organic farming. The
                               Bank environmental specialist reviewed the
                               implementation of PMP on site and found it was adequate.
Physical Cultural        No    Adverse impacts on the known archeological,
Resources OP/BP 4.11           paleontological, historical, or unique natural values in the
                               subproject areas are unlikely, therefore the Physical
                               Cultural Resources policy (OP 4.11) is not triggered.
                               However, a standard clause for ’chance finds’ will be
                               included in the contractors’ contracts and in ECoP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The AF will continue to operate in areas that are home to
BP 4.10                        numerous ethnic groups. PRF’s approach for inclusion of
                               all ethnic groups is specifically designed to ensure that the
                               concerns of all ethnic groups are met through the design



                                Page 8 of 16
                               of the project. The PRF’s planning and implementation
                               process has thus been designed to incorporate various
                               aspects of ethnic issues. Due attention will continue to be
                               given to ensure that ethnic groups do not suffer adverse
                               impacts during the project and that they receive culturally
                               compatible social and economic benefits. Throughout the
                               PRF’s subprojects’ implementation, steps are included to
                               make sure that the cultures of the multi-ethnic society are
                               respected and that gender issues are integrated at all
                               levels. Specific measures to ensure that ethnic groups are
                               adequately consulted, participate in and benefit from the
                               project planning and implementation processes – both for
                               infrastructure sub-projects and for livelihood/ nutrition
                               support – are described in the revised and updated Ethnic
                               Group Policy Framework (EGPF). EGPF was prepared as
                               a standalone document in line with OP 4.10 requirements.
                               The feedback and resolution mechanism strengthened
                               under the original project will continue to be used under
                               the AF. Specifically, these mechanisms will provide
                               affected ethnic groups an ’on-the-ground’ platform for
                               monitoring and reporting on the RAP and/or EGPF
                               implementation. The EGPF also provides the list of
                               documents that will collectively address the requirements
                               of OP 4.10. as the overwhelming majority of project
                               beneficiaries are Ethnic Minority groups.

                               Regarding the pilot partnership on sanitation issues, Nam
                               Saat recently developed guidelines for the engagement
                               with ethnic groups, which the Bank social specialist
                               reviewed and found to be in line with the Bank’s OP 4.10.
                               The guidelines have been incorporated in the ESMF and
                               will be used in villagers where AF would support this
                               activity and its behavioral changes.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The AF would continue to finance the new construction,
OP/BP 4.12                     rehabilitation or improvement of small scale rural
                               infrastructure on a demand driven basis. No involuntary
                               loss of land occurred under the original project. Minor
                               loss of land and assets has been addressed as voluntary
                               donations per the Compensation and Resettlement Policy
                               Framework (CRPF) prepared for the original project in
                               line with the OP 4.12. CPRF would continue to apply to
                               the AF in order to avoid, minimize and mitigate minor
                               loss of private land/ assets under the AF. In case
                               conditions of voluntary donations provided in the CRPF
                               cannot be met, an abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
                               (RAP) will be developed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes    The policy would be triggered because the AF would


                                Page 9 of 16
   4.37                                       likely finance the construction of small weirs that will
                                              regulate the flow of small creaks which may be classified
                                              as dams. The weirs to be built are classified as “small
                                              dams” as defined in the policy which only requires
                                              generic dam safety measures designed by qualified
                                              engineers. The ESMF was updated to provide standard
                                              procedures the PRF takes to address the safety of weirs in
                                              line with the policy.
   Projects on International   Yes            The AF would likely finance the construction of gravity-
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       fed water systems or small irrigation schemes that take
                                              water from rivers that are direct or indirect tributaries of
                                              the Mekong, an international waterway under paragraph 1
                                              of the policy. The policy is therefore triggered. At the
                                              request of the GoL, the Bank notified riparian countries
                                              (China, Myanmar, Cambodia, Thailand, and Vietnam)
                                              and Mekong River Commission (MRC) prior to appraisal.
   Projects in Disputed        No             The AF will not be implemented in disputed areas
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Environmental aspects:

    The experience of the original project shows that negative environmental impacts as a result of the
    types of investments to be financed under the AF would be minor and localized and could be
    mitigated during the planning and implementation of the project. No major environmental issues
    were found to have occurred under the original project. Most civil works to be financed under the
    AF would be the new construction, rehabilitation or improvement of small-scale rural
    infrastructure, as under the original project, such as schools, markets, dispensaries, over-flow
    bridges, access roads, water supply, water storage facilities and irrigation systems. These may
    typically have minor environmental impacts such as waste disposal, water pollution, dust and
    noise that may result from such civil works can be mitigated through good construction practices..

    The following issues were identified as a result of the safeguard review of the original project:

    Construction predominantly was undertaken by contractors under the original project with local
    communities supplying labor in some cases. Given that civil works undertaken by the project tend
    to be small-scale there is little potential for significant adverse localized environmental impacts. A
    screening process is carried out to record potential impacts that would allow minimization and
    mitigation to be incorporated prior to works being undertaken. This tool has been updated and
    improved for PRF II to ensure monitoring and evaluation continues throughout the construction
    period and not just at the outset. This will allow unforeseen issues to be reported along with the
    mitigation used to minimize impacts. Training will also be provided to PRF teams on its use and
    implementation.



                                               Page 10 of 16
Minor environmental impacts were observed within the completion of activities financed by the
project but none that would be described as significant. Examples of such impacts include tree
cutting in school areas without replanting, inadequate watershed protection plan in some cases
with water supply system instillation and irrigation systems with no or inadequate operation and
maintenance plans for irrigation projects. Under the AF, the Environment Code of Practice
(ECOP) will be integrated and mainstreamed into construction works and, when appropriate,
included in operation and maintenance manuals and procedures within village agreements. When
tree cutting is unavoidable, new trees of similar species should be planted in an appropriate
location to compensate this loss. The reporting systems will be improved and supported with
training and refresher training provision to PRF teams. The lack of monitoring mechanisms has
been addressed with a new control document that requires systematic reporting of issues. Training
will be provided on the new process and its use as well as strengthen knowledge on environment
issues overall.

The project “non eligibility list” does not allow financing of investments that have the potential to
cause significant conversion (loss) or degradation of natural habitats and specific questions are
included in the subprojects screening, which capture aspects of OP 4.04. If investments are
proposed in those villages that are within the boundaries of a designated protected area or reserved
forest, specific mitigation measures should be implemented during works in line with the
respective protected area management plan and the ECoP. If necessary, a brief site-specific
environmental assessment should be undertaken with a focus on possible impacts of natural
habitats.

In summary based on lessons learned from the initial project, the following will be undertaken
under the AF to improve the project environmental performance: (i) improve reporting and
recording system of safeguard related issues; (ii) systematically apply safeguard’s measures
provided in the ESMF (ECOP and PMP); (iii) conduct refresh training for technical staff to
monitor safeguards compliance under project financed activities at least once per year; (iv) link
RPF II activities into conservation of nearby natural habitats, forest area and water sources to
enhance positive impacts of PRF project.

Social Aspects:

The overall impacts of the AF are expected to be socially positive and would benefit local
communities, especially the Ethnic Minority communities, in both the medium and long terms.
Improved access as well as capacity of local community to construct, operate, and maintain basic
infrastructure related to education, health, water supply, and road services, which meet
communities’ particular needs are expected to speed up the poverty reduction process and enhance
sustainability and effectiveness of community investment.

The following issues were identified as a result of the safeguard review of the original project:

Review of types and sizes of the infrastructure subprojects implemented under the original project
and field supervisions suggest that most of the civil works are small, and impacts are relatively
minimal. Of total 1,000 subprojects, 35 subprojects (10.5%) involved a minor loss of private land
or assets, mostly under road subprojects. All affected people are direct beneficiaries of respective
subprojects, and no physical relocation of households or business entities occurred. The total
number of affected households amounts to 315, or about 0.3 households per subproject. No
household lost more than 5% of the total productive assets. These cases have been successfully

                                          Page 11 of 16
addressed as voluntary donations, the process of which used under the project is described in detail
in the next section. Under the AF, the quality of community engagement will be further
strengthened based on the lessons learnt under the original project, and the documentation of
voluntary donation processes will be enhanced.

Potential benefits versus negative impacts on land or households livelihoods and assets related to
infrastructures construction have been discussed, and measures to minimize impact have been
developed and agreed within the communities and by affected households. In all cases, affected
people were direct beneficiaries of the infrastructure construction that caused the loss.

No outstanding grievances were registered through the Feedback and Resolution Mechanism
(FRM). However, in order to strengthen the mechanism to address grievances, the RPF would
initiate the 6/ 12 months follow up visits to ensure that no outstanding grievances or impacts
remain unaddressed.

Social safeguard performance of the original project has been strengthened since the Mid-term
Review (MTR) conducted in February, 2014. In particular, safeguard compliance monitoring and
documentation have improved with a new more effective form for monitoring and reporting on
social safeguards effectively applied. This reporting system will continue to be applied under the
AF.

The Compensation and Resettlement Policy Framework (CRPF) developed under the original
project has been updated based on the experience of the original project. Conditions under which
voluntary donations are allowed and the procedures through which they should be executed are
clarified in the revised CRPF. Policies and procedures that should apply when conditions for
voluntary donations cannot be met and impact has to be compensated at replacement cost are also
clarified.

The Ethnic Group Planning Framework (EGPF) has also been updated based on the experience of
the original project, including insufficient consultation with and participation of ethnic groups in
project planning and implementation processes. Measures that started to be taken during the
original project such as hiring of an additional female kumban facilitators and additional
community meetings held at small settlements outside main village settlements where many ethnic
groups tend to live, will continue to be implemented under the AF. Many IEC materials developed
during the original project which proved to strengthen participation of ethnic groups will also
continue to be used under the AF.

Activities to support livelihood activities and nutrition enhancement of PRF beneficiaries,
supported during the implementation of the original project under the Japan Social Development
Fund (JSDF) funded Livelihood Opportunities and Nutrition Gain (LONG) pilot project, did not
result in any loss of private land or asset. Livelihood/ nutrition grants provided under the pilot
were typically used for the production of small livestock such as poultry and catfish, weaving
activities and provision of special meals for pregnant/ lactating mothers and malnourished infants.
Some small structures were built on public space within beneficiary villages as “Village Nutrition
Centers” (VNC). The safeguard instruments prepared for the original projects, including the
simple Pest Management Plan (PMP), were used to minimize and mitigate environmental and
social impacts associated with LONG activities. Recent implementation support mission did not
find any outstanding safeguard issues associated with the livelihood/ nutrition activities.



                                          Page 12 of 16
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  PRF II is not expected to create any potential indirect and/or long term negative impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Project alternatives analysis is not applicable to PRF II. Investments will be small and community
  driven. Adverse impacts are not anticipated.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Four WB safeguard policies triggered for the original project would continue to be triggered for
  the AF, including: environmental assessment (OP 4.01), indigenous peoples (OP4.12), involuntary
  resettlement (OP 4.10), and pest management (OP 4.09). For the AF, in addition to the same four
  policies, the International Waterways (OP 7.50), Safety of Dams (OP 4.37) as well as the Natural
  Habitats (OP 4.04) would also be triggered. To comply with these policies, the CRPF, the EGPF,
  the ESMF, and the simplified PMP were prepared under the original project, which were revised
  and updated based on the experience of the original project and the expanded scope of activities (i.
  e. pilot partnership with Water and Sanitation program). PRF staff at the central and local levels
  will continue to be responsible for the implementation of these safeguard instruments, including
  ensuring compliance with the IEE requirement per EIA regulation if needed. Large subproject that
  required an EIA will not be financed by PRF II as this has been included in the “non eligibility
  list’.

  Through the implementation of the original project, PRF staff has gained an extensive experience
  with the application of World Bank safeguards policies. Their capacity to implement these policies
  in a satisfactory manner has been demonstrated although it can be further improved. The task team
  will continue to work closely with the PRF and provide hands-on guidance as an on-the-job
  training on Bank safeguard policies.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders of the AF are, as under the original project, local communities in the target
  provinces. The participatory planning and implementation mechanism has been strengthened
  during the original project to increase the meaningful participation with local population and to
  ensure free, prior and informed consultations with the Ethnic Minority groups.

 The planning process also includes a detailed assessment of communities’ needs using social
 mapping and other relevant tools to identify priorities and ensure voices of vulnerable groups are
 heard and included in the selection of the priorities. The vision and priorities of the Koumban are
 discussed and agreed upon by community representatives during planning meetings. A Koumban
 integrated development plan would continue to be prepared and validated by local authorities.
 Direct beneficiaries are also involved in the actual implementation of sub-projects, and receive
 technical training (such as on procurement processes, Financial Management and Operation &
 Maintenance) aimed at assisting the Community to implement and manage the sub-projects.

 During the preparation of the AF, the revised ESMF, CEPF and EGPF were the object of
 consultations with key stakeholders through the safeguard consultation meetings held in Pakse,
 Champasak province on March 18, 2015, Oudomxay, Oudomxay province on March 20, 2015 and
 in Vientiane on March 23, 2015. Participants sought for information about the allocation of PRF


                                            Page 13 of 16
  sub-grants between villages, methods of impact assessment and impact mitigation, and grievance
  and conflict resolution mechanism, among other issues. The relevant department heads of PRF
  participated in the meetings and addressed the questions and comments received. The safeguard
  instruments were revised taking into account the comments received, and the minutes of
  consultation meetings are attached.
  Throughout the implementation of this AF, beneficiary/ affected communities will be informed
  and consulted of the overall project approach including project safeguard provisions as part of the
  participatory planning processes.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Mar-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Apr-2015
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 12-Mar-2015
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Mar-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 12-Mar-2015
  Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Mar-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 12-Mar-2015
  Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      06-Mar-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
  Lao People's Democratic Republic                                 12-Mar-2015
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                            Page 14 of 16
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
 Bank?
 Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways


                                           Page 15 of 16
    Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
    Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Satoshi Ishihara,Miki Terasawa
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/    Name: Jan Weetjens (PMGR)                            Date: 01-Jun-2015
   Manager:




                                             Page 16 of 16
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
