                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC14914

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Sep-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             South Asia                     Project ID:       P156902
                            Project Name:        CLEAR - South Asia
                            Team Leader(s):      Elena Ximena Fernandez Ordonez
                            Estimated Date       15-Oct-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       IEGCS                          Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Other public sector governance (50%), Managing for development results
                                                 (50%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.05                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              ECD FOR REGIONAL CENTERS                                                                    1.05
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The grant seeks to contribute to M&E information being increasingly used to make policy and
                           program decisions and the strengthening of country monitoring and evaluation systems in South
                           Asia.
                           C. Project Description
                           CLEAR is a multilateral partnership established in 2010 to support a network of centers through
                           recipient executed grants to strengthen monitoring and evaluation (M&E) capacities and systems in
                           the World Bank Group’s client countries. The centers develop, deliver (locally and regionally), and
                           share knowledge regarding high-quality M&E capacity development services for government
                           agencies, civil society, the private sector, academia, as well as for other providers of M&E capacity
                           building services. The grants function as seed funding to establish and strengthen the centers, and
                           help them develop their workprograms and strategies, materials and expertise in order to become
                           self-financing by the end of the program, currently estimated for 2018. CLEAR currently support
                           such centers in competitively selected academic institutions in Brazil, China, India, Mexico, Senegal,
                           and South Africa.
                         The Independent Evaluation Group (IEG) implements the program in line with its mandate to build
                         client capacity in evaluation, serving as the CLEAR Global Hub, or secretariat. CLEAR
Public Disclosure Copy




                         complements and builds on the experience of the well-respected International Program for
                         Development Evaluation Training (IPDET) , established by IEG 15 years ago in collaboration with
                         Carleton University in Canada.

                         CLEAR’s Trust Fund is supported by the evaluation offices of nine major multilateral and bilateral
                         donors: the African Development Bank, the Asian Development Bank, the Australian government
                         (Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade), the Belgian Development Cooperation Agency, the Inter-
                         American Development Bank, the Rockefeller Foundation, the Swedish International Development,
                         the Swiss Agency for Development and Cooperation, and the UK Department for International
                         Development.

                         The Jameel Poverty Action Lab South Asia at the Institute for Financial Management and Research
                         (IFMR-JPAL) in India was competitively selected in 2010 to implement the CLEAR program and to
                         establish the CLEAR Center in South Asia (CLEAR SA).

                         IFMR-JPAL will provide a range of sustained, context-relevant high quality and cost-effective
                         capacity building activities on M&E to strategic clients in government, civil society, the private
                         sector, academia and other providers of M&E capacity building services. The grant will be organized
                         around three components: 1) Capacity Building Activities for IFMR-JPAL, to strengthen IFMR-
                         JPAL’s own capacities and visibility 2) Capacity Development Services for Clients, to provide
                         strategic clients with capacity building services, including training, technical advisory, knowledge
                         products, applied research, outreach, and M&E network support 3) Monitoring and Evaluation of the
                         CLEAR activities, to assess the effectiveness of the program in South Asia, implement course
                         corrections and learn from implementation. Please see the “Component 2: Capacity Development
                         Services for Clients” for a description of the Strategy through details of the intermediate outcomes,
                         or business lines.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Capacity Building Activities for IFMR-JPAL:

                         Component One will aim to strengthen the internal capacity of the Center. This includes ensuring
                         that the Center is adequately staffed and has the skills and expertise necessary to deliver high-quality
                         technical advisory and capacity building services. It also includes the Center’s plans to gain more
                         visibility among strategic stakeholders in South Asia through improved networks and
                         communications. In order to meet the objectives of Component One, the Center will engage in a
                         variety of internal capacity building activities, which will help develop its management,
                         administrative, and professional capacities.

                         Management and Administrative Capacity

                         The Center will strengthen its management and administrative capacity by hiring and retaining the
                         necessary staff to deliver its work program. The Center will also engage in Learning from
                         Performance Reviews (LEAP) to ensure that there is continuous learning. The Center’s
                         communication plan includes expanding the content and information on its website, as well as
                         developing a stronger presence on online blogs and discussion forums.
                         Professional Capacity

                         CLEAR SA has actively recruited J-PAL South Asia research staff (host institution staff not
Public Disclosure Copy




                         currently part of the core CLEAR team). The Center is also drawing upon select individuals from its
                         wide network of academics and M&E professionals to develop and deliver capacity building
                         services.

                         The Center will continue working under the guidance of its Regional Advisory Committee (RAC) to
                         manage its strategic direction in the region. The RAC provides key inputs on developing professional
                         capacity, as well as necessary information on M&E needs and trends in South Asia. The RAC –
                         made up of external advisors nominated by CLEAR SA and approved in 2013 by the CLEAR Board
                         of Directors - meets approximately twice a year and be called upon for advice on an ad-hoc basis.
                         The RAC currently has members from India and Sri Lanka, and will be expanded to include
                         members from Bangladesh and Pakistan.

                         In addition to the RAC meetings, the Center will engage with key M&E stakeholders both
                         throughout South Asia and globally. Globally, the Center’s staff and key stakeholders will participate
                         in CLEAR’s global forums and meetings, which will bring together other centers operating under the
                         CLEAR program and the CLEAR Global Hub. Regionally, the Center’s staff and affiliates will
                         participate in regional evaluation conferences, where they will present evaluations and conduct
                         workshops.

                         Additionally, the Center will organize in-house training activities for its staff. These include an
                         annual week long internal staff training on managing evaluations, biweekly brownbag lunches on
                         topics ranging from the current policy climate in South Asia to innovative M&E methods, as well as
                         field visits to ongoing evaluations and capacity building activities led by partners.

                         Together, these activities will provide the CLEAR South Asia Regional Center the necessary skills
                         and knowledge to design and implement targeted, effective monitoring and evaluation capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         building programs.

                         Component 2: Capacity Development Services for Clients

                         Component 2 will provide capacity development services for clients, will develop and share
                         knowledge/learning on the “how to” of building M&E capacity, and contribute to CLEAR Global
                         Knowledge Hub. The activities undertaken under this component are divided into business lines
                         which focus on specific intermediate outcomes. The main areas the program will address are: 1)
                         raising the knowledge and skills of current and prospective M&E staff; 2) increasing the
                         organizational capacities to produce evaluative evidence, widening the coverage of evaluations, their
                         relevance and their quality; 3) strengthening the links between the information generated and policy
                         making, planning, and budgeting and leading conversations on best strategies on how coordinate
                         M&E systems. These areas will be addressed through the specifically targeted business lines
                         described below. The business lines were developed during the second grant.

                         BUSINESS LINE 1: Building Skills/Awareness for High Quality Impact Evaluation & Data
                         Collection Among Policymakers, Practioners, and Researchers

                         IFMR-JPAL has focused on building skills and awareness for high-quality impact evaluation and
                         data collection, among a wide-range of partners and clients (i.e. the Indian Economic Service). It
                         maintains a portfolio of activities which aim to jointly affect the knowledge, attitudes, and behaviors
                         of partners and clients towards impact evaluation and high-quality data collection. This includes a
                         portfolio of open-enrollment and customized courses, as well as technical advisory services. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Center employs a comprehensive approach towards this business line, in which each individual
                         activity has multiple objectives. The intended outcomes of each comprehensive activity are: (1)
                         clients increase knowledge of impact evaluation and data collections, (2) clients positively change
                         attitudes towards impact evaluation and data collection, (3) clients go on to commission and/or fund
                         impact evaluations, (4) clients themselves conduct impact evaluations and high-quality data
                         collection. The activities described below will continue in the third grant period.

                         Executive Education: Impact Evaluation

                         The flagship activity for this Business Line is the Executive Education Course. This course is
                         targeted at practitioners, policymakers and academics. It focuses on understanding the necessity for
                         rigor and scientific evidence, thinking about creative strategies in M&E within the context of the
                         participants’ work, and managing common pitfalls of program implementation and impact
                         evaluation. The goal is for participants to be able to identify research opportunities within their
                         organizations, advocate for rigorous evaluation, be better consumers of evidence, and gain
                         preliminary skills to conduct rigorous evaluations (particularly among participants from academic
                         institutions). To this end, participants work with their counterparts from different communities (e.g.
                         donor, academic, practitioner, policymaker, etc.) to develop potential evaluation ideas. At its core,
                         this process is meant to help participants understand what goes into designing and implementing an
                         impact evaluation.


                         Open Enrollment M&E Courses

                         IFMR-JPAL has developed a set of other open enrollment courses (Measurement & Survey Design
                         in India, Basic M&E in Sri Lanka and Bangladesh, etc.) with a fee-based model. Thus far, these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         courses have been high in demand. IFMR-JPAL plans to continue these courses, as they provide a
                         good opportunity to bring together different partners from different sectors, building their
                         knowledge, skills, attitudes, and behaviors towards high-quality M&E. The main objective of these
                         open enrolment courses is to provide a basic understanding of measurement, data collection, and
                         impact evaluation, which can then be translated into using, commissioning/funding, and/or
                         conducting high-quality evaluations and data collection.

                         Technical Assistance and Custom Courses for Civil Servants

                         Since 2013, IFMR-JPAL has been conducting Monitoring and Evaluation trainings for the Indian
                         Economic Services (IES) and Indian Administrative Services (IAS), as well as providing advisory
                         services for the Lal Bahadur Shastri National Academy of Administration (LBSNAA) (the premier
                         civil service training institute in India). The trainings includes a combination of technical lectures,
                         case studies, guest lectures from prominent government officials and M&E professionals, as well as
                         the option of group work to design their own impact evaluation. This activity focuses on working
                         with the top-level civil servants in India, who have the decision-making power to commission
                         evaluations and use evaluations to inform future policies. Targeting this group is also strategic, in
                         that both the IAS and IES remain in the government for the tenure of their career, regardless of
                         political leadership.
                         Technical Assistance and Custom Courses for Civil Society

                         IFMR-JPAL is working with civil society organizations (including BRAC, Breakthrough, Education
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Alliance, etc.) to develop their awareness and skills of M&E. These are customized courses and
                         technical advisory services on new and ongoing evaluations, including developing data collection
                         plans. For each engagement, IFMR-JPAL conducts an in-depth mixed-methods needs assessment.
                         The needs assessment informs the content of the custom course and/or technical advisory service, as
                         well as the specific objectives for the engagement.

                         BUSINESS LINE 2: Strengthening State Government M&E Practices

                         IFMR-JPAL is working with state governments (e.g., Government of Haryana, Government of Tamil
                         Nadu) to strengthen their monitoring and evaluations systems. These are longer-term engagements in
                         which the Center conducts a needs assessment and diagnostic exercise of M&E practices within
                         various departments/ministries at the state level. After the diagnostic review, IFMR-JPAL proposes a
                         series of technical advisory services and custom workshops to address any gaps in M&E practices
                         (data collection, monitoring, outcome tracking, etc.). This service is fully subsidized for the client for
                         an initial period, after which the state government will take personnel costs associated with the
                         activities.

                         BUSINESS LINE 3: Raising Awareness for High Quality M&E

                         As part of its ongoing outreach activities, IFMR-JPAL organizes knowledge-sharing activities,
                         including roundtables on best practices in M&E. These are a series of half-day events, which cover
                         fundamental topics in monitoring and evaluation, and target government and civil society
                         organizations in South Asia, including those partners that may be unable to attend multiple-day or in-
                         person workshops. Topics of these roundtables are both method-specific (qualitative methods,
                         mixed-methods, participatory approaches, collecting data for scale-ups, etc.), as well as topic/theme-
                         specific (evaluation and gender, evaluation and crime, monitoring education and training, etc.).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IFMR-JPAL also delivers presentations at external conferences and trainings on the importance of
                         high-quality evaluation and evidence-based policymaking (e.g., Sri Lankan Evaluation Association
                         conference, Community of Evaluators-South Asia Conclave, World Bank – BRAC conference on
                         impact evaluation, 3ie-Asian Development Bank conference, etc.). The Center also contributes to onl
                         ine blogs and publications, highlighting the importance of prioritizing M&E in decision-making.

                         BUSINESS LINE 4: Diagnosing and Strengthening Regional and International M&E Networks

                         In order to build regional and international M&E networks, IFMR-JPAL provides support to M&E
                         networks and evaluation associations in the form of: (1) sponsorships to attend evaluation field-
                         building events, (2) organizing panels and workshops for regional and international M&E
                         conferences, and (3) partnering on advocacy and outreach events.

                         BUSINESS LINE 5: Building Local Institutions’ Capacities to Conduct Rigorous Evaluations

                         Throughout South Asia, there is a high demand for evaluation skills training, but very few
                         institutions that provide this service. IFMR-JPAL has worked to develop relationships with top-level
                         universities (Indian Institute of Management – Bangalore, Indian Institute of Management –
                         Ahmedabad) that have expressed an interest in M&E short courses and semester-long curriculum at
                         the post-graduate level. Additionally, it has received requests from the Sri Jayawardanapura
                         University in Sri Lanka to conduct lectures and develop content for an M&E diploma course. As
                         there is a growing demand for M&E training at the university level, IFMR-JPAL is working to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         further these services. It will also conduct similar courses for non-university research organizations
                         (i.e, International Center for Integrated Mountain Development), in order to further build local
                         researcher capacity to conduct high-quality evaluations.

                         Business Line 5 specifically works to develop the technical skills of current and future researchers to
                         conduct high-quality evaluations. It also creates an awareness of high-quality research. One of the
                         final deliverables of Business Line 5 is the creation of university-level curriculum (syllabi,
                         presentations, case studies, etc.) which can be shared and used by other evaluation capacity
                         development providers. IFMR-JPAL plans on sharing these resources with universities throughout
                         the region, as well as the other regional centers.


                         Business Line 6: Conducting and Sharing Research and Generating Evidence on 'How To Do' High
                         Quality M&E

                         As part of IFMR-JPAL’s commitment to promoting high-quality research and data collection, it is
                         working to conduct research on best practices in M&E. This will include research projects on
                         developing parsimonious survey instruments, when/how to use digital data collection, and best
                         practices in grassroots M&E. IFMR-JPAL will work disseminate this research through knowledge
                         products for M&E practitioners. By June 2018, the Center will share developed knowledge products
                         and “how to” documents on the CLEAR wikispaces/C4D, based in IEG.

                         Business Line 7: Sharing research and lessons on “How to do” quality Evaluation Capacity
                         Development (ECD).

                         IFMR-JPAL will produce and share knowledge and knowledge products related to the lessons that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IFMR-JPAL has learned on “how to do” evaluation capacity building through the planning and
                         implementation of the various activities in the other business lines. The LEAP reviews will surface
                         this knowledge and identify the lessons that are worth to be codified and shared. These lessons will
                         be targeted towards CLEAR centers and other providers of ECD services.

                         Activities in this business line will often be implemented in combination with activities in the other
                         business lines. For example, related to Business line 1, IFMR-JPAL is currently undertaking a review
                         of past participants in the Executive Education course on Impact Evaluation, starting from 2007. This
                         will involve an in-depth quantitative and qualitative tracer survey and the end product will b ea set of
                         guidelines on best practices in targeting the correct audience, ensuring that the content is relevant for
                         the audience, and how to successfully conduct training follow-ups. Related to Business Line 2, work
                         might be undertaken on how to conduct the nee ds assessments and diagnostic work. In relation to
                         Business Line 5, work might be undertaken in sharing how to knowledge on ECD with the local
                         institutions that they will be working with, etc.



                         Component 3: Monitoring and Evaluation of the CLEAR activities

                         Under Component Three, IFMR_JPAL will collect and keep systematic electronic information on its
                           operations, and provide quarterly monitoring data and annual reports to the CLEAR program at IEG.
                           It will also provide annual audit reports (coinciding with IFMR’s financial year).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The monitoring information will include: Course descriptions (including their objectives, intended
                           audiences, participant selection criteria [if any], dates, duration, faculty, and fees/costs); standardized
                           data on participant participation (disaggregated by gender, nationality, organization type) for each
                           training/workshop; assessment of quality and usefulness of each training/workshop and advisory
                           services (using standardized quality assessment tools); and records on the objectives of each set of
                           advisory or evaluation services. Where a package of services, bundling workshops, advice,
                           evaluations, etc. is provided to a group of clients, IFMR-JPAL will also develop concept notes
                           articulating the overall objectives of the package of services and the rationale for the package to be
                           provided.

                           Additionally, IFMR-JPAL is working to develop a comprehensive monitoring, evaluation, and
                           learning strategy for its programs. The Center will use rigorous qualitative methods (detailed needs
                           assessments, surveys, participant and partner interviews, and field visits) and quantitative tracer and
                           follow-up surveys to track capacity building activities, learning outcomes, and longer-term impacts
                           for key clients. These longer-term impacts for IFMR-JPAL’s clients may include: a better
                           understanding of impact evaluation, changing attitudes towards evidence-based decision making,
                           conducting more internal M&E, using data and evaluation research to inform decision making, and
                           providing evaluation capacity building for other regional organizations. These learnings will be
                           shared with other CLEAR regional offices and other ECD providers.

                           Finally, the Center will conduct annual reviews of its performance (the Learning from Performance
                           (LEAP) reviews) to assess its performance and make adjustments to it portfolio of business lines..
                           See also Component 1.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09               No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/       No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Elena Ximena Fernandez Ordonez
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                                     Date: 28-Sep-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Nidhi Khattri (PMGR)                                         Date: 28-Sep-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
