                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA17844
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Oct-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mali                                 Project ID:   P151449
                            Project Name:      Mali Support to Agroindustrial Competitiveness Project (P151449)
                            Task Team          Alexandre Hugo Laure,Cheick Omar Tidiane Diallo,Remileku Rakiatu Cole
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          26-Sep-2016              Estimated     22-Nov-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTC07                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        30.00           Total Bank Financing:     30.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                    30.00
                              Total                                                                                          30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to increase the processing of agricultural products for targeted value
                           chains in the selected geographic area.

                           ➢❨ Processing➢❨ is defined as the conversion of harvested agricultural products into valuable,
                           marketable products. ➢❨ Targeted value chains➢❨ refer to mango and animal feed. The
                           ➢❨ geographic area➢❨ is the agricultural production basin of Sikasso-Bamako-Koulikoro in
                           southern Mali.



                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                          3. Project Description
                         To support the development of mango and animal feed value chains, in the agricultural area of
                         Sikasso-Bamako-Koulikoro, a number of formal and/or agroindustrial entry points in the form of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         private operators and organizations have been identified. Through Government-led consultations, key
                         representatives of private sector operators have prioritized binding constraints they face to improve
                         their competitiveness. The project will strengthen their technical and commercial capacity to realize
                         their full growth potential; enhance existing and future processing capabilities; and increase their
                         access to domestic, regional, and international markets. Additional major areas of improvement
                         identified during the consultations were the access to production areas, the quality of local supply,
                         and the absence of functioning supportive infrastructure. The project will provide support to address
                         this infrastructure bottleneck by improving rural and feeder roads and upgrading/modernizing
                         market-support infrastructure services. Finally, the project will seek to improve the institutional and
                         fiduciary capacity of API-Mali and the MoA.

                         With an estimated US$30 million (IDA) the project will support the GoM strategy through the
                         following four components.
                         Component 1: Support Agribusiness Diversification through Mango Processing and Investment
                         Promotion (US$5.5 million)
                         Component 2: Improve Access to Mango Production Areas (US$10.8 million)
                         Component 3: Foster Animal Feed Production (US$9.6 million)
                         Component 4: Strengthen Institutional and Implementation Capacities (US$4.1 million).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The geographic area is the agricultural production basin of Sikasso-Bamako-Koulikoro in southern
                         Mali.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Melissa C. Landesz (GEN07)
                         Salamata Bal (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The policy OP/BP 4.01 is triggered and the project is
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     rated "B". Indeed, the improvement of rural roads and
                                                                    construction and rehabilitation of post-harvest facilities
                                                                    may have adverse impacts on soil, water, air quality, flora
                                                                    and fauna.

                                                                    Negative impacts may include, among others, use of
                                                                    chemicals (pesticide, insecticide), health risk for rural
                                                                    population, contamination of soils and surface water,
                                                                    waste generation, increased noise because of machines
                                                                    and vehicles, dusts pollution, destruction of marketing and
                                                                    drying areas, accident risks, proliferation of mosquitoes,
                                                                    destruction of habits and traditions, temporary obstruction
                                                                    of roads.




                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                                                        An Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                        (ESMF) has been prepared to ensure that the
                                                        environmental and social concerns of the project activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        are properly taken into consideration from the planning
                                                        phase through to the implementation and exploitation
                                                        phases. The Framework provides guidance for the
                                                        screening and rating of all project activities by the PCU
                                                        (Project Coordination Unit) prior to their financing. Based
                                                        on the screening results and before works are contracted,
                                                        site-specific environmental work - either ESMPs or
                                                        ESIAs ➢❨ as needed, will be conducted to address
                                                        potential negative impacts. The ESMF was disclosed in-
                                                        country on September 29, 2016 and public disclosure
                                                        followed on September 30, 2016.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    Per the ESMF, no natural habitats or sensitive ecosystems
                         4.04                           have been identified in the project area.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    Per the ESMF, no forests have been identified in the
                                                        project area.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    Although the project will not directly finance any
                                                        pesticides, fertilizers or application equipment, the Project
                                                        will co-finance the implementation of eligible activities
                                                        (as described in the Subprojects Manual) under the
                                                        Productive Alliances scheme. IPMP will provide guidance
                                                        to farmers, cooperatives, traders and processors in the
                                                        form of trainings that may include the promotion of
                                                        integrated pest management (IPM) practices, in particular
                                                        in mango production areas to fight fruit flies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        An Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) has been
                                                        prepared. The IPMP was publicly disclosed in-country on
                                                        September 29, 2016 and through the World Bank website
                                                        on September 30, 2016.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Rural roads improvements, and other civil works, may
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           potentially impact cultural and historical heritage along
                                                        the selected corridors.

                                                        The ESMF includes the appropriate mitigation measures
                                                        (chance find procedures) as well as clauses for contractors
                                                        to be utilized in case of discovery of cultural relics of
                                                        archaeological remains during the works.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project areas, as
                         BP 4.10                        defined by OP/BP 4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The OP/BP 4.12 policy is triggered as potential negative
                         OP/BP 4.12                     social impacts could arise from the rehabilitation or
                                                        construction of infrastructure.
                                                        The potential adverse social impacts potentially arising



                                                         Page 3 of 10
                                                                       from the rehabilitation of rural roads, and the construction
                                                                       and rehabilitation of post-harvest facilities, are expected
                                                                       to be the loss of lands, the loss of fields or loss of access
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       to assets (for example planted trees/crops), and the loss of
                                                                       livelihoods and sources of income.

                                                                       A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                                       prepared. The RPF was publicly disclosed in-country on
                                                                       September 29, 2016 and through the World Bank website
                                                                       on October 3, 2016.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project does not involve construction of dams nor
                            4.37                                       will it rely on dams.
                            Projects on International   No             The project does not involve international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The proposed activities under this project do not involve
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           disputed areas between countries, as defined in OP 7.60.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              OP/BP 4.01, OP/BP 4.09, OP/BP 4.11 and OP/BP 4.12 policies are triggered by the Project, and
                              the project is rated "B" (Partial Assessment) for Environmental Assessment (EA) purposes..

                             While the project will include activities which will have a positive environmental and social
                             impact, the construction and rehabilitation of infrastructures, as well as the increase in industrial
Public Disclosure Copy




                             activity and intensification of agricultural production, may have adverse impacts on the
                             environment. Such adverse impacts would however be site-specific and fairly easy to mitigate.

                             Since site-specific sub-projects haven't been identified yet, the Borrower has prepared an
                             Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an Integrated Pest Management Plan
                             (IPMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to provide (1) potential negative impacts of
                             the project as well as relevant mitigation measures, (2) guidance on the screening and rating of
                             sub-projects to determine further environmental work (ESMPs or ESIAs), and (3) the institutional
                             arrangements for the implementation and monitoring of the environmental and social safeguards
                             of the project.

                             Since the project EA rating is B, all sub-projects financed under this project must fall in EA
                             Category B or C. Category A sub-projects will not be financed under this project.

                             The ESMF and IPMP were publicly disclosed both in-country and through the World Bank
                             website on September 29, 2016 and September 30, 2016 respectively. The RPF was publicly
                             disclosed both in-country and through the World Bank website on September 29, 2016 and on
                             October 3, 2016 respectively.

                             The Project will have many positive environmental and social impacts.


                                                                         Page 4 of 10
                          Identified environmental positive impacts are listed as follow. First, productive partnerships will
                          guarantee smallholders a more stable output market, and a better access to finance, that will help
Public Disclosure Copy




                          them increase their production capacity hence their revenues, limit rural exodus and contribute to
                          rural women autonomy. Through technical assistance, good practices will be disseminated to also
                          increase production and products quality. Then, the construction of post-harvest infrastructures
                          will help to diminish post-harvest losses, to secure harvests against pest, and to increase
                          conservation period, with higher quality products. Finally, this support to value chains will foster
                          investments at industrial level, thus increasing value addition to agricultural products, creating
                          jobs and improving living conditions.

                          Identified social positive impacts are listed as follow. First, individuals who are involved in
                          agriculture in the Project geographic area will gain from trainings and capacity-building activities,
                          leading to greater productivity and earnings, as well as access to new all-season roads and the
                          acquisition of goods and better post-harvest facilities. Second, selected/targeted farmers, traders
                          and producers organizations, professional and inter-professional organizations of the value chains
                          that will contribute to targeted segments will be able to raise the quality, governance and
                          sustainability of their institutions; and increase their capacity for generating revenue for their
                          members. The Project also will have a positive impact on gender inclusion as rural
                          entrepreneurship is an excellent mechanism to involve women, particularly in the transformation
                          of agricultural products.

                          However, the project also entails potential negative environmental and social impacts that can be
                          mitigated.

                          While production capacities will increase, use of insecticides and pesticides may adversely impact
                          the environment by contaminating surface waters and soils, and cause sanitary risks to rural
                          populations. Pesticide resistance may also be increased, thus developing new forms of attacks on
                          plants. During civil works, and during Project life with the use of agricultural and industrial
Public Disclosure Copy




                          machines, accidents may happen. Increased noise because of machines and vehicles, dusts
                          pollution, proliferation of mosquitoes, destruction of habits and traditions, and temporary
                          obstruction of roads are also risks to the Project.

                          With regard to adverse social impacts, the construction and rehabilitation of infrastructures
                          impacts will potentially result in loss of lands, loss of fields or loss of access to assets (for example
                          planted trees/crops), and loss of livelihoods and sources of income, as identified in RPF. These
                          impacts are considered to be site-specific and easy to mitigate.

                           Mitigation measures are further described in the Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF), the Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) and the Resettlement Policy
                           Framework (RPF).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No direct or indirect long-term negative impacts are anticipated from the implementation of the
                           Project.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A. Justification for project design and focus: The selected production basin is where the Project

                                                                      Page 5 of 10
                           has highest chance to succeed, and where agriculture, despite favorable growing conditions and
                           diversity of crops and production techniques, remains associated with high levels of poverty ,
                           mostly subsistence farming (outside of cotton production). Building on existing Bank experiences
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (former and ongoing operations), two value chains have been selected: (i) mango, and (ii) animal
                           feed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower prepared an ESMF in compliance with OP/BP 4.01 and OP/BP 4.11. An IPMP has
                           been prepared in compliance with OP/BP 4.09. An RPF has been prepared in compliance with OP/
                           BP 4.12. All three reports have been approved by the Direction Nationale pour le Controle des
                           Pollutions et Nuisances (DNACPN), and cleared by the World Bank Group Regional Safeguards
                           Adviser (RSA). The client publicly disclosed the three (3) safeguards documents in-country on
                           September 29, 2016 and they were also made publicly available through the World Bank website
                           on September 30, 2016 for the ESMF and the IPMP and on October 3, 2016 for the RFP.

                           Activities that trigger those safeguard policies are the following: under Component 2, which aims
                           to improve access to mango production areas by facilitating physical access to production sites,
                           collection and conditioning of products in the Sikasso region, two types of infrastructures will be
                           financed, to wit: (a) the rehabilitation of 300 km of rural roads, and (b) the construction and
                           modernization of seven post-harvest facilities including collection and conditioning centers. Under
                           Component 3, activities planned under the productive alliances scheme will finance technical
                           assistance, extension services, business development services and productive infrastructures (such
                           as market support infrastructure and equipment: warehouses, ventilated storage, maize sheller,
                           threshers, dryers).

                           To comply with safeguard policies, the Project will, to the extent possible, attempt to better give
                           effect to the fundamental objective of avoiding and minimizing displacement wherever possible.
                           In case displacement will be necessary, the compensatory mechanism will be triggered for affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                           persons who meet eligibility criteria. Project affected people who lost assets, livelihoods or access
                           to livelihoods as a direct result of the Project will be identified in the process of preparing a
                           Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and consulted to identify compensation and assistance that can be
                           provided to help them restoring their incomes. These measures will include job placement
                           assistance and/or training. The RAP will include specific measures for compensation and
                           supporting livelihood restoration, in the event that livelihoods are affected.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key value chain actors/stakeholder groups (individuals and firms) are the main project
                           beneficiaries:
                           - 14,000 farmers (5,000 in mango value chain and 9,000 in animal feed sector); 500 trackers; 50
                           traders; 70 processors; 20 wholesalers and exporters; and 5 slaughter houses;
                           - Participating private entities such as professional and inter-professional organizations including
                           but not limited to the Mango Value Chain Inter-Profession (IFM), Poultry Sector Stakeholders
                           Federation of Mali (FIFAM), National Livestock-Meat Value Chain Inter-Professional Federation
                           (FEBEVIM), FENALAIT, National Oil Mill and Cattle Feed Federation of Mali (FENAPHAB),
                           Industrial Employers Organization (OPI), 100 producer and trader cooperatives, and the
                           Professional Association of Banks and Financial Institutions (APBEF);
                           - Workers who will be employed by the value chains (VCs) supported by the Project;
                           - Agents involved in activities that link with the Project through its backward-linkage (nursery

                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                           owners, seed producers, agro-input suppliers, local collectors) and forward-linkage (transport
                           operators, retailers, shipping enterprises, suppliers of packaging materials);
                           - Rural communities living in areas that will become accessible through the improved road system,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and local consumers of the agricultural and livestock products, and users of the API-Mali One-
                           Stop-Shop;
                           - Ministries, departments, and agencies such as the Ministry of Agriculture (MoA), Ministry of
                           Livestock (MoL), Ministry of Trade (MoTRADE), Ministry of Industrial Development (MoID),
                           Ministry of Investment Promotion and Private Sector (API-Mali), regional directorates of these
                           ministries, the Institute for Rural Economy (Institut Economie Rurale)), National Committee for
                           Agricultural Research (CNRA), land commissions, and local authorities

                           The Project requires a strong commitment from mango value chain actors and animal feed sector
                           stakeholders, including producers and cereal traders (maize) cooperatives, mango value chain
                           actors (producers, processors, exporters), as well as mobilization of elected members of local
                           authorities, traditional and religious leaders and communities.

                           Public consultations were organized during the preparation of the safeguards documents to inform
                           key stakeholders and potentially affected communities. The summary of these consultations can be
                           found in the ESMF and the RPF. Further, the ESMF, IPMP and RPF provide guidance on public
                           consultation to be conducted during the preparation phase of sub-projects.

                           The ESMF, IPMP and RPF provide guidance on public consultation to be conducted prior to
                           Project activities. The PCU will assess the potential impacts of every activity, and determine the
                           consultation needed. When a potential highly adverse impact is expected, an ESIA or RAP must
                           be drafted, and must include minutes of public consultations to collect the opinion of all
                           stakeholders signed by all parties.

                           Prior to start the clearing and settlement process, the Project will conduct meaningful consultation
                           and provide the potentially affected people with the opportunity to contribute to the Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           activities design and implementation, thereby reducing the likelihood of displacement and
                           conflicts. Potentially affected people and relevant stakeholders will systematically be informed on
                           the process of land acquisition.

                           The Project also will establish a grievance redress mechanism (GRM) enabling Project affected
                           people and communities to express dissatisfaction and claim compensation for damages. Affected
                           individuals and households will have been informed in advance about this grievance process. The
                           GRM will be designed to provide a transparent, predictable, and credible process to all
                           stakeholders, thereby contributing to effective, fair and lasting outcomes.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          31-Aug-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       30-Sep-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                              29-Sep-2016
                           Comments: The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) at the level of the CNRA (Ministry of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         Agriculture) has published the three safeguards documents on the website of the
                                         CNRA: http://waapp1.cnra-mali.org/frontoffice/ppub?lim=0
                                         The three safeguards documents were published on September 29, 2016 after
                                         receiving the clearance from the World Bank Group Regional Safeguards Advisor
                                         (RSA).
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       31-Aug-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    03-Oct-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                              29-Sep-2016
                           Comments: The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) at the level of the CNRA (Ministry of
                                         Agriculture) has published the three safeguards documents on the website of the
                                         CNRA: http://waapp1.cnra-mali.org/frontoffice/ppub?lim=0
                                         The three safeguards documents were published on September 29, 2016 after
                                         receiving the clearance from the World Bank Group Regional Safeguards Advisor
                                         (RSA).
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       31-Aug-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    30-Sep-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mali                                                              29-Sep-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: The Project Coordination Unit (PCU) at the level of the CNRA (Ministry of
                                         Agriculture) has published the three safeguards documents on the website of the
                                         CNRA: http://waapp1.cnra-mali.org/frontoffice/ppub?lim=0
                                         The three safeguards documents were published on September 29, 2016 after
                                         receiving the clearance from the World Bank Group Regional Safeguards Advisor
                                         (RSA).
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?



                                                                   Page 8 of 10
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alexandre Hugo Laure,Cheick Omar Tidiane Diallo,Remileku
                                                            Rakiatu Cole
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                     Date: 05-Oct-2016
                            Practice Manager/       Name: Rashmi Shankar (PMGR)                    Date: 06-Oct-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
