                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC11895

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Africa                          Project ID:      P154495
                            Project Name:        Second Energy Small and Medium Enterprises (ESME) Support Project
                            Team Leader(s):      Siet Meijer
                            Estimated Date       30-Nov-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEE07                           Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           SME Finance (25%), Health (25%), Other Renewable Energy (25%), General
                                                 energy sector (25%)
                            Theme(s):            Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (30%), Other social
                                                 development (20%), Other human development (15%), Rural services and
                                                 infrastructure (25%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                                 (10%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3.163                          Total Bank Financing: 0
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Energy SME Support to SSA                                                                   3.163
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of Micro, Small and Medium
                           enterprises to provide access to clean and renewable energy services to rural communities in selected
                           countries in Sub-Saharan Africa.
                           C. Project Description
                           In order to reach the goal of universal access, a private sector approach to development by helping to
                           strengthen micro, small and medium enterprises (MSME’s) and fostering their growth is key. Small
                           businesses collectively shape markets that are able to deliver products and services to a large number
                           of Base of Pyramid (BoP) consumers.

                           This activity is a second phase of a cooperation with GVEP international financed by the ESME
                           trustfund. Under the Phase 1 ESME Grant, GVEP International demonstrated that MSMEs can be
                         mobilized to cost-effectively implement energy access programs to serve hard-to-reach customers.
                         Targeted TA proved to be a crucial success factor to support MSME development in the energy
                         sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Based on the experience and lessons learned, this second phase will be a continuation of the activities
                         to support MSMEs but will be more focused. The current proposed grant will focus on selected
                         countries in sub-Saharan Africa, where GVEP international has ongoing successful engagements.
                         The countries of focus will be Kenya, Tanzania, Senegal, and Uganda.

                         The project will have the following three components:

                         Component 1: Advisory services and capacity building support for micro, small and medium
                         enterprises (MSME’s) in the Off-Grid sector (US$2,270,000)
                         This component will finance:
                         a) Advisory services to early stage MSMEs serving the off-grid energy market (Kenya/Tanzania)
                         b) Empower women to become energy entrepreneurs in rural areas (Senegal)
                         c) Technical Assistance to the project developers to support and accelerate the development and
                         growth of small renewable energy projects (Kenya/ Tanzania).
                         d) Engagement with the Senegalese Rural Electrification Agency (ASER) to provide technical
                         assistance: i) for productive use of energy in newly electrified villages; and ii) to PREMs (Projets
                         Energetiques Multi-Sectoriels) that require business and technical support to develop and implement
                         their projects (Senegal).
                         e) Productive use activities in (potential) newly electrified villages (Kenya, Tanzania).

                         Component 2: Support for clean cooking (US$567,000)
                         This component will finance:
                         a) Support to the Senegal National Biogas Program (PNB) to deploy 10,000 units of biogas systems
                         for rural households by providing business advice and technical assistance to selected biogas
                         activities (Senegal).
                         b) Engagement with cookstove manufacturers, schools and financial institutions to reduce market
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and financial barriers to increase adoption of improved cookstoves (Uganda).

                         Component 3: Project Management (US$327,000)
                         This component will cover the coordination of the proposed program in the selected countries,
                         including aspects related to monitoring and evaluation (M&E), financial management, procurement,
                         environmental and social management, and general administration and logistics.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This TA will provide advisory services and strengthen the capacity of Micro, Small and Medium
                         Enterprises through support to an NGO GVEP in terms of staff costs. The advisory services and
                         capacity building for the NGO will include environmental and social mitigation of impacts that will
                         be part of the screening of potential areas for SME support. This project is Category C.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         During the course of activity implementation, the level of understanding and application of
                         environmental and social management guidelines by the NGO GVEP to the enterprises will be
                         established. This information will be the basis for inclusion in the capacity building activities.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSURR)
                           Raymond Peter Von Culin (GENDR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No            This is a TA activity for advisory services and
                           BP 4.01                                           capacity building for an NGO GVEP with no
                                                                             investments on the ground. The advisory
                                                                             services and capacity building interventions will
                                                                             include establishing the level of GVEP’s
                                                                             environmental and social management capacity
                                                                             and improving its application of that knowledge
                                                                             to the enterprises it supports. Therefore none of
                                                                             the safeguard policies are triggered and no
                                                                             safeguards instruments need to be prepared.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No            Same as above
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No            Same as above
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No            Same as above. The Project activities will not
                                                                             include purchase of pesticides or provide TA
                                                                             that could lead to increased use of pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No            Same as above
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No            Same as above
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No            Same as above
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No            Not applicable. The Project does not have any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             activity involving dams.
                           Projects on International           No            Not applicable. The Project does not involve
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              any activity that will affect international
                                                                             waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               Not applicable. The Project will not affect
                           7.60                                              disputed areas as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                             Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):             Name: Siet Meijer
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                   Date: 12-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/           Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)                  Date: 13-Nov-2015
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
