                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC17879

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Senegal                        Project ID:       P160022
                            Project Name:   Senegal Support to Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative Compliance
                                            Process
                            Team Leader(s): Ilhem Salamon
                            Estimated Date 01-Jun-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEEX1                          Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Oil and gas (50%), Other Mining and Extractive Industries (50%)
                            Theme(s):            Other accountability/anti-corruption (50%), Participation and civic
                                                 engagement (30%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                                 (20%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.3                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Extractives Global Programmatic Support                                                      0.3
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           18.     The project development objective (PDO) is to assist Senegal in implementing its EITI
                           agenda.
                           C. Project Description
                           20.      The GoSN has taken a strong ownership of the EITI process and other stakeholders (civil
                           society, industry, parliamentarians) are showing interest in advancing governance and accountability
                           in the extractives sector. EITI-NC in Senegal has started to play a regional leadership role and
                           facilitator for the adoption of extractive transparency measures both at the national and the regional
                           levels. For instance, the EITI-NC hosted a meeting of African EITI National Coordinators to discuss
                           the evolution of the Standard and the needs of their respective countries. Further, civil society and
                           private sector stakeholders have successfully established independent constituency groups led by the
                           "Coalition for transparency in extractive industries", a coalition of some 40 CSOs, and the
                           Senegalese Chamber of Mines. These constituency groupings are facilitators of the EITI dialogue but
                         do not represent exclusive organizations monopolizing the EITI mandate, as the members of EITI-
                         NC are drawn from a nationwide pool of stakeholders.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         21.      Senegal's membership to EITI has allowed a dialogue on the sector's role in the economy.
                         For example, the government has undertaken a review of its mining code which awaits approval by
                         the National Assembly and has expressed its intention to revise the hydrocarbon legislation as well.
                         Recognizing the efforts that remain to be undertaken, EITI-NC has developed an exercise in self-
                         assessment of progress and works closely with an inter-ministerial committee on the achievement of
                         progress expected by October 17, 2016. The efforts made so far are important and recognized as
                         such. H.E. Professor Ismaila Fall, EITI-NC Chair, was elected alternating member of the
                         International Board of EITI, which clearly demonstrates the appreciation of the efforts of EITI-NC to
                         make Senegal meet the international standard of transparency and accountability.

                         22.      The World Bank has supported GoSN since its EITI candidature approval in October 2013
                         through an initial grant of $500,000 over two years and an additional funding of $ 145,000 in July
                         2015. The quality of the implementation of the previous EITI grant that closed on December 31,
                         2015 was satisfactory: (i) EITI-NC is fully operationalized; it has developed its internal regulations
                         and established several working subcommittees; (ii) the structure has ensured its sustainability
                         through the development of an interactive website; and (iii) EITI-NC was able to involve several
                         stakeholders, such as the "Parliamentary Network for the Government of Mineral Resources in
                         Senegal", a media network and several networks of civil society. The support increased contributions
                         to the parliamentary debate on the extractives sector policies such as the review of the mining code
                         through a better understanding of industry issues and collaboration with other members of EITI-NC.

                         23.      The Bank has been the main donor for EITI implementation in Senegal. The next largest
                         direct supporter has been the UK Embassy that funded a visit of EITI-NC to the gold mining region
                         of Kedougou. The Government of Canada, Department for Foreign Aid, Trade and Development
                         (DFATD) has indirectly supported EITI by making the production of the first report a condition for
                         budget support; DFATD has also funded some complementary activities such as: (1) a local
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development project (through SME support) in a major mining region, (2) a West African Economic
                         and Monitoring Union region policy dialogue on the mining sector, (3) a study on mining production
                         data, (4) a study on mining companies? Corporate Social Responsibility programs, and (5) a strategic
                         planning exercise to finalize the multiyear work plan. An ongoing USAID support to civil society
                         engagement in EITI will end in 2016 and there is no plan for a new project.

                         24.     The proposed grant would be a follow-on grant to an EITI Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF)
                         grant (Senegal EITI Implementation Support Project, P131626) which financed the establishment of
                         Senegal?s EITI Permanent Secretariat and the first EITI report's preparation and dissemination. The p
                         roposed grant is meant to push EITI implementation in Senegal forward and support critical efforts
                         needed to help the country reach EITI compliance. A follow-up grant is needed to ensure the
                         sustainability and mainstreaming of EITI in Senegal.

                         Project Components

                         25.     The proposed grant comprises four components as follows:

                         26.     Component A: EITI Implementation Support. This component will support the activities
                         essential to EITI implementation and meeting Senegal's obligations as an EITI candidate country to
                         reach compliance. These activities include:
                         -        Annual EITI report for Senegal. Recruitment of an Independent Administrator (IA) in charge
                         of the preparation of one EITI report covering all extractive industries for the calendar year 2014.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Building on lessons learnt from the preparation of the first report, it will be important to help
                         operators and state agencies better understand the EITI requirements. The project will thus support
                         advisory services for state agencies and companies operating in the extractives industries to comply
                         with EITI reporting requirements.

                         -        Assessment of the legal and institutional framework as it relates to the licensing and
                         awarding of contracts in the oil, gas and mining sector in collaboration with DH. Recruitment of a
                         consultant to: (i) review the legal and institutional framework in Senegal as it relates to license
                         allocations (EITI requirement 2.2), registration of licenses (EITI requirement 2.3), and disclosure of
                         contracts (EITI requirement 2.4), (ii) assess how the legal and regulatory environment compare to
                         international best practice, and (iii) make recommendations on policy reforms the government can
                         adopt in order to address the gaps and strengthen the sector in this aspect. While this assessment
                         cannot influence reforms in the short-term, the recommendations should be shared with the IA for the
                         2014 report prior to publication so the findings can be incorporated.

                         27.   Component B: Communication and Outreach. This component will support the
                         communications and outreach plan of the EITI Permanent Secretariat for the first year of project
                         implementation and will include the following activities:

                         -       Dissemination of the first EITI Report Support for the EITI Permanent Secretariat to: (i)
                         publish and disseminate crucial information on EITI implementation through the production of a
                         short video and brochures in order to inform the public on the overall extractives industry, EITI
                         implementation and related events, and (ii) print and disseminate the first EITI report including in the
                         mining regions and through a dissemination workshop in the capital. The workshop will include
                         dissemination of information on the new EITI Standard (2016) and the EITI validation .process.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         -       Internet and social media activities. Support for the management of a Senegal EITI website
                         and social media accounts that contains information specifically related to the EITI implementation
                         in Senegal as well as wider information on activities related to transparency of extractive industries
                         in Senegal, as well as global news and trends on EITI implementation experiences from other
                         countries.

                         28.      Component C: Project Management. This component will support the costs of three EITI
                         Permanent Secretariat staff (Permanent Secretary, Administrative and Financial Officer, and
                         Database Specialist) and provide support for travel the operating costs related to the work and
                         training of the Permanent Secretariat staff and EITI-NC members of day to day activities carried out
                         by the EITI Permanent Secretariat as well as an audit. GoSN covers the costs of office space and
                         associated utility costs, operation costs associated including office supply, travel costs related to the
                         work of the Secretariat and of EITI-NC members, office maintenance, internet, phone, banking
                         charges, and vehicles and fuel, and will contribute to travel costs related to the work of the
                         Secretariat and of EITI-NC members as needed.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         35.     The project is a technical assistance for Senegal. It is meant at enhancing transparency and
                           accountability in extractive industries' revenue management. It involves no physical investment or
                           recommendation that would be relevant for safeguard analysis.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           36.     While MEF has a good record in implementing Bank-financed projects, the EITI Permanent
                           Secretariat is relatively new. However, the EITI Permanent Secretariat was responsible for
                           implementing the previous EITI grant and has demonstrated its capacity to manage the
                           implementation of the proposed grant. The proposed grant will further strengthen the capacity of the
                           current staff in the Secretariat and Environmental and social management will be integrated part of
                           the capacity building.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ruma Tavorath (GEN07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No              This is a technical assistance project focused on
                           BP 4.01                                             improving the institutional management of
                                                                               licensing and awarding of contracts, capacity
                                                                               building and training and sensitization. There
                                                                               are no physical investments being supported
                                                                               under the project. The grant will not finance
                                                                               studies or assessments linked to potential
                                                                               mineral extraction. Since none of the project
                                                                               activities have any impact on the ground nor
                                                                               any derived down-stream impacts, the category
                                                                               is proposed to be C.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No              This policy is not triggered as project activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               are not expected to have any impacts on natural
                                                                               habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No              This policy is not triggered as project activities
                                                                               are not expected to have any impacts on or
                                                                               infringe into designated forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No              This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                               not finance the procurement or use of pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No              This policy is not triggered as project activities
                           BP 4.11                                             are not expected to have any impact on physical
                                                                               cultural resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No              This policy is not triggered given that project
                                                                               activities are not expected to cause any impacts
                                                                               on Indigenous Peoples.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No              This policy is not triggered given that project
                           4.12                                                activities are not expected to cause any physical
                                                                               or economic displacement, nor any restriction in
                                                                               access to natural resources.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No              This policy is not triggered given the project is
                                                                                             not financing any dam construction or
                                                                                             rehabilitation nor any activities that rely on the
                                                                                             operations of existing dams
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects on International                    No                   This policy is not triggered given the project is
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              not financing any activities in international
                                                                                             waterways as defined by the policy.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               This policy is not triggered given the project is
                           7.60                                                              not financing any activities in disputed areas as
                                                                                             defined by the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Ilhem Salamon
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 28-Apr-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Paulo De Sa (PMGR)                                           Date: 28-Apr-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
