INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12371
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Central African Republic  Project ID:  P153030
Parent       PI19815
Project ID:
Project Name: Health System Support Project Additional Financing (P153030)
Parent Project CF-Health System Support Project (P119815)
Name:
Task Team       Paul Jacob Robyn
Leader(s):
Estimated       26-Mar-2015               Estimated    26-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (910%), Public administration- Health (9%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Health system performance (25%),
Population and reproductive health (20%), Child health (20 %), Other
communicable diseases (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      6.00            Total Bank Financing:    6.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                6.00
Total                                                                      6.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 9


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The development objective of this proposed operation is to increase utilization and improve the
quality of maternal and childhealthservices in targeted rural areas of Central African Republic.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
The revised project development objectives are to: (a) increase utilization and improve the quality
of maternal and child health services in targeted rural areas the Recipient's territory; and (b)
provide emergency health services to the general population.
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The original project has two main components:
Component 1: Improving use and quality of maternal and child services through results based
financing at different levels. This component finances the purchasing of key Maternal and Child
Health (MCH) and Reproductive Health services from rural public, Faith-based Organizations (FBO)
and NGO facilities by a Performance Purchasing Agency (PPA).
Component 2. Strengthen monitoring and evaluation capacity to enable the health information
system to generate up to date, reliable data to measure performance for RBF. The component was
intended to support health facility and population-based household surveys to be conducted by an
independent third party, i.e., the External Evaluation Agency (EEA).
Due to the current crisis situation, budget initially allocated for Components 1 and 2 will be largely
transferred to the two following new subcomponent and component that will be added under the
restructured project.
Sub-component 2.3:
The new sub-component's objective is to strengthen the capacity of the MoH to support the delivery
of MCH services by assisting the ministry in ensuring basic functions such as monitoring,
surveillance of epidemic cases, training its staff, evaluation /assessment of the evolving needs of the
population, organization of the supervision of health services, and in equipping key MoH services
with computers, printers, basic office supplies, etc. since the ministry was vandalized.
Component 3:
The objective of this new component is to provide emergency health services to the population
affected by the crisis, including IDPs and vulnerable groups (mother and children) and ensure that
health professionals are available in health facilities so these facilities can operate during the
emergency period. The component will support: (a) the delivery of a basic emergency health package
that will be defined jointly with the UN agencies to be contracted out; (b) the provision of technical
assistance (TA) in setting up mobile clinics as needed, managing the logistics of drugs, managing
medical supplies, training staff on the emerging needs of the population and care in emergency
situations, organizing medical and health information, etc.; (c) the payment of bonuses to health
workers to improve the quality of services by: (i) rewarding them to go back to their duty station or
wherever the displaced populations are; and (ii) maintaining them at their duty station or wherever
Page 2 of 9


﻿the populations are to provide the minimum services of medical emergency. The scope of
engagement of each of the UN agencies will be further fine-tuned in terms of the technical and/or
supplies services and TA in the contracts that will be developed.
In addition, the bonuses for health facility workers, estimated at US$1 million, will be provided
through HRIFT funds. The proposed support is in line with the HRIFT objectives.
Additional Financing and Related Project Description:
The Additional Financing of the Central African Republic Health System Support Project will
support (i) scaling-up of Performance Based Contracting and Performance Based Financing for the
strengthening of health system delivery in areas affected by the crisis; (ii) strengthening monitoring
and evaluation capacity and support project implementation unit; and (iii) support the provision of
emergency health services.
Component 1: Improving utilization and quality of maternal and child services through performance-
based financing
*Performance Based Contracting for strengthening health service delivery
*Provision of key inputs, drugs, staffing and infrastructure investments
*Performance Based Financing for improvements in utilization, quality and supervision of care
Component 2: Strengthen the capacity of the Ministry of Health and Population (MoHP) in
monitoring and evaluation and the delivery of maternal and child health services
*Capacity building
*Strengthen M&E through the creation of an External Evaluation Agency and reinforce health
management information system Reinforce health management information system
*Coordination and program management at all levels
*Performance contracts at central level of Ministry of Health
Component 3: Provision of emergency health services
*Provision of emergency health services to IDPs and vulnerable groups
The Project Design is as follows:
Component 1: Improving utilization and quality of maternal and child services through performance-
based financing (Total: US$13.0 million: US$4.0 million IDA Additional Financing and US$9
million HRITF): Under the original project design, the HSSP was supposed to introduce PBF across
nine prefectures in Regions 2, 3, 4 and 6 to cover a total population of 2.3 million. Several of these
prefectures are either now supported by other partners or are currently inaccessible due to the
security situation, while other zones in these regions remain without assistance. At the time of
preparing the original project, the country's health system did not face the same needs in
pharmaceuticals, equipment, and personnel, as it does in the post-crisis period.
As such, the Additional Financing would provide support to unassisted zones in the original four
target regions through a package of interventions that combine PBF alongside the provision of key
inputs, drugs, staffing and infrastructure investments. As previously done in similar contexts such as
Afghanistan in the early 2000s, Performance Based Contracting (PBC) will be used to establish
Performance-based Partnership Agreements (PPA) with NGOs to develop context-appropriate
approaches for the implementation of PBF in specific geographic zones. Under this approach, the
MoHP will specify a package of health services which the contracted NGO will be responsible for
delivering through a combination of PBF and other investments to strengthen health service delivery
Page 3 of 9


﻿in a specific geographical location (by region). The performance of the NGO will be judged against
progress on specific, measurable indicators that will be evaluated regularly. PBC will be used as a
transitional strategy in the post-crisis phase to orient the health system towards a financing approach
that is results-based, while taking into consideration that substantial investments will need to be
combined with PBF to address the current challenges. In time and as needs change, the strategy may
be revised so that financing will be purely based on performance.
While the original project budgeted support through PBF at approximately US$2-3 per capita per
year, it is expected that due to the current needs of the health system, additional resources will be
needed to be effective in the post-crisis context. As such, the new intervention will provide support at
US$5-7 per capita per year for 2.5 years of implementation. The scope of interventions applied to
improve service delivery outcomes will be broadened to not only include PBF (as per the original
project design) but also investments in equipment, materials, and recruitment and training of human
resources. Due to the increased per capita investment and reduction in available resources for
Component 1, the new target population will be approximately 1.3 million inhabitants, a reduction
from the original target population of 2.5 million inhabitants.
Table 1: Targeted districts and population, 2015
Health Region Health District Sub--Prefecture Number of health facilities  Population 2014
Region 2           BABOUA                Abba                   7
Baboua                         15                95,223
BERBERATI        Berb6rati        22                171,868
BOUAR           Bouar       22    198,537
Baoro           6
NOLA       Nola   25     127,069
Bambio                  5
Bayanga       7
Sub-total                   109           592,697
Region 3           BOZOUM          Bossemptele           5     90,663
Bozoum          20
PAOUA     Paoua 28      200,470
Sub-total                   53     291,113
Region 4           SIBUT/KEMO         Sibut        4       148,875
D6koa         5
Mala         1
Ndjoukou         5
Sub-total                    15    148,875
Region 6          ALINDAO          Alindao                     16     115,549
Mingala                      9
MOBAYE       Mobaye             6       121,728
Zangba                5
KEMBE        Kemb6      6      78,439
Sat6ma 2
Sub-total                     44   315,716
TOTAL              221      1,348,421
Component 2: Strengthen the capacity of the Ministryof Health and Population (MoHP) in
Page 4 of 9


﻿monitoring and evaluation and the delivery of maternal and child health services (Total: US$1.7
million: US$1.5 million IDA Additional Financing and US$0.2 million HRITF): Prior to the crisis,
the health sector's health management information system was very fragmented, and the data
generated remained unreliable. The crisis has crippled the routine monitoring system even further.
The main causes of the current weaknesses are a lack of health personnel trained in routine reporting,
and a lack of equipment to make the national system work. Component 2 will therefore support the
overall health information system in the country, as well as supporting external verification of PBF-
financed services and results of contracted NGOs through health facility and community-based
surveys. These verification activities will be conducted by an independent third party. The external
evaluation agency (EEA) will be contracted bythe Ministryof Health and Population. The EEA's
roles will include ex-post fact verification of service volumes and quality delivered by health
facilities contracted with thePPA and for which PBF payments have been made. The EEA will also
be tasked with building in-country monitoring and evaluation capacity. Component 2 will also cover
the operating costs of the PIU, including financing goods, consultant services, some training, and
other operating costs.
Component 3: Provision of emergency health services (Total: US$0.5 million: US$0.5 million IDA
Additional Financing and US$0 million HRITF): Component 3 will be used to continue to support
the provision of emergency health services to the population affected by the crisis, including IDPs
and vulnerable groups (mother and children).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is being implemented in targeted rural areas of the Recipient's Territory, namely
unassisted zones in Regions 2, 3, 4 and 6 as specified in table 1. The target population will be
approximately 1.3 million inhabitants. The Additional Financing will be implemented in the areas
where Indigenous People (IPs) are located. Even though the project is not expected to have adverse
impacts on IPs, it is important to ensure that IPs will share project benefits.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         New activities implemented would not modify the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               safeguard arrangements of the original Project, which had
triggered the Environmental Assessment policy OP4.01
due to the potential for increased medical waste and is
being mitigated by a nationally validated Health Care
Waste Management Plan (HCWMP). As the project will
continue in the same locations, the HCWMP prepared
under the original project and disclosed in 2011 remains
relevant for the AF.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project will not affect natural habitats.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project does not involve forests or forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project does not involve pest management.
Page 5 of 9


﻿Physical Cultural       No           The project does not involve pest management.
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          New activities implemented would not modify the
BP 4.10                              safeguard arrangement of the original Project, which had
triggered the Indigenous Peoples 4.10. An Indigenous
Peoples Planning Framework was developed under the
original project and will be utilized for this Additional
Financing.
Involuntary Resettlement No          The project does not involve land acquisition leading to
OP/BP 4.12                          involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
resources and livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not involve dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
New activities implemented would not modify the safeguard arrangements of the original Project,
which had triggered the Environmental Assessment policy OP4.01 due to the potential for
increased medical waste and is being mitigated by the existing nationally validated Health Care
Waste Management Plan (HCWMP) which has been disclosed in-country and at the Info Shop.
The proposed changes are not expected to have any significant or irreversible environmental or
social impacts. The project activities are not expected to have large scale or significant impacts.
The project category will remain B as it was the case for the original project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project will not support civil works. Nevertheless, the project will result in an increase in the
use of medical material which will accordingly increase medical wastes. The project design
incorporates the safe and responsible handling and disposal of medical waste through several
measures The main safeguard instrument under this policy will be the Medical Waste Management
Plan (MWMP) prepared by the Government. This plan is being implemented by the MoHP since
original project was approved in 2012. In addition, under PBF, health centers will report on
Page 6 of 9


﻿hazardous medical material waste management since that action will be included as an indicator to
be evaluated and purchased in PBF. In fact, the quantified quality checklist used by PBF to pay for
performance on the quality measure, measures this element. The weighting for this aspect will be
increased, and the adherence to the guidelines will be checked, and paid for, quarterly.
To better address the need to ensure that indigenous pygmy communities share in project benefits,
an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was prepared and disclosed prior to appraisal
in 2012. While the AF will not be implemented in areas with Indigenous Peoples, this framework
will be used for the project in case it is eventually implemented in areas where IPs are present.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main stakeholders identified are the following:
*      Local communities in the targeted areas including IPs;
*      Local authorities and traditional rulers;
*      The mayors;
*      Sectoral ministries ( ministry of Environment, the ministry of Health and Population;
*      NGOs that will be contracting.
The ministry of Health and Population and the Performance Agencies will ensure the
environmental and social safeguard compliance during the project implementation.
The World Bank safeguards team will also provide training session on WB s safeguards policies
and the PIU staff will benefit from specific training on medical waste management techniques.
Moreover, the quantity and quantified quality checklist used by PBF, to pay for performance, will
precisely measure both the proportion of indigenous people served by health facilities and the
management of medical waste. The weighting for those two indicators will be increased, and the
adherence to the Indigenous Peoples Plan and guidelines for waste management will be checked,
and paid for, quarterly. This is the comparative advantage of PBF in solving such traditionally
intangible problems. The quarterly reports of the performances agencies will reflect the safeguards
implementation actions.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                27-Sep-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                             22-Sep-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Central African Republic                                   27-Sep-2011
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                05-Mar-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                             08-Mar-2011
"In country" Disclosure
Central African Republic                                   12-Mar-2012
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 7 of 9


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paul Jacob Robyn
Approved By
Page 8 of 9


﻿Safeguards Advisor:  Name:                                   Date:
Practice Manager/    Name:                                   Date:
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


