INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA13534
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Oct-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Congo, Democratic Republic T           P153836
of                  Project ID:
of
Parent       P101745
Project ID:
Project Name: DRC High Prirority Roads Reopening and Maintenance - 2nd Additional Fin
(P153836)
Parent Project DEMOCRATIC REPUBLIC OF CONGO - High Priority Reopening and
Name:           Maintenance Project (P101745)
Task Team       Alexandre K. Dossou
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Nov-2015               Estimated     18-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO1                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (65%), Central government
administration (18%), Sub-national government administration (17% )
Theme(s):      Infrastructure services for private sector development (33%), Corporate
governance (330%), Other social development (17%), Environmental policies
and institutions (17%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    190.60            Total Bank Financing:   125.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        65.60
IDA Grant                                                                125.00
Total                                                                    190.60
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 10


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The proposed project#s development objective is to re-establish lasting access between provincial
capitals and districts andterritories in three provinces in a way that is sustainable for people and
the natural environment in the area of influence of theoperation.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
The objective is to re-establish lasting access between provincial capitals and districts and
territories in four provinces (Province Orientale, Katanga, Sud Kivu, and Equateur) in a way that
is sustainable for people and the natural environment in the area of influence of the project.
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
As for the initial Project and the AFl, the Pro-routes AF2 comprises four components:
Component 1 will help reestablish land connection between the provinces of Sud and Nord Kivu and
within the Orientale Province. This component will focus on the rehabilitation works, for an
estimated cost of about US$59.5 million, of the road sections: (i) Komanda - Bunia - Mahagi
(Uganda border) to complement the ongoing output-based management and maintenance contract on
the Kisangani - Niania - Komanda - Beni section; (ii) Beni - Kasindi (Uganda border) to ensure an
adequate level of service on that road would be consistent with its regional traffic through Uganda;
(iii) Bukavu - Goma linking Nord and Sud Kivu provinces by an all season passable road, and; (iv)
Bukavu - Homi - Walikale to complement the sections Walikale - Lubutu - Kisangani allowing
direct accessibility between Bukavu in Sud Kivu and Kisangani in province Orientale avoiding a
long trip from Bukavu to Kisangani via Beni - Komanda and; (v) Dulia - Bondo road section, thanks
to the funding of the financing gap deriving from the cost overrun from the initial financing.
Under a contribution from the GovDRC, through the Road Maintenance Funds (RMF), AF2 will also
ensure, included in component 1, the continuation of the maintenance works on the already reopened
2,732 km of high-priority road network under the initial project and its AFI, for an estimated cost of
US$65.6 million
Component 2 includes, as for the initial grant and AF 1, all activities related to capacity building,
institutional strengthening, and project implementation. This additional institutional support will
mainly cover the finalization of the road sector strategy, the strengthening of the CI (Unit in charge
of project implementation) taking into account the provision of technical assistance to enhance the
capacity of the CI, the fees and operating costs of the CI and the support program to develop the
construction industry in the road sector.
Component 3 covers environmental and social protection activities. This component will have the
same activities as for the initial project and AFI but related to the new road sections and the
Environmental and Social Consultative Panel will continue its two missions per year to oversee the
Page 2 of 10


﻿global implementation and functioning of the institutional arrangement in place for this component.
Component 4 covers monitoring and evaluation including the development of a road data collection
system and the environmental and social program as per the initial project and AFl. Socio-economic
impact evaluation will be conducted, twice during the implementation period of the AF2.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
These characteristics are as follow:
*      RN2: Bukavu - Goma (about 150 km) is located in Sud and Nord Kivu Provinces close to
Lake Kivu. It crosses mountain forests and areas populated by IP Batwa <<Impunyu >>;
*      RN3: Bukavu - Homi - Walikale (about 200 km) is also located in the same Provinces. It
also crosses mountain forests, including the Kahuzi-Biega National Park (KBNP), for about 20 km,
and areas populated by Indigenous People Batwa <<Impunyu>>;
*      RN4: Beni - Kasindi (Uganda border) (about 80 km) is located in the Nord Kivu Province. It
crosses the Virunga National Park (ViNP) for about 10 km and runs along it for the remaining
distance. Indigenous People Mbuti Asua lives in these areas. This section is especially challenging
because it is the main export route of timber, mostly illegally exploited, to Uganda.
*      RN27: Komanda - Bunia - Mahagi (Uganda border) (about 300 km) is entirely located in
Orientale Province. It crosses areas populated by Indigenous People Mbuti (Efe), but not any
protected area.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Antoine V. Lema (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes          The parent project was rated EA category A. An
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) was prepared and disclosed in September 2007.
The same ESMF has been re-disclosed in 2011 under the
first Additional Financing. Since then, ten (10)
Environmental and Social Impacts Assessments (ESIAs)
have been prepared, reviewed, and disclosed. Additional
other environmental studies such as Preliminary
assessment of support to Congolese Institute for Nature
Conservation (Institut Congolais pour la Conservation de
la Nature - ICCN) concerning the participatory
management of protected areas and a strategy and action
plans on Forestry protection and commercial bush meat
control have also been prepared, disclosed, and
implemented.
This second Additional Financing aims to fund the
rehabilitation of four main road sections. The road
sections (i) Komanda - Bunia - Mahagi (Uganda border)
(about 300 km); and (ii) Beni - Kasindi (Uganda border)
(about 100 km) for which two Environmental and Social
Impact Assessments (ESIAs) have been prepared and
transmitted to the World Bank for its review and
Page 3 of 10


﻿approval, are planned for rehabilitation during the first
year of the project implementation. For the remaining two
other roads, Bukavu - Goma (about 150 km) and Bukavu
- Homi - Walikale (about 200 km) which will be
rehabilitated later on, once their ESIAs have been
completed, approved by the Bank and disclosed in
country and at InfoShop, the existing ESMF has been
accordingly updated to cover their area of influence. This
updated ESMF has also been approved by the Bank and
disclosed in country on October 12, 2015 and at
InfoSchop, on October 15, 2015, together with the ESIA
of the first two roads, which were disclosed in country on
September 24, 2015 and at InfoShop on October 15, 2015.
All these safeguard instruments are cleared by the Bank
before disclosure in country and at InfoShop.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The crossing of the Virunga National Park and KPNP
4.04                                 necessitates that a particular attention be paid to these
particular ecosystems. For these reasons, the updated
ESMF and the ESIA elaborated for NR4 include for each
instrument a specific chapter on good practices for
managing natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes          The roads to be rehabilitated under AF2 traverse forests
and fragile ecosystems. This is the case of most of road
sections (NR2, NR3, NR4 and NR27. The revised ESMF
and mainly the ESIA prepared for this road section
include specific sections on managing forestry issues
within these road sections rehabilitation works.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project does not have any relation with pest
management
Physical Cultural       Yes          Targeted areas by activities of road section rehabilitation
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 within this second Additional Financing include ViNP, a
UNESCO World heritage area classified as a site in
danger since 1994 and KPNP, also classified as World
heritage area and in danger since 1997. In addition, areas
targeted by the AF include areas, which hosted civil wars.
This means unexpected graves could be discovered
alongside sections of road projected to be rehabilitated.
For all potential issues, the ESMF and ESIAs include
guidance on how to manage chance finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          The roads to be rehabilitated under AF2 traverse forests
BP 4.10                              and fragile ecosystems. IP Mbuti, Batwa, and others are
under severe pressures because natural forests have
almost disappeared on some road sections (RN2, RN3,
RN4, with the exception of ViNP), or along one of them
(RN27). In addition, economic development generated by
the rehabilitation of the roads could have negative impacts
Page 4 of 10


﻿on Indigenous People Mbuti and Batwa, who might lose
their access to natural resources and their cultural identity.
To prevent and mitigate the risks and potential negative
impacts on Mbuti and Batwa Indigenous Peoples, AF2
has developed an IPP to support IPs and strengthen the
activities already developed with the implementation of
the initial Financing and the AF 1. The IPP has been
reviewed and cleared by the Bank, for the first two roads
Komanda - Bunia - Mahagy and Beni - Kasindi. It was
disclosed in country and at InfoShop on October 14, 2015.
As regard to the remaining two roads Bukavu - Goma and
Bukavu - Homi - Walikale, here again, the existing IPPF
has been updated accordingly to address potentially
adverse impacts. It also was reviewed and cleared by the
Bank and disclosed in country on October 12, 2015 and at
InfoShop on October 14, 2015.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The roads concerned by the AF2 traverse some villages
OP/BP 4.12                           and cities and will induce some involuntary resettlement
of population alongside the roads or in the vicinity of the
borrowing sites of materials for the roads works. A
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared to
cover Komanda - Bunia - Mahagi and Beni - Kasindi
roads. It was reviewed and cleared by the Bank and
disclosed in country on September 24, 2015 and at
InfoShop on October 06, 2015. The existing Resettlement
Plan Framework (RPF) has been updated to cover the area
of influence of the two other roads Bukavu - Goma and
Bukavu - Homi - Walikale. It was also reviewed and
cleared by the Bank and disclosed in country and at
InfoShop on October 14, 2015.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not finance dams nor rely on dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        The project is not expected to affect international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project is not located in a Disputed Area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This second Additional Financing will support activities related to the rehabilitation of four road
sections. These civil works will unquestionably induce environmental and social adverse impacts
in terms of trees cutting, dust, noise, waste management, security and health issues both for
populations and for employees. However, as it is rehabilitation works, most of adverse impacts
associated with these investments will likely be site-specific, so manageable at an acceptable level.
Page 5 of 10


﻿In addition, rehabilitation works will take place in forested areas and sensitive ecosystems such as
Virunga National Park, and KPNP. Potential adverse impacts could occur on biodiversity, on
natural resources and fauna by facilitating through the rehabilitation of roads the access of these
parks and forests. The civil works and the re-opening of road sections could also induce impacts
on cultural heritage as ViNP is classified as UNESCO World heritage and KPNP as World
heritage.
On social level, the rehabilitation of road sections may induce the displacement of populations. In
addition, Indigenous people are present within areas where rehabilitation works will be undertaken
with the possibility to some adverse impacts on them.
The project remains EA category A and will not trigger new safeguards policies due to the fact
that components and activities are the same as in the parent project. The triggered policies are OP/
PB 4.01; OP/PB 4.04,OP/PB 4.36, OP/PB 4.11, OP/PB4.10 and OP/PB 4.12. Safeguard
instruments (ESMF, IPPF and RPF) had all been prepared since the beginning of the parent project
and over 10 ESIA, 10 RAP and IPPs have been prepared, disclosed and implemented as guidance/
guidelines for the activities during the parent project and the first Additional Financing phase.
During the parent project implementation, screening of sub-projects has taken place to ensure
proper identification and mitigation of any adverse impacts.
In order to ensure that all the sub-projects financed under the parent project and the first AF were
in compliance with Bank safeguards policies and in line with the national regulatory framework, a
protocol has been signed between the National Agency in charge of environmental impact
assessment and safeguards monitoring (Groupe d'Etudes Environnementales du Congo -GEEC
became since November 2014, Agence Congolaise de l'Environnementale-ACE). This agency's
staffs organize regularly supervision missions and produce reports on their findings and propose
mitigation measures if needed. These practices will continue during the second AF.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Potential long-term indirect and cumulative impacts of road sections rehabilitation and improved
mobility through maintenance are the gradual disappearance of rainforest in the area of influence
of the road segments, and the reduction of biodiversity through commercial bush meat hunting and
agricultural expansion.
Other negative impacts include an increased rate of accidents due to increased motorized traffic,
and higher respiratory health hazards for the populations living along the roads due to dust in the
air generated by fast moving vehicles during the dry season and the spread of HIV/AIDS and STIs.
Economic growth as a result of the road rehabilitation is likely to lead to further intrusion into the
territory of indigenous pygmy groups with potential consequences such as loss of their traditional
territories and resources, leading to further impoverishment and incremental loss of their cultural
specificity.
Impacts on physical cultural resources are expected to be site specific and limited to possible
damage to sites within the right of way, such as graves, sacred places, and trees.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Page 6 of 10


﻿The only alternative is the absence of road sections rehabilitation and this option does not make
sense as people need road to go to health centers, markets for selling and buying, schools to learn,
etc. More specifically the absence of these rehabilitation works will cut the link between the
provinces of Sud and Nord Kivu and within the Orientale Province. It also contributes to isolate
DRC vis-d-vis its neighboring countries, particularly Uganda.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
As stated above, the Borrower has prepared appropriate safeguards instruments to address
potential environmental and social safeguards issues; ESIAs, an RPF and an IPP for the two road
sections planned for the AF2's, first year of implementation. The existing ESMF, RPF and IPPF
were updated to cover potential adverse impacts of the remaining two roads, whose civil works
will be subject to the preparation and subsequent review, clearance and disclosure of their
safeguards instruments: ESIAs, RAPs and IPPs. The safeguard instruments for the four roads were
approved by the Bank, cleared by the RSA and disclosed in country and at InfoShop. These
safeguard instruments have identified adverse potential impacts and proposed mitigation measures
to avoid, reduce or offset adverse impacts through the implementation of ESMPs (Environmental
and Social Management Plans). In addition ESMPs include capacity strengthening and monitoring
plans with indicators to make sure mitigations measures will be applied properly and they will
produce anticipated impacts. They also include awareness-raising campaigns targeted at relevant
stakeholder groups for better implementation and monitoring of project safeguard measures.
CI has two environmental specialists with a solid experience in World Bank's policies and its
related safeguard instruments. These experts who benefitted from safeguards training during Bank
supervision missions are responsible for safeguards implementation. In other words, they oversee
the implementation of the project safeguards instruments and coordinate efforts at the national
level. CI staff will continue to regularly monitor and follow-up with any safeguard issues. CI has
also hired, since the initial project, an International firm (BEGES) in charge of Environmental and
Social measures implementation. This firm will continue to provide technical assistance and
safeguard guidance to enterprises and other actors. The Bank's supervision missions will also
continue to include environmental and social specialists.
In addition, the Congolese National Agency will continue to regularly supervise rehabilitation
works under this AF and to produce reports on their findings and to propose mitigation measures
to be implemented by the CI through its environmental and social unit. Lastly, CI has contracted
with a Consultative Environmental and Social Panel, comprising two international experts, to
oversee the implementation of the entire environmental and social program and provide advices to
the CI twice a year.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders concerned by this second AF are constituted by populations established by the
project covered zone and along the concerned road sections, ICCN (responsible for parks
management), indigenous peoples in the targeted areas by this AF, farmers who are settled along
road sections, transporters, habitants of villages crossed by road sections, municipalities, NGOs,
ministries in charge of transport, roads, agriculture, social affairs, livestock development,
environment etc. During the safeguard instruments (ESMF, ESIAs, RAPs and IPPs) preparation,
the various stakeholder groups have been consulted. When documents were completed, they have
been summarized in local languages and made available to populations. Additionally, a new series
Page 7 of 10


﻿of consultations have been held, and comments, suggestions, and recommendations made during
these consultations have been taken into account in the safeguards documents finalization. The
latest versions and their summaries were made available in municipalities.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              01-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           15-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  20-Dec-2007
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Democratic Republic of                            24-Sep-2015
Comments: Documents are disclosed on the website of the Ministry of Environment and
Sustainable development www.medd.gouv.cd/publications/Pro-Routes
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              02-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Democratic Republic of                            24-Sep-2015
Comments: Documents are disclosed on the website of the Ministry of Environment and
Sustainable development www.medd.gouv.cd/publications/Pro-Routes
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Congo, Democratic Republic of                            14-Oct-2015
Comments: Documents are disclosed on the website of the Ministry of Environment and
Sustainable development www.medd.gouv.cd/publications/Pro-Routes/Plan en
faveur des Populations Autochtones-PPA
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
Page 8 of 10


﻿OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [X] No [     ]  TBD [
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X] No[   ]  NA[
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alexandre K. Dossou
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 05-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Supee Teravaninthorn (PMGR)          Date: 05-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


