                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSA16844
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 27-Mar-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               05-Apr-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Uzbekistan                   Project ID:              P149610
    Project Name:                     Ferghana Valley Water Resources Management - Phase II (P149610)
    Task Team Leader(s):              IJsbrand Harko de Jong
    Estimated Appraisal               07-Apr-2017                  Estimated Board          06-Jun-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GWA09                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                       Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           190.90                        Total Bank Financing: 142.40
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                            32.60
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                         30.40
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  112.00
    EC European Commission                                                                                        15.90
    Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00
    Total                                                                                                        190.90
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objective is to improve the quality of irrigation and drainage service delivery to
    agricultural users within the project area.
    3. Project Description
    The project will contain the following components:

    Component A: Irrigation Modernization. This component aims to increase water supply both from surface and

                                                    Page 1 of 10
groundwater sources and to reduce wastage through investments in the modernization of the water distribution
system. Investments will increase the capacity to control and distribute water along the canal network. This
component will consist of the following sub-components:
- Subcomponent A-1: Rehabilitation of Surface Irrigation System.
- Subcomponent A-2: Rehabilitation and Construction of Pump Stations.
- Subcomponent A-3: Construction of Wells.
- Subcomponent A-4: Flood Control and Bank Protection.

Component B: Support for Agricultural Modernization. This component will promote intensification and
diversification of agriculture and improved water management. The Project will use a combination of direct
training activities, information dissemination, technology demonstrations, experience sharing activities and
interactions with other sources of information, financial and technical support. The Component will be
organized around the following sub-components:
- Subcomponent B-1: Agricultural intensification and diversification.
- Subcomponent B-2: Improved Water Management.

Component C. Project Management. This component will support strengthening the MAWR’s and the Project
Implementation Unit’s (PIU) capacity for project management, monitoring and evaluation (M&E) (including,
inter alia, the areas of procurement and financial management) through the provision of goods, consultant
services, training, and financing of incremental operating costs. This component will (i) support the preparation
of a feasibility study and bidding documents for follow-up investment activities; and (ii) develop a
comprehensive management information and data collection and reporting system on key performance outputs
and impact indicators through, inter alia, baseline surveys; participatory assessments; mid-term reviews; and
final evaluations. The EU grant will provide additional resources to support fiduciary management of the EU-
funded project activities, as well as M&E, communication and visibility activities as per EU requirements.

Uzbekistan is a signatory to several International Labor Organization (ILO) conventions related to child and
forced labor , but the enforcement of these conventions, as well as of existing national laws reflecting
international agreements, has remained challenging, especially during the cotton harvest. Recognizing the need
to change the system, the government of Uzbekistan has announced its plans to mechanize 70 percent of cotton
harvesting by 2020. The 2015 cotton harvest was the first year when the cotton harvest mechanization campaign
commenced in earnest. The Asian Development Bank is working with the government to formulate a strategy to
mechanize agriculture, with a particular emphasis on cotton production. The Bank funded SKWRMIP is
supporting cotton harvest mechanization on 25,200 ha.

The World Bank, in consultation with the government and development partners, has adopted a multi-pronged
approach to address child and/or forced labor issues in Uzbekistan. These include (i) pursuing continuous
country dialogue and collaboration with international/multilateral agencies and donors to address these issues;
(ii) performing sector analytical work and policy dialogue to promote diversification away from cotton and
mechanization of cotton harvesting; (iii) promoting crop diversification and intensification, and supporting
agricultural mechanization through a number of investment operations; and (iv) strengthening project-level
mitigation measures and binding provisions, including implementing a Third Party Monitoring (TPM) and
Feedback Mechanism (FBM) to help address child and/or forced labor issues in connection with the project
activities or within the project area. In 2014, the World Bank signed a Memorandum of Understanding (MoU)
with the International Labor Organization (ILO) that stipulates that the ILO will carry out third party monitoring
in the Bank-financed project areas, as agreed with the GOU. The MoU was extended through the end of 2018,
thereby ensuring implementation of the TPM and support to the FBM throughout the 2017 and 2018 harvests.
The Feedback Mechanism is also carried out by the ILO and includes three components: (i) strengthening the
existing national GRM mechanisms; (ii) a “facilitation” handled by the ILO as managers of the TPM, which
serves as an independent channel for people not wishing to work through national channels; and (iii) the


                                                Page 2 of 10
international channel through the ILO’s supervisory mechanism.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project area covers 103,622 ha and is entirely located in the Ferghana Valley, encompassing three regions:
Andijan, Ferghana and Namangan. The proposed project areas (selected based on a multi-criteria analysis)
include:

(i) The Podshaota-Chodak project area (29,507 hectares) in Namangan region located in the northeast of the
Ferghana Valley. Administratively, the project area consists of Yangikurgan district in its entirety and part of
Chodak district. It is located on the right bank of Syr Darya River;
(ii) The Isfayram-Shahrimardan project area (54,375 hectares) in Ferghana region located in the south of the
Ferghana Valley. The project area covers the southern part of Isfayram-Shahrimardan administration of
irrigation system. Administratively, the project area include the entire Ferghana and Kuvasay districts, Ferghana
city, and parts of Kuva, Altiarik and Tashlak districts;
(iii) The Savay-Akburasoy project area (19,740 hectares) in Andijan region located in the southeast of the FV.
Administratively, the project area is part of Kurgantepa, Jalalkuduk, and Hujaobod and Bulokboshi districts of
Andijan region and located on the left bank of Karadarya River.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Alisher Khamidov( GSU03 )
 Ekaterina Romanova( GSU03 )
 Gulana Enar Hajiyeva( GEN03 )
 Javaid Afzal( GEN03 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes            The overall impact of the project due to the
                                                             proposed activities like rehabilitation and lining of
                                                             main canals and related water control infrastructure,
                                                             rehabilitation of pumping stations and capacity
                                                             strengthening of water managers and users will help
                                                             improve overall water use efficiency. Average
                                                             annual withdrawals from the Syr Darya basin,
                                                             including through groundwater extraction, will
                                                             increase (see under OP7.50: International
                                                             Waterways).

                                                             Environmental aspects of the project are mainly
                                                             associated with civil works to be carried out under
                                                             Component A and Component B, including in
                                                             particular the rehabilitation/modernization of the
                                                             irrigation network and the flood control and bank
                                                             protection. As these works will focus on
                                                             rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and be of
                                                             relatively small scale, the project is classified as
                                                             Category B.



                                                Page 3 of 10
                                                     The potential environmental impacts may include
                                                     excessive dust and noise generation; damage to soil
                                                     and loss of the fertile layer due to excavations;
                                                     excessive fumes due to the use of heavy
                                                     construction machinery; generation of construction
                                                     and domestic wastes on the construction sites and
                                                     on the affiliated facilities (e.g. construction camps);
                                                     and impacts on water regime of natural waterways
                                                     which are the source of irrigation supplies to be
                                                     improved as a result of the project.

                                                     In order to address project's environmental
                                                     concerns, the client has prepared an Environmental
                                                     Assessment and Management Plan (EAMP), which
                                                     considered the above impacts in detail and
                                                     suggested adequate mitigation measures. The
                                                     EAMP has also assessed potential environmental
                                                     and social risks and opportunities associated with
                                                     the capacity building and credit line access aspects
                                                     under Component B, and determined the measures
                                                     to address those aspects.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No          There is no critical natural habitat located in the
                                                     project area, as defined in the policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No          There is no forest located in the project area, as
                                                     defined in the policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes         The project will not directly support the purchase of
                                                     pesticides. However, since the project will support
                                                     agricultural modernization activities, including
                                                     agricultural diversification and intensification, and
                                                     since the crops involved are most likely those
                                                     heavily treated with pesticides, these will lead to the
                                                     increased use of pesticides, and, thus, increased
                                                     need in pest management. The potential risk of
                                                     increased use of pesticides, as an indirect impact of
                                                     the project, is addressed through the Pest
                                                     Management Plan incorporated as a separate
                                                     chapter into EAMP. The pest management plan
                                                     (PMP) discussed in detail the potential impacts, and
                                                     indicated the project will support training to be
                                                     provided to farmers to raise awareness of the good
                                                     pest management practices/integrated pest
                                                     management (IPM) principles.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No          There are no physical cultural resources present in
                                                     the project area, as defined in the policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes         Potential resettlement impact is expected as a result
                                                     of rehabilitation and construction works under
                                                     Component A. A Resettlement Policy Framework

                                          Page 4 of 10
                                                     (RPF) was prepared and outlines requirements for
                                                     resettlement activities, including a comparative
                                                     analysis of the Uzbek national legislation and WB
                                                     policy vis-a-vis resettlement, types of potential
                                                     resettlement impact, steps for preparation of RAP(s)
                                                     and entitlement matrix. The RPF was disclosed by
                                                     the client and the WB in December 2015. A
                                                     Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) for the first phase
                                                     of the project in Namangan region, where the
                                                     project design had been finalized, was also
                                                     prepared, publicly consulted and disclosed in
                                                     adherence with the WB policy requirements. The
                                                     RAP was disclosed in country and by the WB in
                                                     February 2016. Additional site-specific RAP(s)
                                                     will be prepared as needed once the detailed plans
                                                     for civil works during subsequent phases are
                                                     finalized and the extent of resettlement impact is
                                                     known.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                Yes         The PIU prepared and submitted to the Bank copies
                                                     of the revised dam safety information, including the
                                                     Operations and Maintenance Plan, an Emergency
                                                     preparedness Plan and a Dam Safety Note in
                                                     accordance with the requirements of the Policy.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Yes        The Syr Darya is an international river, which flows
7.50                                                 through Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Uzbekistan and
                                                     Tajikistan. In February 2016, the Bank, on behalf of
                                                     the Government of Uzbekistan notified three
                                                     upstream and downstream riparian countries
                                                     (Kazakhstan, Kyrgyz Republic, and Tajikistan) of
                                                     Uzbekistan’s intention to implement the
                                                     FVWRMP-II.

                                                     The Government of Kazakhstan raised concerns
                                                     about the impact of the project on the Syr Darya
                                                     during the notification period. These concerns were
                                                     addressed through the provision of additional
                                                     project information, including the project EAMP,
                                                     and additional analysis on water resources
                                                     modelling in accordance with the requirements of
                                                     BP 7.50. The findings of the additional analysis
                                                     confirmed the initial assumptions of notification.

                                                     The Task Team is satisfied that (i) the Project will
                                                     not cause appreciable harm to any of the riparians
                                                     in the Syr Darya River basin; and (ii) Project
                                                     activities are not expected to have adverse effects
                                                     on the quantity or quality of water flows to riparians
                                                     in the Syr Darya basin.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60    No          The project is not located in Disputed Areas as

                                          Page 5 of 10
                                                                   defined in the Policy.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    Environmental aspects of the project are mainly associated with civil works to be carried out under Component
    A and Component B, including in particular the rehabilitation/modernization of the irrigation network and the
    flood control and bank protection. As these works will focus on rehabilitation of existing infrastructure and be of
    relatively small scale, the project is classified as Category B. The potential environmental impacts may include
    excessive dust and noise generation; damage to soil and loss of the fertile layer due to excavations; excessive
    fumes due to the use of heavy construction machinery; generation of construction and domestic wastes on the
    construction sites and on the affiliated facilities (e.g. construction camps); and impacts on water regime of
    natural waterways which are the source of irrigation supplies to be improved as a result of the project.

    The project will not directly support the purchase of pesticides. However, since the project will support
    agricultural modernization activities, including agricultural diversification and intensification, and since the
    crops involved are most likely those heavily treated with pesticides, these will lead to the increased use of
    pesticides, and, thus, increased need in pest management. In addition, the agricultural intensification and
    diversification capacity building and assistance to farmers to access credit lines have the potential to raise
    environmental and social issues due to the implementation of agricultural activities financed through the
    external credit lines.

    Rehabilitation and lining of main canals and related water control infrastructure, rehabilitation of pumping
    stations and capacity strengthening of water managers and users will help improve overall water use efficiency
    from the current 30 percent to 35 percent. Average annual withdrawals from the Syr Darya basin, including
    through groundwater extraction, will increase. The net impact under the project design scenario on water
    withdrawal from the Syr Darya basin is 83.9 MCM, by an estimated 0.4 percent of the average annual runoff of
    the Syr Darya of 20,582 MCM at the Uzbek Tajik border. The Task Team is satisfied that (i) the Project will not
    cause appreciable harm to any of the riparians in the Syr Darya River basin; and (ii) none of the Project
    activities are expected to have any adverse effects on the quantity or quality of water flows to any riparian in the
    Syr Darya basin.This withdrawal stays below the internationally agreed withdrawals as reflected in protocol 413
    that was issued on February 7, 1984, and that allocates 46% of the annual Syr Darya flow to Uzbekistan, 44% to
    Kazakhstan, 8% to Tajikistan, and 2% to the Kyrgyz Republic. An additional analysis was conducted to estimate
    the impact of the project on the total cumulative flow between April and September. Considering that an
    estimated 70 percent of the annual runoff of the Syr Darya at the Uzbek Tajik border occurs between April and
    September, the net impact of the project is 0.6 percent, 1.2 and 1.8 percent under the project design, medium-
    and high-case scenario, respectively.

    The project area is downstream from and is dependent on, among others, the Andijan and Kerkidon reservoirs.
    In addition, the project proposes to rehabilitate Kandiyon Mudflow Reservoir. In total, the Feasibility Study
    identified seven dams that are located in the project area. The Bank has recommended organizing a Possible
    Failure Mode Analysis (PFMA) workshop in 2018.

    The social impacts associated with this project include those that will result from permanent and temporary land
    acquisition for the construction of bore-wells and reconstruction of a storage reservoir and rehabilitation of main
    and inter-farm canals and also within the existing storage reservoir will require the felling of trees planted
    illegally.


                                                     Page 6 of 10
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Anticipated long term impacts of the project are positive. These are related to the improved efficiency of scarce
water resources of the FV region, reduced soil salinization through stabilization of the ground water level, better
and more reliable crop yields, and reduced climate change vulnerability by ensuring reliable water resources for
irrigation. Social benefits include anticipated higher income and living standards of the project beneficiaries due
to increase in yields and land profitability. social capital of local communities will be strengthened via
community mobilization and fostering the participation of the people both as Water Consumer Association
(WCA) members and as active contributors to the Project implementation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
"Without Project" was considered as an alternative scenario for the project. It has been concluded that no
interventions will lead to further degradation of land and continuous scarcity of water resources, and, as a result,
to poor crop yields in the region.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In order to address project's environmental concerns, the client has prepared an EAMP, which considered the
above impacts in detail and suggested adequate mitigation measures. The EAMP has also assessed potential
environmental and social risks and opportunities associated with the capacity building and credit line access
aspects under Component B, and determined the measures to address those aspects. Because the range and
diversity of likely activities to emerge from this support is narrow, the EAMP provided general guidance for the
preparation of site-specific environmental management plans SEMPs to be developed during project
implementation, as the credit line activities get identified. The potential risk of increased use of pesticides, as an
indirect impact of the project, is addressed through the PMP incorporated as a separate chapter into EAMP. The
PMP discussed in detail the potential impacts, and indicated the project will support training to be provided to
farmers to raise awareness of the good pest management practices/IPM principles.

Similarly, the projects social concerns have been addressed through the preparation and disclosure of a project
Resettlement Policy Framework that will be applied to address land acquisition related impacts in the Isfayram-
Shahimardan, Savay-Akburasoy and other relevant project locations where civil works will take place. In
addition, a site specific Resettlement Action Plan for the subproject located in the Podshaota-Chodak area of
Namangan Province in the Ferghana Valley was prepared and disclosed. The number of PAHs impacted upon
by the construction of the storage reservoir in Namangan province is 3, by the water transmission pipeline also
3, and by the construction of new bore-wells 105. The total number of PAHs impacted upon is 111. Of this
number 6 will lose from 10% to all of their land, while 4 of these PAHs will lose from 60% to 95% of their trees
of economic value.

Permanent agricultural cropping land acquired for new bore-wells has been estimated at 2.85 hectares and
temporarily acquired 5.70 hectares. Permanent garden land to be acquired has been estimated at 0.30 hectares
and for the storage reservoir 1.34 hectares. Garden land temporarily acquired includes 0.60 hectares for bore-
wells and 1.26 hectares for construction of the new water transmission pipeline. The permanent loss of trees of
economic value includes 157 for the construction of the new water transmission pipeline and 235 for the water
storage reservoir. The total estimated cost for all involuntary resettlement actions identified in this RAP is
Uzbek Som UZS 125,042,720 (US$ 52,000). RAP implementation will be monitored and evaluated by an
external consultant hired by the PIU and cleared by the Bank.

Projects on international waterways require notifying riparian countries. The letter provides detailed information
about the project and states that project-supported activities will not undermine the quantity or quality of the
current basin-water uses. Bank Management has determined (in accordance with OP/BP 7.50) that the Project

                                                  Page 7 of 10
   will not cause any adverse effects on the quantity or quality of the water flowing to any riparian in the Syr Darya
   basin.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   Identified stakeholder groups include: farmers in the FV project area; WCAs in the FV project area; the
   population and civil society in the FV project area; water management staff working for FV water management
   institutions (Province Department of Agriculture and Water Resources, Basin Irrigation System Authorities,
   Hydrology and Ameliarative Expedition, Pump Stations, Energetics and Communication Authority, Main
   Canal/Irrigation System Authorities; female farmers, staff and members of WCAs and rural women in FV
   project area.

   In May 2015, the borrower conducted a series of public consultation meetings in all three locations of the project
   area with the above mentioned groups of stakeholders. Public consultations on RPF and RAP took place in
   December 2015 and in January 2016. The borrower maintained proper record of the meetings and attached
   those, as detailed meeting minutes, to the final version of EAMP, RPF and RAP. The EAMP has been cleared
   by the Regional Safeguards Advisor and disclosed by on April 15, 2016.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              08-Apr-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           15-Apr-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




   Uzbekistan                                                                      08-Apr-2016
 Comments: The draft EAMP was disclosed and discussed on May 12-14, 2015, in all three project areas in
 Ferghana, Namangan and Andijan, and then the finalized EAMP was posted through publicly available web-site.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       02-Nov-2015
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    24-Dec-2015
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Uzbekistan                                                                  22-Dec-2015
 Comments: RAP for the first phase of the project in Namangan region was disclosed in-country on Feb. 1, 2016
and on Infoshop on February 25, 2016
 Pest Management Plan
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    A
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 "In country" Disclosure
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::
 Pest Management Plan is part of EAMP document.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level



                                                   Page 8 of 10
PHCompliance




          OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          report?
          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice      Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP               Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




          OP 4.09 - Pest Management
          Does the EA adequately address the pest management              Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          issues?
          Is a separate PMP required?                                     Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a             Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
          included in project design?If yes, does the project team
          include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                 Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards   Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes []    No [X]   TBD   []
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes [X]   No []    TBD   []
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)

          111 Provide estimated number of people to be affected
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                            Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
          Bank?
          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared          Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          and arrangements been made for public awareness and
          training?
PHCompliance




          OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?          Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the         Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
          Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and
          sent?
          Has the RVP approved such an exception?
PHCompliance
                                                                          Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                         Page 9 of 10
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been          Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                 Name:IJsbrand Harko de Jong
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                  Name: Nina Chee (SA)                Date: 05-Apr-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:            Name: Michael Haney (PMGR)          Date: 05-Apr-2017




                                                       Page 10 of 10
