                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC13727

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Myanmar                        Project ID:      P156124
                            Project Name:        Myanmar EITI Implementation Project
                            Team Leader(s):      Morten Larsen
                            Estimated Date       15-Dec-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEEX1                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Other Mining and Extractive Industries (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Other accountability/anti-corruption (60%), Other public sector governance
                                                 (40%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3.5                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Myanmar Strategic Partnership                                                                3.5
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           Increase transparency and accountability in Myanmar’s management of extractive industry data,
                           revenue, and impacts. The project is expected to achieve this objective by supporting the
                           implementation of the Myanmar Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project duration is expected to be four years (2016, 2017, 2018, 2019) in support of the
                           implementation of the MEITI work plan for the period 2016 - 2019. The four objectives of the
                           MEITI work plan are: i) Reform of resource governance; ii) Creating an enabling environment for
                           EITI; iii) Implementing EITI; and iv) Increasing accessibility of data. Specific activities include
                           coordination of MSG and sub-committee meetings, outreach events, studies, capacity building and
                           training, communications, and the preparation of annual EITI Reports and a validation report in
                           2017. Moreover, it is also envisioned that the project will support the development of a digitized
                           mineral cadastre system. This is not a routine component of EITI support, but will help Myanmar
                           comply with the 2013 EITI Standard by directly addressing the issue of data quality which is
                           particularly prevalent in Myanmar. This project will aim to support the range of institutions and
                         stakeholders involved in reaching compliance with the EITI requirements.

                         Project Components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1 – Support to the MSG and EITI Secretariat (Estimated cost: $1.6 Million) This
                         component will support the activities essential to EITI implementation and meeting Myanmar’s
                         obligations as an EITI member under the 2013 Standard. Central to this will be the production and
                         dissemination of the annual EITI Reconciliation Report. The Myanmar government covers the costs
                         of office space, staff, utilities, and some communications costs, while the grant will cover the
                         operation costs associated with the activities. These include the day to day activities carried out by
                         the EITI Secretariat unit, under the oversight of the MSG. It will also emphasize capacity building to
                         create the necessary skills among MSG members, constituency stakeholders, and the EITI Secretariat
                         unit within the Ministry of Finance. It is anticipated that many of the activities will be carried out in
                         close collaboration with civil society.

                         Given the breadth of extractive industries in Myanmar, the MSG has identified the need to undertake
                         baseline studies of certain sectors. Baseline studies on the gemstone sector and the hydro sector have
                         been included in the work plan. These studies will analyze the institutional structure of the industries
                         and attempt to map and quantify the flow of funds accruing to central government and regional
                         administration. The objective of the studies will be to determine the relevance and complexity of
                         integrating these sectors under the EITI reporting framework.

                         Component 2 – Improving data quality and operators’ readiness for EITI implementation (Estimated
                         Cost: $150,000) Component 2 will cover activities aimed at improving the capacity of reporting
                         entities to meet EITI reporting requirements and enhance the overall standard of the data they
                         produce. This will be coordinated with and build on training in reporting templates typically
                         provided by the Independent Administrator. It will aim to improve overall quality, availability and
                         accessibility of EITI related data among both private sector operators and SEEs (such as audit
                         procedures, verification of production statistics and others). Specific attention will be given to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         domestic companies and to SEEs.

                         Component 3 – Institutional development for EITI Implementation – Ministries (Estimated Cost:
                         $1.75 Million ) Component 3 will support the work plan activities specific to line Ministries,
                         including the Ministry of Mines, the Ministry of Energy, the Ministry of Environmental
                         Conservation and Forestry, and Ministry of Finance outside the EITI Secretariat unit. Specifically
                         this will include development of a mineral cadastre registry system. EITI Standard 3.9 requires that
                         countries have a publicly available registry of mining licenses, including information about license
                         area, dates of award or duration, or type of permit. In addition to supporting EITI implementation,
                         the creation of a modern mineral cadastre and license system will significantly improve mining
                         governance and stewardship of natural resources by introducing greater transparency in the decision-
                         making. The Mineral Cadaster Management System will be designed in a way that requires
                         mandatory safeguards review before the award of a mineral license and that the system will prompt
                         safeguards reporting deadlines as a flag in the monitoring system. The support to the mineral cadastre
                         will be done in collaboration with the national land management authorities which hold overall
                         responsibility for spatial planning and management. This activity will build on initial map
                         consolidation support provided by Finnish support.

                         Component 3 will also support the capacity of Ministry of Finance to compile and manage EITI data
                         across a range of governmental agencies including the Internal Revenue Department and Customs.
                           This component will also support collaboration across traditional ministry lines in order to include
                           agencies such as the National Statistical Office and the Office of the Auditor General.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will provide only TA and there are no physical investments on the ground. Trainings will
                           take place in Yangon, Naypyitaw and regions affected by extractive industries with a broad set of
                           stakeholders, including communities and civil society and community based organizations and oil/
                           gas and mining companies. The project will only support the multi-stakeholder group and
                           government agencies to make recommendations related to improving transparency and reporting on
                           financial and sector-specific information and will not make recommendations related to investments
                           for specific sites. Studies or reports developed under this grant will not contribute to further
                           infrastructure investments or policy interventions related to investment promotion in the oil and gas;
                           mining and gemstones, or hydropower sectors.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Client institutional capacity for implementing of safeguard policy is low. Nonetheless some progress
                           has been made in terms of stakeholder consultation, and the EITI has created a forum for addressing
                           issues related to EI companies' environmental and social performance. Environmental and social
                           impact assessment and management will be integrated parts of the training events and workshops
                           which are envisaged in order to improve agencies' and stakeholders' understanding of the extractive
                           industries.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
                           Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              This is a technical assistance project focused
                           BP 4.01                                              specifically on improving the institutional
                                                                                management of extractive industries, including
                                                                                relevant consultations and training. There are no
                                                                                physical investments being supported under the
                                                                                project. Studies to be financed by the grant will
                                                                                be limited to baseline assessment of institutional
                                                                                structures and payment flows. The grant will not
                                                                                finance studies or assessments linked to
                                                                                potential development oil and gas; mining and
                                                                                gemstones, or hydropower investments or
                                                                                related infrastructure. Since none of the project
                                                                                activities have any impact on the ground nor
                                                                                any derived down-stream impacts , the category
                                                                                is proposed to be C.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No              This policy is not triggered as project activities
                                                                                are not expected to have any impacts on natural
                                                                                habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No   This policy is not triggered as project activities
                                                                are not expected to have any impacts on the
                                                                management of forest.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   This policy is not triggered as the project will
                                                                not finance the procurement or use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   This policy is not triggered as project activities
                         BP 4.11                                are not expected to have any impact on physical
                                                                cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   This policy is not triggered given that project
                                                                activities are not expected to cause any impacts
                                                                on Indigenous Peoples.
                                                                The team notes that the EITI is inherently a
                                                                multi-stakeholder initiative with responsibility
                                                                to increase transparency and accountability of
                                                                the extractive industries by publishing and
                                                                disseminating yearly reports. Myanmar EITI is
                                                                governed by a multi-stakeholder Group (MSG)
                                                                which includes nine members of civil society
                                                                with a diverse representation of states and
                                                                regions.
                                                                Moreover, two decentralized MSG committees
                                                                have been established in Mandalay and Maway
                                                                regions.
                                                                Furthermore, the EITI Standard EITI requires
                                                                that the report is “comprehensible, actively
                                                                promoted, publicly accessible, and contribute to
                                                                public debate” (Requirement 6).
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                In this regard, the Myanmar EITI is in the
                                                                process of developing a communication strategy
                                                                with the support of the World Bank EITI MDTF
                                                                first grant (P143321). This will include
                                                                procedures for consultations and dissemination
                                                                of EITI material in local languages.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   This policy is not triggered given that project
                         4.12                                   activities are not expected to cause any physical
                                                                or economic displacement, nor any restriction in
                                                                access to natural resources.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No   This policy is not triggered given the project is
                                                                not financing any dam construction or
                                                                rehabilitation nor any activities that rely on the
                                                                operations of existing dams.
                         Projects on International         No   This policy is not triggered given the project is
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   not financing any activities in international
                                                                waterways as defined by the policy.
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No    This policy is not triggered given the project is
                           7.60                                                              not financing any activities in disputed areas as
                                                                                             defined by the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Morten Larsen
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                                            Date: 20-Oct-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Paulo De Sa (PMGR)                                           Date: 20-Oct-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
