                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA12309
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Pakistan                            Project ID:    P131324
                            Project Name:      PK-Sindh Barrages Improvement Project (P131324)
                            Task Team          Abdulhamid Azad
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          08-Apr-2015                         Estimated   22-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWADR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%), Irrigation and
                                              drainage (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Water resource management (60%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%),
                                              Income Support for Old Age, Disability & Survivorship (10% ), Climate change
                                              (5%), Other environment and natural resources management (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     209.00           Total Bank Financing:                  191.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           18.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 191.00
                              Total                                                                                       209.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to strengthen the Irrigation Department's capacity to effectively rehabilitate, operate and
                           manage the Guddu barrage.



                                                                        Page 1 of 10
                          3. Project Description
                         The primary function of the gated Guddu barrage is to provide irrigation water to over one million
                         hectares of agricultural lands in the Jacobabad, Larkana , Sukkur and the Naseerabad districts , by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         feeding the Ghotki Feeder and Rainee canals on the left (east) side and the Begari Sindh (BS) Feeder
                         and Desert Pat Feeder canals on the right (west) side. The barrage incorporates two fish ladders. The
                         barrage is also used for river control and flood management. It has been designed to pass a super-
                         flood discharge of up to 33,980 cubic meters per seconds (m3/sec). The barrage is also an important
                         transport link across the River Indus and provides cooling water for the thermal power station at
                         Guddu. Two major gas lines cross the barrage. The barrage was commissioned in 1962 and has now
                         seen over fifty years of active service. The Guddu barrage has a span of 1,400 meters. It consists of
                         64 gates of 18 meters each and one navigation lock with a span of 15 meters. The gates weighing 55
                         to 100 tons are “fixed wheel” type and operate without counterweights. The project has the following
                         three components:

                          Component A: Rehabilitation of the Guddu Barrage (US$196 million) This component will support
                         rehabilitation of the barrage and its associated structures. The works have been determined based on
                         (a) a detailed diagnostic assessment, (b) hydrological and sediment analysis studies including
                         physical and numerical model studies, and (c) geotechnical, structural, and safety evaluation studies.
                         Implementation of the environmental and social plan (US$6 million) is part of this component.

                         Component B: Improved Barrage Operation (US$8 million): This component will support
                         modernization and improvements to the barrage O&M. This will include necessary upgrades to the
                         instrument monitoring systems such as piezometers and gate positioning and water measurement
                         equipment (acoustic Doppler current profilers), replacement of surveillance and maintenance boats,
                         and procurement of hydrographic equipment. The project will provide new covered workshops and a
                         stock of spare parts for maintenance activities. The instrument monitoring system for the barrage will
                         be renovated and the operating staff will be equipped with an upgraded operation, maintenance, and
                         surveillance manual.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component C: Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation (US$5 million): This component
                         will support the coordination of all project-related activities as well as training and technical
                         assistance in procurement, financial, social and environmental safeguards, and communication.
                         Activities will include the establishment of an independent panel of experts (POE) to review,
                         monitor, evaluate, and help guide the rehabilitation process with regard to the safety of the barrage.
                         The component will also support implementation of an information dissemination and
                         communication program, particularly regarding possible canal closures, citizens’ engagement and
                         feedback, and the implementation of safeguard-related action plans.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Guddu barrage is located at longitude 69.71’ E and latitude 27.42’ N across the River Indus some 16
                         km from Kashmore, 130 km from Rahimyar Khan, 190 km from Sukkur, and 630 km from Karachi.
                         The Barrage is accessible by paved road from all these cities. The nearest airports to the barrage are
                         Rahimyar Khan and Sukkur. The Guddu barrage provides only way of crossing the river for some
                         considerable distance. The nearest river crossings on upstream is located about 230 km at DG Khan
                         and downstream crossing is located about 190 km at Sukkur. Based on the traffic counts carried out
                         in October 2011, the average daily traffic on the barrage is 3260, in which 40 percent are heavy
                         vehicles. Peak hourly traffic is 225 vehicles per hour.


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         The project area is dominated by characteristics of braided Indus river (meandering channels,
                         temporary shoals and alluvial sand tracts), barrage pondage and floodplain agriculture. Indus
Public Disclosure Copy




                         upstream of Guddu is extensively braided with a width of 10 to 15 km with constantly shifting
                         channels. The river carries water through its entire width during high flow season of June to
                         September, while the water will be limited to few channels during remaining months. The barrage
                         and its river training works narrowed the river at the barrage by 1.3 km and created a temporary
                         pondage area on the upstream side during high flows and some permanent ponds near the spurs.
                         Before construction of the Guddu barrage, the area is a desolated terrain with some agriculture in the
                         floodplains, but the barrage transformed these barren lands in to vast agricultural tracts. Landuse in
                         the project impact area is covered 35 percent by Indus (10% by active channels, 15% by river
                         alluvium, 5% by stagnant water bodies, 5% by riverine scrublands), 60 percent by agriculture, 4
                         percent by settlements and 1 percent by barren or waste land that is not suitable for agriculture.

                         The project location is surrounded by cultivated land. Soil types range from dark brown sandy loam
                         in most places to light-brown sand in others. The area’s soils contain adequate moisture and nutrients
                         for agricultural use. The soils at the barrage site are alluvial in nature and are mainly silty clay, clay
                         loam, and loam soils.
                         The Indus at Guddu drains an area of about 950,000 km2 and generates a mean annual discharge of
                         6,682 cumec. The hydrograph of the river is strongly seasonal with a long low water season between
                         October and May (low flow season) and a high water season between June and September (high flow
                         season) – driven primarily by summer snowmelt in the upper catchment and monsoon rainfall. River
                         flow upstream of Guddu barrage varies from a monthly average flow of approximately 10,300 cumec
                         in August, to a monthly average flow of approximately 990 cumec in December. The corresponding
                         figures downstream of barrage are approximately 9,500 cumec (335,000 cusec) and 708 cumec
                         (25,000 cusec) in August and December respectively.
                         About 15,000 cumec of water is being diverted through four canals of Guddu (509 cumec through
                         Beghari Sindh Feeder; 396 through Desert Feeder; 311 through Ghotki Feeder and 283 cumec
                         through Rainee canal).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A 170 km stretch of the River Indus between two irrigation barrages Guddu and Sukkur is the
                         designated as national protected area for Indus dolphin, and is known as Indus Dolphin Game
                         Reserve . The total area of the reserve is 125,000 ha and has a 3 km buffer zone on the floodplains.
                         This dolphin game reserve was also declared as Ramsar wetland of International Importance in year
                         2000. According to recent estimates in 2011, the reserve holds a population of 918 dolphins.
                         Whereas in 1975, only 150 dolphins were recorded from this reserve signifying the conservation
                         efforts carried out so far.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Javaid Afzal (GENDR)
                         Miki Terasawa (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes             The proposed project involves civil and mechanical
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                        rehabilitation works of the existing barrage, which is
                                                                      located on Indus river. The impact of the project will be
                                                                      site specific and will be mainly associated with the
                                                                      construction phase. An independent EIA has been
                                                                      undertaken during project preparation. Besides, The


                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                                                           project will has developed an emergency preparedness
                                                           plan, a social development action plan and an
                                                           environmental management plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes   The project may impact on flora and fauna: the Indus
                         4.04                              River between the Guddu and Sukkur barrages is an
                                                           important game reserve and habitat for the Indus or Blind
                                                           Dolphin (Platanista gangetica minor). This part of the
                                                           river contains large population of dolphins. During the
                                                           implementation, the project will assess the performance of
                                                           the fish ladder and propose improvements or alternatives
                                                           based on best global practices available technologies if
                                                           possible. The ESIA reports has recommended a study on
                                                           dolphin conservation action plan and will be awarded
                                                           soon after the project is approved by the Bank.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No    The project does not impact riverine forests as all the
                                                           activities are confined within the river main course. It is
                                                           expected that around 260 trees mainly eucalyptus and
                                                           acacia may need to be fell down mainly for the
                                                           construction of office cum residential colony.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No        There will be no change in the irrigation supplies from the
                                                           barrage after the rehabilitation works have been
                                                           completed and therefore there will be no change in the
                                                           existing pesticide use practices in the irrigation command.
                         Physical Cultural           No    The rehabilitation works are limited to the existing
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11              structure with no new activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      No    There are no known indigenous groups in Sindh province
                         BP 4.10                           as identified under this policy. The only identified
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           indigenous people in Pakistan under the OP/BP 4.10 are
                                                           in Kalash valley in the northern Pakistan (Chitral district
                                                           of Khyber Pakhtunkhwa province).
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes      While no land acquisition or resettlement is expected at
                         OP/BP 4.12                        this time, this has been triggered as a precautionary
                                                           measure. The staff colony would be established on land
                                                           owned by the Irrigation Department. The RPF is prepared
                                                           to guide resettlement planning for any unanticipated land
                                                           acquisition and resettlement impacts during the course of
                                                           the project implementation.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes   Although barrages are not dams, they are indeed major
                         4.37                              hydraulic structures on which millions of hectares of
                                                           irrigated land and population are dependent. A panel of
                                                           expert has been established and they will continue during
                                                           the implementation period. An emergency preparedness
                                                           plan has been prepared as well as an updated barrage
                                                           operational plan.
                         Projects on International   Yes   The project area is located on the Indus River which is an
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              international waterway. However, the project essentially


                                                            Page 4 of 10
                                                                       involves rehabilitation of existing barrage facilities. It
                                                                       does not involve works and activities that would exceed
                                                                       the original scheme, change its nature, or alter or expand
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       its scope and extent to make it appear a new or different
                                                                       scheme. Therefore given the nature of works envisaged
                                                                       under the proposed project: (a) the project will not
                                                                       adversely affect the quality or quantity of water flows to
                                                                       other riparians; and (b) it will not be adversely affected by
                                                                       other riparians’ water use. The project team has also
                                                                       reviewed Article VI1 of the Indus Waters Treaty between
                                                                       India and Pakistan and concluded that a notification by
                                                                       Pakistan to India under paragraph (2) of the said Article
                                                                       VI1 is not required, as the project will not cause
                                                                       interference with the waters of any of the Rivers and will
                                                                       not affect the other riparians materially. Therefore, the
                                                                       Project falls within the exception to the notification
                                                                       requirements of OP 7.50, set forth in paragraph 7(a) of OP
                                                                       7.50. The RVP has approved such an exception.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project is located within Sindh province of Pakistan.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           The province is not a disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Guddu barrage has been in operation for more than 50 years and the proposed rehabilitation works
                              will not alter the current operational regime of the barrage and hence will not create any additional
Public Disclosure Copy




                              impacts. The proposed activities are limited to the existing footprints of the barrage and no
                              additional land acquisition is required, hence most of the impacts from the proposed activities are
                              temporary in nature and limited to construction period. Based on the experience of rehabilitation
                              of other barrage projects in Pakistan, many of the environmental issues are mainstreamed in the
                              project design (e.g. construction using bulkhead gates). Dolphin game reserve located immediately
                              downstream of the barrage is the most significant receptor susceptible from impacts of the
                              construction works. The overall positive impact of the project, which is the enhancement of the
                              life of the barrage to safeguard the livelihoods of 2.6 million people in the command area through
                              provision of irrigated water for 1.2 million ha, will be experienced countrywide.
                              Construction of barrages on the Indus River has resulted in fragmentation of dolphin habitat as
                              well as other fish species, particularly Hilsa. Besides, diversion of water for irrigation has also
                              resulted in reduction of historical environmental flows below Kotri barrage. This project has
                              allocated significant resources to undertake dolphin conservation management and Hilsa migration
                              impact assessment studies, which will be completed during the implementation of the project.
                              Recommendations will be presented to the concerned Government departments for
                              implementation. A number of studies in the past have been conducted to determine the quantum of
                              environmental flows for healthy river system including aquatic life as well as to avoid sea
                              intrusion. Government is implementing recommendations according to the Water Apportionment
                              Accord of 1991.
                              Changes in water quality, under-water noise with potential impact on dolphins and other river


                                                                        Page 5 of 10
                           habitat, impact of longer than scheduled canal closures on crop yields and other water needs are
                           some key environmental issues. Traffic, air quality, potential collision of dolphin with construction
                           vehicles, clearing of natural vegetation and trees and higher noise levels are some other potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                           issues envisaged in the project and are associated with construction stage of the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           According to GoS development plans, rehabilitation of Sukkur and Guddu barrages are considered
                           as major developments in Indus in next 20 years. The construction of three barrages in Sindh has
                           been diverting about 3,920 cumec to the canals and resulted in irrigation of 5,572,995 ha of land.
                           The construction of a series of barrages on the Indus River system has a cumulative impact of
                           increased irrigation, which brought the green revolution in this region of the world, and increased
                           the economy many fold. The current conditions of all barrages require urgent action to rehabilitate
                           them in order to improve the efficiency and effectiveness of irrigation water distribution in rural
                           Sindh. The rehabilitation work under the project will safeguard the continued operation of Guddu
                           barrage by prolonging the useful life of the structure, and continue uninterrupted water supply to
                           the irrigation network of Sindh. However, dolphin habitat and blockage to fish migration upstream
                           particularly Hilsa are some of the major environmental issues resulting directly from the
                           construction of barrages in decades between 30-60s. Rehabilitation of these barrages will not
                           result in any additional environmental impacts than what has already been noticed.

                           The project will ensure safeguarding the livelihoods of 2.6 million people in the barrage command
                           area, besides ensuring a number of other environmental and social co-benefits. The project is
                           expected to provide positive social impact by maintaining reliable supply of water to more than
                           370,000 farm households and reducing communities’ vulnerability against barrage failure.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           No intervention. Failure of the Guddu Barrage can cause widespread flooding and interruption of
                           water supplies, resulting in a disastrous setback to the economy and the lives of the people in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           area. Thus, ‘no intervention’ is not an option. The alternative of carrying out the repairs through
                           intensive maintenance during regular closure periods was considered and not found viable. To
                           carry out proper repairs, the drying of the construction surfaces is necessary, requiring the
                           construction of coffer dams.
                           Seven alternatives were studied for improved flood protection. Alternative 1 includes the raising
                           and strengthening of existing river training works to withstand a 100 year return flood.
                           Alternatives 2, 3, 4 cover various methods of discharging floodwaters through left marginal bund
                           by allowing controlled breaches, but all these alternatives are rejected due to requirement of
                           inundation of large areas of agricultural lands and settlements. Alternative 5 includes construction
                           of an underground siphon through left bank to divert water from upstream to downstream, which
                           is a technically challenging and expensive. Alternative 6 and 7 include construction of new
                           marginal bunds and widening of existing barrage through construction of new gates. An overview
                           of all these alternatives are described below

                           1.       Strengthen & Raise Existing River Training Works to Contain 100 Year Flood flows:
                           Existing river training works will be strengthened and the existing marginal bunds shall be raised
                           to 6ft above the modelled 100 year flood levels. Stone pitching would be added to the river side to
                           protect the bunds from scour during flood flows. No land acquisition is required for this option.
                           2.       Earth Fuse Bund on Left Marginal Bund: A sacrificial section for the weaker section of
                           left marginal bund is proposed. The section would be designed to breach causing the flood level

                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                         upstream of the barrage to reduce, thus reducing the need to raise the existing marginal bunds.
                         This option is cheaper but the downstream of the fuse bund must be maintained clear of all
                         settlements or be evacuated prior to a breach and the area likely to be flooded would be large.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.       Fixed Weir on Left Marginal Bund: This option works in a similar manner to the earth
                         fuse bund; however, instead of the construction of a sacrificial portion of bund which requires
                         reconstruction following a breach, the crest level of this section of the bund is lowered and a
                         concrete weir crest is constructed. The area likely to be flooded would be larger than above option,
                         but there would be no need for reconstruction of the structure following a breach.
                         4.       Gated Weir on Left Marginal Bund: This option is same as above, except that the crest
                         level of the weir can be reduced by adding gates to the weir. Similar to above two options, this
                         option also requires maintaining large areas to be flooded during floods.
                         5.       Siphon under left bank Canals: Additional capacity to pass water from upstream of the
                         barrage to downstream could be provided by constructing a large concrete siphon (culvert) which
                         passes under the Rainee and Ghotki Canals on the left bank of the barrage. The capital cost of the
                         structure would be far outstripping the existing budget. Maintenance costs on the siphon shall also
                         be high, but will ensure that the siphon can operate at the time of need. It is a long term solution to
                         flooding in the area. Moreover, the flood water of siphon when diverted to river downstream of
                         barrage would add flood pressure to Sukkur barrage.
                         6.       Construct New Marginal Bunds: In this option, construction of new marginal bunds was
                         considered instead of rehabilitation of the existing bunds. However this option was rejected
                         because the existing marginal bunds are technically suitable for rehabilitation.
                         7.       Extend Barrage on Left Bank: This is achieved by providing additional gate bays on the
                         left bank of the barrage. This option would require reconstruction of the left guide bund and the
                         head regulators of the left bank canals. A diversion for these canals would also be required during
                         construction. Major interventions would also be required to manage the alignment of the river
                         approach to satisfy the upstream river morphology and extensive modelling studies would be
                         required. The construction period and costs will be very high. Large scale land acquisition is
                         required along the left bank.
                         Environmentally and socially the alternative 1 is preferable compared to other options due to (i) no
Public Disclosure Copy




                         loss of terrestrial habitat (clearing of natural vegetation and trees) and aquatic habitat
                         (development of additional pondage area) due to additional land acquisition and construction
                         works (ii) lesser requirement of quarry and borrow materials due to lesser construction works, (iii)
                         lesser construction related environmental impacts from construction equipment and vehicles and
                         construction workforce.
                         Several options have been considered for the rehabilitation of the barrage regulator control system.
                         In considering these options, the feasibility took into account the importance of maintaining power
                         operations, number and skill level of barrage staff and the unlikelihood that future expenditure on
                         maintenance will be significantly increased. Analysis shows that the option to rehabilitate barrage
                         using instrumentation and control similar to the existing arrangement (compared to centralized
                         control or remote control options) provides the most reliable and most flexible solution. This is
                         because it will accommodate multiple failures and still allow powered operation of gates. The
                         existing motor drive trolleys can be replaced by an appropriate number of new trolleys with the
                         design updated to include modern control and braking as well as ancillaries such as task lighting. It
                         would also be possible, if required, that one or more trolleys be powered by a small petrol engine
                         making operation without electricity possible although it is also envisaged that a permanent
                         standby generator would be available, so to an extent, this would be a double redundancy. The
                         option of using instruments and control system similar to the existing arrangement is the least cost
                         option due to the smaller number of motors and associated equipment required.



                                                                    Page 7 of 10
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Sindh Irrigation and Drainage Authority and the Irrigation Department has been successfully
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementing the on-going Sindh Water Sector Improvement Project (WSIP), which is also a
                           category A project. WSIP has an established environment and social unit, and safeguard
                           compliance has been satisfactory. The Project Monitoring Cell of WSIP facilitated preparation of
                           ESMP, RPF, and other required documents with support from a consultant and also facilitated
                           independent environment and social assessment. Their capacity and experiences will support the
                           established environment and social unit for the proposed project, which is responsible for project
                           preparation and implementation. In ensuring safeguard compliance, the Project Management
                           Office of the Irrigation Department will also be supported by construction supervision consultant
                           and independent monitoring and evaluation consultant.

                          The PMO will be responsible for the implementation of ESMP. The PMO would be responsible
                          for all aspects of project implementation including technical, operational, financial management,
                          and overseeing the implementation of ESMP. The PMO will include an Environmental and Social
                          Unit (ESU) consisting of the following staff

                           •        Environmental specialist,
                           •        Social development specialist
                           •        Communication Specialist
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Extensive consultations were carried out during the project preparation. Initial consultations were
                           held at the early stages of the project preparation (November 2011 to Jan 2012) to share the project
                           objectives and terms of references of the proposed ESIA study. Second round of consultations
                           were held during October to December 2013 to disclose the results of ESIA. Consultations
                           involved multiple methods – for example, household level interviews, village wise meetings, focus
Public Disclosure Copy




                           group discussions and workshops. A medical camp for women in the project area was also
                           organized to promote awareness on the project. Stakeholders consulted include (i) population
                           around the project area and community representatives. (ii) farmers in the command area of Guddu
                           barrage, (iii) industrial users of the canals, such as Guddu thermal power plant, (iv) district and
                           provincial government authorities responsible for district administration, roads, forest, rural
                           development, agriculture, fisheries, wildlife and environmental protection, (v) community based
                           organizations and (vi) conservation agencies such as IUCN and WWF.
                           The ESA was submitted to Sindh-EPA, which cleared the report on February 17, 2015. A final
                           round of consultation and disclosure of the ESA reports was carried out during October 2014.
                           These meetings were held in Guddu and Sukkur, at which respective relevant district organizations
                           and institutes were invited. The consultation meetings were also attended by local community, SID
                           officials, media, civil society representatives. The ESA summary has been translated into Sindhi.
                           The Summary (both English and Sindhi) and the ESA document were uploaded on the website of
                           SID on 10 November 2014 and disclosed at the InfoShop on January 08, 2015.
                           Key stakeholders include Sindh Irrigation Department, Sindh Environment Protection Agency,
                           Wildlife Department, District Administrations, communities in project areas and command areas,
                           private sector, and NGOs. Detailed consultations were held with community members, including
                           fishermen, farmers, and women. Consultations were also held at district and provincial levels in
                           finalizing the Independent Environment and Social Assessment. The project prepared
                           communication strategy as a part of Social Management Framework. This includes continued


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           consultations during the project implementation, in particular with community members who
                           could be affected by the project works.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      12-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Jan-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      12-Jan-2015
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         12-Jan-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      07-Jan-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Jan-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Pakistan                                                         12-Jan-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Abdulhamid Azad
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                         Date: 15-Apr-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Christina Leb (PMGR)                           Date: 16-Apr-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
