INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
,2 Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Albania                    Project ID:   P152094
Project Name:    Integrated Land Management Project (P152094)
Task Team        Kathrine M. Kelm
Leader(s):
Estimated        08-Jul-2015                Estimated     29-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Public administration- Information and communications (30%), General public
administration sector (30%), Information technology (40% )
Theme(s):        e-Government (30%), Personal and property rights (30%), Land administration
and management (40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      45.00             Total Bank Financing:    45.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
a          International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           45.00
Total                                                            45.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project's development objective would be to contribute to an increase in the efficiency,
transparency, reliability and availability of an integrated land management system through
integration of key IT systems, and geo-spatial and immovable property information.
The project would achieve these goals by (i) supporting the development of an integrated land


﻿management policy and harmonized legal framework; (ii) improving the regulatory environment,
business processes, staff capacity and customer orientation in the IPRO; (iii) updating, upgrading and
digitizing the paper-based registration information for priority areas of the country; (iv) improving
transparency of immovable property ownership and transactions by increasing digital information
U       and on-line access; (v) facilitating spatial data access, exchange and sharing; and (vi) developing a
new methodology for value-based property tax and piloting new approaches for enhancing property
taxation.
C. Project Description
The proposed project will have the following four components:
Component A: E-Governance for Enabling Integrated Land Management. The Government of
Albania is taking major steps to improve service delivery to citizens, increase transparency, minimize
opportunities for corrupt practices and build public trust. The e-Gateway was recently put into
operation and the digital property registration system has been integrated. A new Bank financed
project will support the establishment of citizen centric service delivery, a one-stop-shop service
center that will include property registration services. This component would support the Ministry of
Innovation and Public Administration (MIPA), in cooperation with key stakeholder groups, to
manage the development and implementation of an enabling e-governance technical environment to
support a wider Integrated Land Management Program. Actions under this component would involve
the development of Integrated Land Management policy, strategy, legal framework and technology
to create an enabling technical environment, and development of rules, standards and human
resource capacities to manage implementation of the program. Data acquisition, processing, storage,
access, sharing and optimal use of geospatial and other data will be additional key elements of the
program. Many of the provisions of the EU INSPIRE Directive could be translated to the policy,
legal and technical framework in Albania. The project would also support the Bank financed project
for citizens centric services by addressing the key components and data related to geospatial and
property/land systems. The component would work closely with the MIPA and the new National
Spatial Data Agency (ASIG) to ensure that the data models, metadata rules and strategy for including
the data layers for the main themes in the INSPIRE directive and areas of key government interest in
the urban and land sectors are included in the integrated land management system.
Component B: Data for the Integrated Land Management System. The biggest challenges facing
IPRO remains the pre-2011 registration data (data for approximately 80% of property in the country).
These data (maps and legal registers) are kept in manual form and are of poor quality or damaged by
daily use. Thus, a national process to digitize, update and upgrade the data is urgently needed so it
can be uploaded and maintained in the IT system as part of the wider e-government strategy. Actions
under this component will complete first registration in any remaining priority areas, provide
institutional support to IPRO, and fulfill other data requirements. Although many of these zones are
in remote areas, first registration remains incomplete along the economically valuable Southern
coastline and for most forests/pastures. The process requires a regulatory framework to determine
administrative boundaries, address the particular issues associated with the southern coastline, and a
procedure to recognize the rights of users in remote areas who are often from the most vulnerable
groups and rely on forest products for their livelihood. Institutional support for IPRO, would include:
production of a digital archives; staff training; improving IT system and integrating the system
architecture; extending e-services modules and putting them into operation; and ensuring sufficient
backup and disaster recovery mechanisms. Key data suppliers include the address information and
the citizen national identification (NID) system held at the Ministry of the Interior. These data need
to be integrated with the IPRO IT system and be available in the geoportal. The proposed project


﻿would therefore include a subcomponent to access these data and link to the IPRO IT system.
Component C: Property Valuation and Taxation. This component would support the establishment of
a more efficient and transparent property valuation and taxation system. Actions under this
U       component will include conducting mass appraisal system pilots based on international valuation
standards in select municipalities. The pilots will inform the procedures to set up and operationalize
the system, and identify changes in property tax collection as well as changes in tax burden
(distributional effects) as a result of the mass appraisal system. This is expected to be achieved
through: (i) the development of a fiscal cadastre - property data and IT system; (ii) the design and
piloting of a mass valuation system; and (iii) the adoption of valuation standards based on
international standards and the development of a market-based property tax legal framework. The
component could also contribute to the strengthening of local governments' capacity to bill and
collect property tax revenues and to assure the flow of information across the different institutional
users.
Component D: Project Management, Capacity Building and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The
project would also support IPRO and ASIG with updating and implementation of their Strategic
Business Plans in order to ensure IPRO operates as a service oriented business and ASIG develops
its capacity to operate as the hub for geo-spatial information. These modernization plans require
intensive training and information campaigns for staff as well as for state and private users. In
addition, a strong M&E program is needed to track progress for each institution within the wider e-
government structure and to collect and analyze gender data about property ownership and services.
Actions under this component will include developing a business plan for ASIG, devising an
integrated training and capacity building plan for implementing agencies, and strengthening M&E
methodology and rigor at the implementing agencies.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented for the entire country of Albania, but majority of the activities will
focus around improved services and digital databases, with no physical footprint.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project will be implemented either by IPRO that has implemented a large land administration
project component of the Land Administration and Management Project (P096263) which closed on
June 30, 2014 or by a newly established PIU - National Spatial Data Agency (ASIG). Although
ASIG has no previous experience in implementing World Bank projects it is expected that ASIG will
work together with the IPRO for implementation.
The safeguards issues identified for the project will be assigned to a specialist within the PIU, while
for the development of specific studies (such as the SESA or the chapter of the Program) consultants
with relevant expertise and experience will be hired on board.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Esma Kreso (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Although there are no activities with a physical


﻿OP/BP 4.01                               footprint envisaged under this project, there is
potential for small-scale, indoor reconstruction works
that would be needed for establishment of server
rooms or IT-back up storage under Component B. In
the event that such works would be needed, a
Checklist EMP would be prepared for the specific
sites. A generic Checklist EMP will be prepared and
disclosed prior to Appraisal as guidance.
Under component A, the wider Integrated Land
Management Program needs to be assessed related to
the potential environmental implications. This would
need to be carried out either by doing a Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) in
parallel with the development of the Program, if such
a document is required also by the Albanian law on
SEA. If not, the Program should be supplemented
with an integrated section that would analyze the
potential linkages and impacts on the environment.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
a       4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No         There will be no physical investments requiring
BP 4.12                                 temporary or permanent land acquisition or
displacement. The main activity under this project
will focus on registration of property rights and the
team refers to the 2009 Interim Guidance Note on
Land Use Planning (Paras. 10 and 11), which
indicates that OP 4.12 is not triggered in the case of
support for Government land use planning or
administration activities which do not include any
investments that actually result in changes in
resource or land access, use and/or organization. (i.e.,
the project will only record the existing situation, not
change it).
Although in projects of this kind there is the potential
for the process of land surveying, mapping and
registration to result in establishing formal
boundaries that do not coincide with actual current


﻿land use patterns on the ground, in some cases
resulting in an effective reduction in the area
accessible to a private landowner, the current
registration regulations in Albania instruct the
registration teams to record the facts on the ground
and include automatic allowances of up to 15%
surplus for the area occupied compared with the
privatization documentation. The definition or
amendment of a property boundary as to its legal
position should not be confused or co-mingled with
the failure to accept ownership and/or requiring a
person to move. Also, based on the previous project
(LAMP) precedent, in case of any dispute regarding
the location of the boundary between a private land
holding and adjacent state-owned land, the Borrower
will be encouraged to set the boundary based on the
actual land use/occupation rather than existing land
records. If unresolved discrepancies remain, they
would be indicated as such in the registration data (i.
e. a dotted line on the map and a note of who
occupies the land) rather than formalizing a
boundary that reduces a current private land
"holding." Furthermore, there is a legalization
process on-going in Albania that allows most people
to formalize their land rights, even for illegal
occupation and there are administrative and judicial
procedures in place to resolve any disputes. Thus, the
issue of involuntary resettlement or lack of access is
not considered to be a significant risk under the
present project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
*    Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jul-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
B.      Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be
needed. The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS.
Checklist EMP will be prepared and disclosed in its generic form by mid-May. The ToR forSESA
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿or section of the Integrated Land Management Program related to environment will also be
disclosed at this time.
IV. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kathrine M. Kelm
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                      Date: 18-Mar-2015
*       Practice Manager/     Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                   Date: 18-Mar-2015
Manager:


