INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12344
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Samoa                       Project ID:  P128904
Project Name: WS: Pacific Regional Connectivity Program: Phase 3 - Samoa (P128904)
Task Team       Natasha Beschorner
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Apr-2015                 Estimated    19-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General information and communications sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Rural services and
infrastructure (40%), Regulation and competition po licy (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.60             Total Bank Financing:    16.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            6.42
IDA Grant                                                                    16.00
Asian Development Bank                                                       18.50
Local Sources of Borrowing Country                                            8.18
Pacific Regional Infrastructure Facility Trust Fund                           1.50
Total                                                                        50.60
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project development objective is to reduce the cost and increase the availability of Internet
Page 1 of 9


﻿services in Samoa.
3. Project Description
The Project is expected to finance a submarine fibre-optic cable linking Samoa (Savaii and Upolu) to
U        Fiji (at the Southern Cross Cable Network at its landing station in Suva).
Project Components are as follows:
o        Component 1. Samoa-Fiji Cable, comprising the following:
Component 1 (a) Submarine cable system. Design, supply and installation of a submarine cable
system to connect Samoa (Upolu and Savai'i) to Fiji (Suva), including undertaking a marine survey,
financing the cable manufacture and cable deployment-marine operations.
Component 1 (b) Landing stations and ancillary equipment. Construction of landing stations and
ancillary facilities in Savaii and Upolu, including acquisition and installation of onshore equipment.
Component 1 (c) Additional costs. Financing of Indefeasible Rights of Use (IRUs) (including the
acquisition of long-term landing services in Fiji and capacity) and management costs associated with
the operation of the SSCC.
Component 2. ICT Regulatory Technical Assistance. Carrying out a program of activities designed
to enhance regulatory capacity of the Office of the Regulator, such program to include, inter alia: (a)
review, development and implementation of effective regulation for the ICT sector with a particular
focus on wholesale markets; (b) review (and update) of existing legal regulatory framework; and (c)
carrying out a nationwide consumer survey on the benefits of ICT.
Component 3. Project implementation and administration. Carrying out a program of activities
designed to strengthen the capacity of the Recipient for Project transactional implementation and
management, such program to include: (a) Project finance and transactional assistance in connection
with the institutional design and operationalization of the SSCC pursuant to public private
partnership arrangements; including independent appraisal of the proposed structure of SSCC; (b)
overall Project coordination, financial and contract management, procurement, communications and
outreach plus reporting, audit, monitoring and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
1.     Component 1 involves laying approximately 1,300 km of submarine fiber optic cable
between Suva, Fiji and the islands of Upolu and Savaii in Samoa, and installation of one cable station
in Samoa. The preferred cable landing site in Apia (Upolu) is situated at Fagali'i where the existing
Samoa/American Samoa (SAS) - American Samoa-Hawaii (ASH) cable landing site and beach
manhole (BMH) owned by BlueSky. The existing cable on Upolu runs from the landing site to a
cable station over waterways and is therefore extremely vulnerable to flooding, which compromises
Samoa's connectivity. A new cable station will be installed, away from rivers and low lying areas, to
maintain the integrity of Samoa's communications system. A hardened duct is expected to be
installed within the public road reserve from BMH. The anticipated route is eastwards for 2.2km
along the Main East Coast Road, northward on Golf Course Road and then Plantation Road to a
designated site (approximately 100-200sqm) on government-owned land at the Samoa Royal Golf
Course, in an elevated area not vulnerable to flooding. A sublease arrangement is being pursued for a
small demountable building that will secure the telecommunication plan and backup power
equipment (containing diesel generator, batteries, etc).
Page 2 of 9


﻿2.     The Project includes a spur to Savai'i, where a duct and beach manhole (BMH) will be
constructed. This option enables the utilisation of a gap in the reef through which to bring the cable
toward the shore. The most suitable landing site for the cable is on government land at the Malietoa
Tanumafili II hospital in Tuasivi. A duct will extend from the newly constructed BMH (approx
U1 sqm) behind the chapel and along the road reserve to the existing BlueSky cable station. An
additional 600mm rack will be installed inside the existing BlueSky cable station adjacent to the
hospital.
3.     In Fiji, the landing point will be the existing Vatuwaqa Communications Centre in Laucala
Bay, Suva, the termination point for Southern Cross, Tonga and Vanuatu cables. There is capacity at
the existing landing site and cable station operated by FinTel to accommodate an additional cable
from Samoa and no major construction is necessary. Only short-term minor shoreline disturbance
will be necessary to install the cable to the duct at the BMH. FinTel and the Samoan Submarine
Cable Company will sign a landing party agreement which will be submitted to the Fijian
Government, and FinTel will provide space within existing facilities for the connection. The IEE/
ESIA includes a due diligence assessment of this landing station (Appendix 5)
4. The main activities will be:
(i)    a marine bathymetric survey to characterise the route (1-10km study corridor) to avoid
known environmentally significant areas and other features with potential design or cable integrity
implications such as canyons, seamounts and hydrothermal vents;
(ii)   detailed design of the submerged infrastructure - the cable and repeaters. This will determine
the cable route, cable types and quantities, and clarify the nature of its deployment on the seafloor -
surface laying, or trenching and burial, supplementary protection, etc.
(iii)  construction of a BMH (approx 1 sqm) at Tuasivi on Savai'i to land the cable at the Malietoa
Tanumafili II hospital.
(iv)   cable laying - the cable will be buried in the shallow water approaches to the landing sites
and surface-laid along the deep water route. In most cases the cable will lie directly on the seabed.
Near shore areas will require the cable to be buried up to one metre (by sea plough or hydro-jetting
methods) to protect it from damage.
The Project will use the applicable safeguards policies of the World Bank (see triggered safeguard
policies below) and Asian Development Bank (Safeguard Policy Statement, 2009). The safeguards
a        process has built upon the implementation experience of the recently-commissioned Tonga-Fiji cable
where no adverse social or environmental impacts were experienced during marine operations or
landing at Suva or Nuku'alofa.
The safeguard instruments for this project were modelled on those prepared for the recently approved
Federated States of Micronesia to Palau cable, which was also co-financed by the World Bank and
Asian Development Bank, with improvements being made to instrument structure and clarity to
further improve project delivery. The World Bank, in consultation with the Asian Development
Bank, will take primary responsibility for review and clearance of safeguards instruments to ensure
compliance with the safeguard policies of the two institutions..
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Page 3 of 9


﻿Environmental           Yes          This Project will finance the laying of a submarine fiber-
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                optic cable system, with associated marine and land based
infrastructure between Samoa and Fiji. The project
influence area (PIA) includes terrestrial and marine
environments in Samoa and Fiji. Potential adverse
environmental impacts may include temporary site-
specific disturbance of marine ecosystems (including
habitats and species) and coastal areas and communities
during installation and maintenance of the cable, and
construction of the land and marine based infrastructure,
which are expected to be temporary and readily
manageable. The Project has been assigned a category
"B" consistent with the anticipated nature of these impacts
and the requirements of OP4.0 1. An Initial Environmental
Examination (IEE) which corresponds with the Bank's
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)
requirements and associated Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared by the
Government to address these issues in Samoa and Fiji.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The IEE/ESIA report identified that marine protected
4.04                                 areas did exist in Fiji and Samoa, but these were not in
close proximity to the proposed cable route. The report
identified that sensitive marine habitats (eg. Seagrass,
coral and mangroves etc) exist in the vicinity of potential
project impact areas (PIAs), however that these habitats
do not exist close to the landing sites. Given the design
flexibility available elsewhere along the routes, these
habitats can be readily avoided. The ESMP provides
management measures to ensure full compliance with this
policy, and relevant national and international laws,
treaties and other obligations. The key mitigation measure
will be avoidance of natural habitats through appropriate
detailed design. The final design (including routing) and
associated contractors ESMP will be submitted for Bank
approval prior to commencement of works.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project infrastructure will not impact on forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not include pest management.
Physical Cultural       Yes          The ESIA/IEE concluded that Physical Cultural
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 Resources (PCRs) do not exist within the PIA. As two of
the three landing sites are at existing facilities (and hence
will not require new infrastructure) PCRs are unlikely to
be relevant. Regardless, a Chance Find Procedure is
contained in the ESMP and be included in works
contracts.
Page 4 of 9


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           A country-level social analysis has been completed as part
BP 4.10                                of preparation of the Environmental and Social Safeguard
Procedures for the Pacific Island Countries. This analysis
looked at the applicability of OP 4.10 in each PIC based
on four criteria. OP 4.10 defines Indigenous Peoples
based on four characteristics: (i) self-identification as
members of a cultural group, (ii) collective attachment to
habitats/territories, (iii) customary institutions, (iv) and
indigenous language. All four characteristics must be
present to trigger the policy. In Samoa, virtually all of the
population is ethnic Samoan and there are no significant
ethnic cleavages among them; therefore, they do not self-
identify as members of a distinct indigenous cultural
group within their own country. Similarly there are no
customary cultural, economic, social or political
institutions that are separate from the dominant society
and culture because they are the dominant society and
culture. There also is no indigenous language different
from the official language of the country. Based on this
analysis, OP 4.10 is not typically triggered in Samoa.
Despite the absence of some of the key criteria, because
of the relatively high salience of ethnic identification and
inter-ethnic relationships in Fiji, the Policy may be
triggered in Fiji under certain circumstances. However
given that there are no impacts affecting land or shared
resources, OP4.10 will not be triggered in Fiji.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes           Two of the three landing sites are at existing cable landing
OP/BP 4.12                             stations. New infrastructure includes installation of ducts
in narrow channels to connect the cable to landing sites
and cable stations (30cm width and Im deep approx).
Based on due diligence, all land for duct routes is
expected to be government-owned including public road
reserves, the hospital in Savaii and Royal Samoa Golf
Course at Fagalii near the domestic airport. The landing
site at Suva is currently under Crown lease to FinTel and
no additional land will be required. The IEE/ESIA
identified two fishing reserves in proximity to landing
sites in Samoa, and two in Laucala Bay at the Fiji end.
The IEE/ESIA includes consideration of social issues
including whether there are any potential impacts to
customary rights over near shore areas. Any potential
impacts are anticipated to be extremely limited, very
short term in nature (i.e. one day) and can be mitigated
through providing adequate notification to nearby fishers
and villages. An RPF has been included as part of the
IEE/ESIA to address issues which may emerge during
detailed design including (i) use of a site other than the
Page 5 of 9


﻿hospital site in Savai (which is considered by the IEE);
(ii) any impacts on streetside stalls, trees or other
livelihood implications as a result of the communication
ducts. .
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           The project scope does not include dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No         The project entails construction of a submarine cable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  between the territorial waters (ocean) of Samoa and Fiji.
However, these water bodies do not form a boundary
between countries.
Projects in Disputed     No           There are no disputed areas within the scope of project
Areas OP/BP 7.60                      implementation.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project influence area (PIA) includes terrestrial and marine environments in Samoa and Fiji.
Potential adverse environmental impacts may include temporary site-specific disturbance of
marine ecosystems (including habitats and species) and coastal areas and communities during
installation and maintenance of the cable, and construction of the land and marine based
infrastructure, which are expected to be temporary and readily manageable.
Two of the three landing sites are at existing cable landing stations. New infrastructure includes
installation of ducts in narrow channels to connect the cable to landing sites and cable stations
(30cm width and Im deep approx). Based on due diligence, all land for duct routes is expected to
be government-owned including public road reserves, the hospital in Savaii and Royal Samoa Golf
O
U           Course at Fagalii near the domestic airport. The landing site at Suva is currently under Crown
lease to FinTel and no additional land will be required.
The IEE identifies that sensitive marine habitat (eg. Seagrass, coral and mangroves etc) exist in the
vicinity of potential project impact areas (PIAs), however that these habitats do not exist close to
the landing sites. Given the design flexibility available along the routes, these habitats can be
readily avoided.
The submarine cable will be buried in shallow water approaches to the landing sites and will be
surface-laid on the seabed along the deep water route. Cable installation has the potential for some
disturbance in near shore environments where burial techniques are employed and where the cable
route passes through coral reef environments; however surface-laid sections in deeper water are
unlikely to cause any significant impact.
The Project will take into account the implementation experience of the recently-commissioned
Tonga-Fiji cable, co-financed by the World Bank and Asian Development Bank. No adverse social
or environmental impacts were experienced during marine operations or landing at Suva or
Nuku'alofa, and no major adverse or irreversible impacts are expected for Samoa or Suva.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Page 6 of 9


﻿in the project area:
The Project will only result in temporary environmental impacts during construction phase. No
indirect or long term impacts are anticipated based on the experience of similar Bank funded cable
projects in the region. Direct impacts resulting from construction activities for the Project will be
minimal, localised to near-shore areas where the cable is landed, and easily mitigated as guided by
the ESMP.
O
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The ESIA/IEE considered alternative routes in nearshore areas for landing sites. The selected sites
and routing were assessed and chosen based on economic, technical and environmental grounds.
Route options will be further analyzed during the detailed design stage which will be further
informed by a marine bathymetric survey and more detailed technical input.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Initial Environmental Examination (IEE) which corresponds with the Bank's Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) requirements and associated Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) has been prepared by the Government. The exact cable route will be
determined by a detailed marine bathymetry survey at the design stage to characterise the route to
avoid environmentally significant areas (where known) and other features with potential design or
cable integrity implications such as canyons, seamounts and hydrothermal vents. The route
selection and use of Government owned land will also reduce any potential land or livelihood
impacts.
An RPF has been included as part of the IEE/ESIA to address issues which may emerge during
detailed design including (i) use of a site other than the hospital site in Savai (which is considered
by the IEE); (ii) any impacts on streetside stalls, trees or other livelihood implications as a result of
the communication ducts.
O
A PMU located in MoF will have overall responsibility to ensure safeguard compliance in the
preparatory phase and will work in collaboration with key agencies with regard to safeguard
o          requirements. MoF has experience with ADB and World Bank projects and safeguard
requirements. The Ministry of Communications and Information Technology (MCIT) is the lead
*          agency for communications networks and infrastructure in Samoa. MCIT previously delivered the
Samoa National Broadband Highway (SNBH) Project and worked with LTA, PUMA and other
agencies for the installation of cable stations and duct routes on government land. Although the
ministry faces some capacity constraints, MCIT has relevant experience in gaining development
consent and approval for similar infrastructure developments andSamoa has competent
environmental compliance staff (MNRE's PUMA) with adequate capacity to fulfil their role in
project delivery.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations were undertaken with various stakeholder groups (potentially affected communities
etc) and documented in the IEE/ESIA report. Consultation on the Project took place in Samoa in
March 2015 with key stakeholder groups and villages in proximity to landing sites to inform the
IEE/ESIA process and assessment (including confirmation of preferred site locations). Only key
stakeholder consultation was undertaken by MCIT and FinTel in Fiji (not community
consultation) regarding the Suva landing site since there will be extremely minor works required.
Page 7 of 9


﻿Consultation was carried out in March 2015 with the key Government agencies which FinTel
deals with on a regular basis in respect of various cables it manages.. Further consultations with
targeted stakeholders will be led by FinTel and MCIT regarding development consent, permits for
construction activities, formal public notification of Project activities and to secure formal land
O
Q)         leasing and subleasing agreements. The details of these consultations are documented in Annex 2
of the IEE/ESIA. The IEE/ESIA outlines grievance procedures adhering to cultural formalities in
Samoa, Code of Environmental Practice 3 (COEP3) and World Bank public consultation and
information disclosure requirements. The IEE/ESIA report and ESMP has been disclosed locally
in Samoa and also via the World Bank's Infoshop in April 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Fiji                                                     16-Apr-2015
Comments: Will be disclosed on the Fintel website http://www.fintel.com.fj
Samoa                                                    10-Apr-2015
Comments: Available on the Government's official website: http://www.mcit.gov.ws/Portals/O/
Publications/i 50410%2OFinal%2ODraft%20IEE%2OReportl229am%20WB%20rev.
pdf
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Samoa                                                    13-Apr-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Page 8 of 9


﻿Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[   ]  NA [
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
O
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[    NA
in the project cost?
O
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]   No[       NA
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Natasha Beschorner
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Ross James Butler (SA)               Date: 27-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Randeep Sudan (PMGR)                 Date: 30-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


