INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15465
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Macedonia, former Yugoslav  Project ID:  P154263
Republic of
Project Name: Local and Regional Competitiveness Project (P154263)
Task Team       Gordana Popovikj Friedman,Melissa Rekas
Leader(s):
Estimated                                   Estimated    24-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTC03                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General industry and trade sector (80%), Vocational training (10%), Public
administration- Industry and trade (10%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%), Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprise support (20%), Regional integration (20%), Cultural
Heritage (20%), Education for the knowledge economy (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
U         8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:      22.98             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      3.62
Free-standing TFs for ECA CU4 Country Unit                                   19.36
Total                                                                        22.98
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to enhance the contribution of tourism to local
economic development and improve the capacity of the government and public entities to invest in
Page 1 of 12


﻿tourism growth and facilitate destination management.
3. Project Description
The Local and Regional Competitiveness Project (LRCP), with focus in tourism development, is a
four-year investment operation that will be financed with a grant from the European Union, using
funds from the Instrument for Pre-accesssion Assistance (IPA) II earmarked to competitiveness and
innovation in fYR Macedonia. LCRP will be managed as a Hybrid Trust Fund and will consist of
four components, one executed by the Bank and three components by the Government of fYR
o        Macedonia. The activities in the Bank Executed component will fund technical and advisory
assistance to sector-level policies and measures that would improve the enabling environment for the
activities under the recipient-executed components.
LRCP will provide investment funding and capacity building to support sector growth, investment in
destinations and specific destination prosperity. At the central government level, the project will
enhance the business environment, private-public dialogue, and strategic planning for the sector
(Component 2.1). At the regional and local levels, the project will support selected tourism
destinations in the country through a combination of technical assistance to improve destination
management (Component 2.2), infrastructure investments (Component 3.1), and investments in
linkages and innovation (Component 3.2).
Two circuits and one corridor comprising a total of 10 destinations have been identified as having the
most potential for fYR Macedonia. Following a literature review of the key strategies that govern the
tourism sector in fYR Macedonia, it was evident that although a number of destinations (or clusters
of destinations) had been identified as 'strategic' for the sector, defining how they link together or
could be developed for the market was missing. The project team (led by members of the Working
Group) therefore scored and prioritized the destinations using a set of five criteria, and identified the
selection of ten destinations that scored over 60 percent. The team consulted with the private sector
in order to: (i) validate and verify their commercial viability, and (ii) define their organization into
circuits or corridors as per the reality of how they are packaged and used. This process resulted in the
definition of two circuits and one corridor.
The destinations included in the focus of the project are mostly multiple-use. They can be visited for
a variety of products rather than identifying with just one specific product or theme. The product
themes which most prominently stand out within these destinations are broadly reflective of those
identified in the National Tourism Strategy:
a.     Rural tourism (cultural facilities, but mostly nature, leisure, traditional activities, skiing,
hiking, biking)
b.     Lake tourism (around the 3 natural lakes, combined with cultural, rural and nature)
c.     Nature tourism (mountain, hiking, biking, paragliding)
d.     Cultural tourism (heritage resources, historical sites, religious, archeological, nature)
e.     Wine tourism (some cultural facilities, leisure, nature, rural)
Component 1: Technical assistance for tourism development (Bank Executed). This component will
improve the capacity of institutions and business environment in support of tourism development at
the national level, through advisory services, analytical assistance, and policy advice. Areas of focus
are derived directly from diagnostic work that highlights key challenges. This component includes
technical assistance for the following activities:
a.     Improve institutional coordination, including assistance to implement recommendations for
strengthening the horizontal and vertical institutional coordination mechanisms and results among
Page 2 of 12


﻿the institutions at the central level, from the central to the regional and local levels and among the
units at the local level.
b.     Review and advise on the draft National Tourism Strategy for the period 2016 onward
(currently under preparation), its action plan, and its environmental and social impacts.
O
c.     Improve the availability and use of data to inform policy-making, including assistance to
support the Government as it implements recommendations on the current state of data collection in
the sector and its use for evidence-based policy-making.
d.     Improve the business environment, including funding selected analysis, policy notes, and
advice on measures necessary to improve the sector-specific business environment, particularly in
the areas of industry standards, licensing, accreditation, and the regulatory burden on micro and
small enterprises.
e.     Support and just-in time technical advice to the implementation of the activities under the
Recipient Executed components, including the World Bank's implementation support to the project's
activities. This includes, among other things, development of the Grant Manual (rulebooks) of the
financing instruments under Component 3.
Component 2: Strengthening destination management and enabling environment (Recipient
Executed). This component will support implementation of activities to enhance tourism
development at the central government level and at the destination level. It will include the
following:
a.     Sub-component 2.1: Central level capacity, coordination, and policy: LRCP will support
Recipient-executed activities to implement recommendations from Component 1, including but not
limited to: (i) training in public-private dialogue and tourism development; (ii) systems and
equipment to implement improvements in data- and information-gathering, its linkages with policy-
making; and (iii) technical assistance to implement business environment reforms (including selected
equipment, e.g. IT).
b.     Sub-component 2.2: Destination Management: LRCP will build destination management
capacity in the destinations selected for participation in the project, in order to more effectively
manage tourism development and provide greater impacts for local people. This component will
provide support through technical assistance and limited equipment or service provision. Destination
management will be improved through an approach centered on public-private dialogue (PPD) with
key stakeholders (including tourism businesses and tour operators, municipalities, regional
development centers, NGOs, local service or skills development institutions, and others) in the
a        destination.
Component 3: Investment in tourism-related infrastructure and linkages at destinations (Recipient
Executed). The objective of this component is to support key investments that will make an impact
on increasing the attractiveness of the selected destinations through upgraded product offerings and
linkages with local economies to capture a greater share of economic benefits. The component will
provide funds for investment in infrastructure and non-infrastructure activities (training, publications,
upgrading of supplier capabilities, etc.) in the destinations participating in LRCP. There will be an
open call for applications in destinations comprising the circuits and corridor. This approach enables
LRCP to have a degree of geographic concentration while also taking an approach that reflects
balanced regional development. Project proposals must demonstrate how the proposed activity: (i)
meets the needs of the circuit/corridor; (ii) has positive economic and financial returns; (iii) will
attract further private sector investment and business development; and (iv) will be sustainable over
time. Integrated with the destination management activities from Component 2, the package of
interventions will facilitate the realization of impacts such as job creation, attraction of new t ourists,
increased overnights and spending per tourist, increase in revenue and tax generated from tourism
Page 3 of 12


﻿related activities, and opportunities for participation by rural, poor, and marginalized communities.
a. Sub-component 3.1: Infrastructure investments: This sub-component will finance infrastructure
sub-projects and related technical assistance that are critical for unlocking the potential of the
U         destinations by upgrading the quality of attractions, sites, and overall visitor experience. The
investments will be informed directly by the circuit/corridor needs assessment and development
plans to be developed with support from CIIP. Eligible activities for infrastructure sub-projects will
include interventions to improve physical condition of attractions, access to cultural and natural
heritage sites, and related TA such as promotion and branding of destinations and sites, etc. The
national contribution to LRCP will be applied to these grants. The selection of infrastructure sub-
projects will be conducted through a competitive and transparent process. Applications may be
submitted by municipalities, regional development centers, or other public entities, with 10 percent
of co-financing in cash or in-kind. The eligibility criteria will include incentives for multi-
municipality sub-projects. Detailed procedures, eligibility criteria, and responsibilities will be
included in the grants manual that will form part of the Project Operations Manual (POM) and Grant
Manual.
b. Sub-component 3.2: Grants for enhanced tourism service-delivery and local economic impact
(linkages and innovation grants). This sub-component provides matching grants for qualified
organizational entities (e.g. business associations, training and educational service providers, civil
society organizations, and Destination Management Organizations (DMOs) at the selected
destinations to improve access to information and services, and improve service quality, linkages and
innovation in the destinations. Activities could include technical assistance and capacity-building (e.
g. design and implementation of local supplier linkages programs, modules for competency based
skills training); technical and financial support (e.g. for tourism innovation competitions at schools or
associations); soft infrastructure (e.g. equipment, ICT, training materials); and promotional activities
(recruitment drives, marketing of local products, business-to-business (B2B) integration, branding
and marketing activities) among others. This sub-component will also finance innovation by micro
and small private enterprises in the selected destinations to develop new or improved products and
services in the tourism value chain; conduct marketing or business development; pursue training;
purchase minor equipment; and undertake renovation of existing facilities, among others. Grants to
private enterprises will require a matching contribution of at least 50 percent in cash. The grants will
increase the capacity of the private sector to generate increased economic benefits from tourism
a         activities at the destinations.
Component 4: Strengthening project management (Recipient Executed). This component will
support the capacity of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to ensure that all Recipient Executed
activities under LRCP are effectively implemented. It will finance technical expertise (consultants),
training, equipment, operating costs, and equipment associated with implementation, monitoring and
evaluation of project activities. Staff and consultants of the PIU will be trained, as necessary, in
tourism development and destination management, and in the concepts, policies and activities
supported under LRCP. PIU staff will also provide training to beneficiary municipalities/public
entities in tourism development, cultural heritage, regional development, and related areas
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Current geographical scope of the project is the entire territory of fYR Macedonia. FYR Macedonia
is a landlocked country encompassing 25,713 m2 of land, and home of around 2 million people. It
borders Kosovo, Serbia, Bulgaria and Greece. The capital, Skopje, counts about half a million
Page 4 of 12


﻿inhabitants. Other cities include Bitola, Kumanovo, Prilep and Tetovo. Topography of fYR
Macedonia is mostly characterized with steep mountains (Sar Planina, Matka, Kozuf, Bistra, Korab,
Nidze, Osogovo and more) amongst which six (6) are higher than 2,000 m. and large number of
natural (some tectonic) and artificial lakes (over 50).
Two circuits and one corridor comprising a total of 10 destinations have been identified as having the
most potential for fYR Macedonia. Following a literature review of the key strategies that govern the
tourism sector, it was evident that although a number of destinations (or clusters of destinations) had
been identified as 'strategic' for the sector, defining how they link together or could be developed for
the market was missing. The project team (led by members of the Working Group) therefore scored
and prioritized the destinations using a set of five criteria, and identified the selection of ten
destinations that scored over 60 percent. The team consulted with the private sector in order to: (i)
validate and verify their commercial viability, and (ii) define their organization into circuits or
corridors as per the reality of how they are packaged and used. This process resulted in the definition
of two circuits and one corridor.
The 10 destinations selected as the focus of the project are mostly multiple-use. They can be visited
for a variety of products rather than identifying with just one specific product or theme. The product
themes which most prominently stand out within these destinations are broadly reflective of those
identified in the National Tourism Strategy: a. Rural tourism (cultural facilities, but mostly nature,
leisure, traditional activities, skiing, hiking, biking); b. Lake tourism (around the 3 natural lakes,
combined with cultural, rural and nature); c.  Nature tourism (mountain, hiking, biking,
paragliding); d. Cultural tourism (heritage resources, historical sites, religious, archeological, nature);
e. Wine tourism (some cultural facilities, leisure, nature, rural). The destinations, which could be
grouped in two circuits and one corridor are as follows:
a.     Destination 1 encompasses Ohrid, Struga, Prespa and their surroundings
b.      Destination 2 encompasses Skopje, Kumanovo and their surroundings
c.     Destination 3 encompasses Pelagonija
d.     Destination 4 encompasses the Tikvesh region
e.     Destination 5 encompasses Maleshevo
f.     Destination 6 encompasses the Reka region
g.     Destination 7 encompasses Gevgelija and Dojran
h.      Destination 8 encompasses the Polog region
i.     Destination 9 encompasses Strumica and its surroundings.
o        j.      Destination 10 encompasses Shtip, Radovish and their surroundings
Activities which may create negative environmental impacts are included to Component 3:
Investment in tourism-related infrastructure and linkages at destinations. Investments to tourism-
related infrastructure defined under the sub-Component 3.1: Infrastructure investments will need to
be consistent with the Circuit Needs Assessments and Development Plans developed under
Component 2, selected through a competitive and transparent process. They will include
interventions to improve physical conditions of attractions, access to natural and cultural heritage
sites, promotion of destination and branding of destinations and sites and similar. Activities under the
Sub-component 3.2: Grants for enhanced tourism service delivery and local economic impact include
technical assistance and capacity building, technical and financial support, soft infrastructure (e.g.
equipment), and promotional activities. Under the project Component 2 some equipment purchase
and service provision is envisaged which will have non-significant environmental impact if any.
Earlier identification of the main project themes and identification of project activities with potential
environmental impact indicates that the most probable impact locations under the project will be sites
of cultural and natural heritage.
Page 5 of 12


﻿FYR Macedonia is rich with immovable cultural heritage of exceptional, historical and artistic
importance. According to official information from the national institution in charge of protection of
the cultural heritage and its regional offices, in FYR Macedonia there are 11,200 immovable
U         officially registered cultural monuments. Among the immovable cultural property mainly
represented, by far, are the archaeological sites (4,260), of which 88 make sites of scientific interest
currently undergoing excavations. There are 1,726 churches with more than 150,000 m2 under
frescoes, 1,213 buildings from the old urban and rural architecture, 47 towers and bridges, 1,026
monuments and memorials, 126 Islamic architecture buildings, 24 old bazaars and other historical,
urban and architectural structure, 32 commercial buildings and several other types of buildings a nd
immovable estate. The immovable cultural heritage is distributed throughout the entire territory of
the country. Some of the more relevant are:
- Ohrid and Struga areas have the highest concentration of cultural monuments; Pelagonia is
rich with different variety of cultural heritage;
- Skopje features many monasteries, churches, mosques, Turkish baths, hamams, old bazaars
and fortresses and other Medieval monuments; and
- The Vardar river valley has the largest number of archaeological sites.
There are 3 National Parks, over 50 natural monuments and 4 sites of special natural character in
fYR Macedonia. National Parks (NP) being NP Pelister, NP Galicica and NP Mavrovo. In addition to
NPs, the most important areas, in terms of their biodiversity significance and size, are the three
tectonic lakes - Ohrid Lake (23,000ha), also a Natural and Cultural World Heritage Site; Prespa
Lake (1 7,690ha); and Dojran Lake (2,730ha). The lakes are shared with neighboring countries,
Albania (Ohrid), Albania and Greece (Prespa), and Greece (Dojran) respectively. The Spatial Plan of
the fYR Macedonia envisages 11.6% of the country's territory to be placed under formal protection
by 2020.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
Ivana Ivicic (GENDR)
Natasa Vetma (GENDR)
o
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          LRCP has been classified as Category B project, meaning
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                some level of adverse impact can be expected as a result
of its implementation, but none of them significant, large-
scale or long-term. As a result of this classification OP
4.01 Environmental Assessment is triggered.
Environmental impacts are expected from activities under
the Component 3: Investment in tourism-related
infrastructure and linkages at destinations. The Recipient
(CDPMEA) prepared Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF). Sub-component 3.1
foresees infrastructural investments by public entities for
which EIA or EMP will be prepared in line with ESMF.
Sub-component 3.2 includes public, non-profit entities
and/or private sector soft investments and minor works
Page 6 of 12


﻿for which EMP Checklists will be prepared. Category A
sub-projects are not eligible for financing.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          OP/BP 4.04 Natural Habitats is triggered based on the
)         4.04                                  preliminary assessment of sub-project themes and needs
identified relating to Component 3 activities. Many of the
identified themes are tied to protected areas and areas
with preserved nature. There is high probability for
activities taking place in aforementioned types of areas
therefore OP 4.04 is triggered and due diligence
documents will be prepared.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           Although some of the sub-projects foreseen under the
Component 3 may take place in the forest areas, these
activities will be limited to rehabilitation of existing
infrastructure, and no activities impacting forest and wood
resources would be found eligible for funding therefore
OP/BP 4.36 is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            This project will not finance purchase of pesticides or
support activities that would directly increase the use of
pesticides therefore OP 4.09 is not triggered.
Physical Cultural        Yes          Macedonia bases its tourism attractiveness, amongst other
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  things, in rich cultural history, thus is very likely that sub-
projects eligible for funding under the Component 3
would include some kind of works on cultural heritage
monuments and/or buildings or infrastructure facilitating
tourists' needs which is located in such premises or in
vicinity. To enable such works, but in the same time
protect cultural and historical attractions, OP 4.11 is
triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          Implementing team prepared Resettlement Policy
OP/BP 4.12                            Framework because the project infrastructure investments
are defined through demand driven grant process. The
Framework describes how the land acquisition process
will be carried out if needed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No
4.37
Projects on International  No         Although public water infrastructure investments were
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  discussed as an option under Component 3, the client
decided not to support these types of projects since there
are other ongoing specialized projects for such
investments thus OP/BP 7.50 is not triggered.
Projects in Disputed     No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Page 7 of 12


﻿A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
The project is category B project which means impacts on the environment are possible as a result
of project implementation. However, these impacts associated with the project are assessed to be
short-term, local, predictable and easily mitigated for the existing environment.
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 was triggered in line with the project categorization and
expected impacts. Majority of the possible identified impacts stem out of implementation of the
Component 3: Investment in tourism-related and linkages at destinations which includes
infrastructural investments (sub-component 3.1) and grants for enhanced tourism service-delivery
and local economic impact (sub-component 3.2). These investments can vary from construction
works on buildings, infrastructure construction, expansion, improvement and rehabilitation works,
to procurement of technical and financial support, capacity-building and promotional activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04 and Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 policies are triggered
due to envisaged works under the sub-component 3.1 which include interventions aiming to
improve physical conditions of attractions, access to cultural and natural heritage sites, as well as
promotion and branding of destinations and sites. Themes recognized as the most prominent
amongst clusters, during the pre-appraisal stage, include natural tourism (activities in mountains,
hiking, biking) and cultural tourism (including heritage resources) and it is to be expected that a
number of eligible applications will include such themes and potentially cause impacts to
protected cultural heritage as well as areas with preserved natural habitats or protected areas
(PAs). While rehabilitation works and some types of projects will be eligible in such areas, sub-
projects potentially exerting negative significant and/or lasting impact to fragile ecosystems or/and
sensitive areas will not be supported. In addition, initial screening of projects that exist in the
various stages of preparation and/or implementations conducted by the CDPMEA indicated that
many projects of rehabilitation and conservation of historical buildings and sites are in the pipeline
O
or being developed.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12 is triggered as a precautionary because the tourism
investment grant to Municipalities or other stakeholders relevant for tourism development.
o           Because of the nature of the investments there will be no displacement of people. However, there
is a chance for small scale land acquisition or probable impact on a small businesses such a shops.
RPF provides guidelines how to address a list of possible impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Major environmental impacts are not expected to occur as a result of this project implementation,
however, the project will potentially develop and carry out activities in potentially sensitive places
such as protected areas and within or near cultural heritage resources which presents the point of
the safeguards concern. Themes for infrastructural investments, as part of the eligibility and
selection criteria, were identified and possibly include investments to accessibility and
enhancement of natural tourism and cultural heritage tourism including upgrading the hiking and
biking routes, rehabilitation of municipal infrastructure and utilities, upgrading public spaces and
cultural buildings, restoration of cultural and natural heritage sites, etc. These activities possibly
include construction works that my cause human and animal disturbance, soil pollution,
degradation of air quality and noise and vibration pollution either due to earth works or presence
Page 8 of 12


﻿of heavy machinery. In the use phase, impacts related to human economic and leisure activities are
possible, such as disturbance of animals and other, and will largely depend on the location and
type of the sub-project.
O
Q)          Tourism consists of a number of economic activities related to travel and stay of tourists in a
particular area. This includes agriculture and food production, transport, hospitality, construction
industry, telecommunications, and even oil and wood processing and more. The number of
potentially associated projects is large and encompasses almost every of the economic activity
present in an area.
One of the eligibility criteria for the applied sub-projects is to attract further private sector
investment and stimulate business development. With the increased number of tourist that is
expected as the result of this project, related private and public investments are expected to occur
in the future. These can be: further road construction and rehabilitation, agriculture production
increase, construction industry investments, trade, etc. which all can have adverse impacts to the
environment and potentially sensitive areas, including protected areas (PAs). Beside the positive
social impacts such as availability of social and infrastructure as well as educational and
employment opportunities, negative impacts are possible in a form of increased space occupancy
by hotels and other infrastructure (parking lots, roads, camp sites, etc.), air quality decline induced
by the increased traffic, increased use of pesticides and mineral fertilizers causing decrease of
water and soil quality, and more.
Tourism development in FYR Macedonia is, amongst other thing, based on attractiveness of rare
and specific preserved areas. Increased number of people and intensified economic activities
associated with tourism can contribute to degradation of nature and biodiversity.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Analysis in tourism carried out in the project preparation phase identified clusters and themes as
well as types of projects that would benefit tourism development in FYR Macedonia. In order to
enhance positive impacts of the project infrastructure investments and non-infrastructure grants,
10 eligible destinations, within 2 circuits and/or 1 corridor have been selected. Further selection of
O
investment projects for the selected destinations, will be informed by the destination management
work conducted through Component 2 preferring grant applications serving larger number selected
*           destinations. Priority will be given to applications that have been reflected as priority destination
needs in the Circuit Needs Assessments and Circuit Development Plans.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Recipient, CDPMEA, with the support of WB environmental team, has prepared
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which will be used as guiding
document for all further environmental due diligence processes and which identifies
environmental issues and potential positive and negative impacts of project implementation
activities.
ESMF defines forms and procedures for environmental screening and assessment of applications
for grants for enhanced tourism service-delivery and local economic impact under the Component
3. ESMF sets procedures, obligated for the applicants, regarding environmental assessment of the
proposed subprojects according to World Bank safeguards procedures and to obtain environmental
permits as prescribed by the national and EU legislation. It also defines overseeing and control of
Page 9 of 12


﻿the assessment and selection procedure as well as responsibilities of the project stakeholders in the
aforementioned processes. ESMF also includes Resettlement Policy Framework setting guiding
principles to be followed in the case of land acquisition or land use changes determining principles
and procedures for contracting, compensation and more.
o
Since the project is overall classified as category B, only category B and C sub-projects will be
eligible for funding under the Component 3, however, this does not mean the project cannot
exercise any adverse negative effects, however these need to be recognized and mitigated in
further environmental due diligence processes. As a general principle, projects requiring EIA as
obligatory, under the national legislation, will not be supported, however, each sub-project will be
screened in accordance with WB policies. EIAs, EMPs or EMP Checklists for smaller works and
predictable, general, non-specific, impacts will be prepared for projects of B category. ESMF
provided guidelines and instructions for adequate and successful development and use of
Environmental Protection Questionnaires, Screening Reports and EMPs/EMP Checklists
management and monitoring templates.
Category A (as per OP 4.01) activities will not be financed through the project. The project would
not support any activities that could trigger OP 4.09 Pest Management or OP 7.50 Project on
International Waterways. Investments in the designated protected areas which would have
negative impact on natural and critical habitats and species; investment within designated "Special
Tourism Development Zones "; activities impacting fragile ecosystems, important habitats, and
green-fields of outstanding aesthetic value; activities requiring conversion of forests, wetlands, and
alpine/sub-alpine meadows; and heavily polluting industries will also be found ineligible.
CDPMEA, the implementing institution, has experience in implementation of WB and EU project
and employs a person working specifically on environmental issues. In addition, Environmental
Expert will be employed (within PIU) to assist in ensuring environmental compliance, for the
entire project implementation period. Some training might be needed for CDMPEA staff, in
specific WB safeguards policies, the extent of which would be defined by the WB Environmental
Specialist soon after the commencement of sub-projects environmental screening.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders to the project implementation are CDPMEA, authorities of municipalities of the
*           destinations selected for the project participation, and centers for the development of planning
regions. CDPMEA as a primary recipient of funds is responsible person for the entire projects'
environmental due diligence process. Ministry of Environmental Protection and Physical Planning
will play an important role in overseeing environmental management of the project, assisting
CDPMEA in process of identification of potential impacts on the project level, preparation of
mitigation and monitoring activities and plans, and reporting.
The ESMF and the RPF in English language was disclosed on October 19, 2015 on CDPMEA and
Agency for Support and Promotion of Tourism (ASPT) web sites, followed by versions in
Macedonian and Albanian language on October 22, 2015, where it remained available to public
for 14 days (until November 5, 2015). ESMF and RPF were also available in hard copy on the
premises of CDPMEA and ASPT and in English, Macedonian and Albanian language. In parallel
with publishing ESMF and RPF, call for comments was issued with electronic and postal
addresses on disposal for sending comments. Public consultations took place in Agency for the
Support and Promotion of Tourism (ASPT) premises in Skopje on October 30, 2015. All relevant
Page 10 of 12


﻿comments and Public Consultation Minutes were included to the final version of ESMF and RPF.
All environmental due diligence documents prepared for sub-projects will be publically disclosed
and consulted as described in ESMF.
B. Disclosure Requirements
O         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of                   14-Oct-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of                   14-Oct-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X] No[   ]   NA [   ]
property?
Page 11 of 12


﻿Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X] No[  ]   NA[    ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
a          related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gordana Popovikj Friedman,Melissa Rekas
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Javier Suarez (PMGR)                 Date: 19-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


