INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15212
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jun-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Cambodia                    Project ID:  P148647
Project Name: Mekong Integrated Water Resources Management Project- Phase III (P148647)
Task Team       Greg J. Browder
Leader(s):
Estimated       23-Nov-2015                 Estimated    17-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO2                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (55%), General agriculture,
fishing and forestry sector (45%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (60%), Rural services and infrastructure (20%),
Other environment and natural resources management (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      15.64             Total Bank Financing:    15.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
o           BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.64
International Development Association (IDA)                                  15.00
LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                           0.00
Total                                                                        15.64
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective of the Mekong Integrated Water Resources Management Project
Phase III is to establish the foundation for effective water resource and fisheries management in the
Page 1 of 13


﻿project areas in the northeast of Cambodia. The overall development objective for the Mekong
Integrated Water Resources Management series of projects is to establish key examples of integrated
water resource management (IWRM) practices in the Lower Mekong Basin, at the regional, country
and sub-national levels.
o
3. Project Description
The proposed M-IWRM 3 would comprise the following two components summarized below.
o        Component 1: Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Management in Northern Cambodia (Total Cost $11
million; IDA finance US$10 million and RGC US$ 1 million). The objective of this component is to
improve the management of fish and aquatic resources in northern Cambodia. These resources
contribute significantly to livelihoods, food security and biodiversity.
Sub-Component 1.1: Establishment of Community Fisheries Management (US$ 2.5 million). This
will establish 20 new, and strengthen 50 previously registered, CFis in Kratie and Stung Treng
Provinces. Activities span (a) formulation of CFi management plans and identification of alternative
livelihoods and investments, and (b) implementation of CFi management plans including
demarcation of fishing areas and conservation zones (FCZ), systematic monitoring and reporting, and
evaluation of management plans.
Sub-Component 1.2: Fisheries Co-Management Infrastructure and Equipment (US$ 2.2 million).
This will provide infrastructure, equipment, and support to local and provincial fishery management
organizations to more effectively co-manage fish resources in the project area, and to better plan and
develop rural infrastructure. Activities span: (a) strengthen co-management capacity at the
Commune, District and Provincial level; (b) provision of infrastructure and equipment for CFis to
implement Management Plans, conduct fisheries-related water quality, monitoring, and disseminate
information; (c) provision of infrastructure and equipment for Provincial FiA; and (d) strengthen FiA
capacity to assess the impacts (such as pollution) on fish, and to engage in transboundary fisheries
management with Laos under the framework of the Mekong IWRM Program.
0
Sub-Component 1.3: Enhancements of Fisher Community Livelihoods (US$ 4.0 million). This will
support identification and development of alternative livelihoods, particularly aquaculture, for
members of each CFi, as well as support for social development through investment in priority rural
infrastructure identified in the pre-existing Commune Development Plan. Activities include: (a)
construction of fish hatchery in Stung Treng with capacity to produce roughly 3 million fingerlings
per annum; (b) provision of small grants to CFi member household or groups to support livelihood
diversification; and (c) provision of small grants to communes for priority infrastructure investments
to support fisher communities.
Sub-Component 1.4: Project Administration and Management (US$2.3 million: $1.3 million IDA
and $1.0 million RGC). This will provide FiA and provincial FiAs with funds for (a) office
renovation, equipment, vehicles and administrative costs, (b) technical support to meet minimum
fiduciary/safeguard standards, and (c) incremental operating costs. The RGC will make in-kind
contributions by seconding government staff, and by providing office space and basic utilities.
Component 2: Water Resources Management (WRM) in the Northeastern Cambodia and Trans-
Boundary Dialogue (IDA financing US$ 5.5 million). This component aims to improve water
resources management in Northeastern Cambodia in the 3S and the 4P sub-basins, and support trans-
boundary dialogue with Vietnam under the framework of the Mekong IWRM Program.
Page 2 of 13


﻿Sub-component 2.1: Strengthening Water Resource Management Institutions (US $1.6 million): This
component will focus on developing the capacity of MOWRAM and PDWRAM departments and
agencies at the national and provincial levels by providing equipment, buildings, river basin
O
U        committee and stakeholder education program support.
Subcomponent 2.2: Water Resources Monitoring and Management in the 3S and 4P Basins (US $3.0
million): This component will finance the establishment of hydrological and meteorological
monitoring stations, undertaking field surveys, development of water resource models, and
operationalized water resources monitoring and assessment programs at the multi-basin scale.
Sub component 2.3: Project Management (US$ 0.9 million: IDA $0.4 million and RGC $0.5
million): This component finances specialized fiduciary consultants to support the PMU to enable
successful implementation of Components 1 and 2 of project. The RGC will make in-kind
contributions by seconding government staff, and by providing office space and basic utilities.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed M-IWRM3 interventions will focus on: (a) key spawning and existing growing
habitats in the Sekong River and the Mekong mainstream in the northern part of Cambodia; the 100
kilometer stretch of the Mekong River between Koh Langa (bordering with Lao PDR) to Kratie /
Stung Treng in Cambodia and the concerned villages along this stretch; (b) Cambodian parts of the
regionally significant Sesan-Srepok-Sekong (3S) Sub-basin, shared by Lao PDR, Cambodia, and
Vietnam, and related tributaries; and (c) the Prek Preah, Prek Krieng, Prek Kampi and Prek Te (4P)
Sub-basin east of Kratie. Geographical features of project provinces are as follows:
Stung Treng province, Stung Treng is characterized by extensive forests, intersecting rivers and
streams, and low population density. Stung Treng includes the western section of the Virachey
National Park. The Stung Treng stretch of the Mekong was designated as a Ramsar Site in 1999 and
is under the management authority of the Department of Nature Conservation and Protection of
Ministry of Environment (MOE). The Ramsar site covers an approximately 37 km long stretch of the
Mekong river in Stung Treng Province and incorporates 21 villages, three communes and one
Sangkat. Along this stretch of the Mekong River 21 community fisheries at various stages of
establishment. The Ramsar site has two sections with many islands, divided by a single wide, open
water channel in the region of Koh Key. The Ramsar site harbors a rich faunal biodiversity that is
significant not only in Cambodia but also regionally and globally. Indigenous Peoples (IP)
communities are present in this province, comprising about 12.38% of the total population in the
province, such as Phnorng people and Kouy people.
Kratie province, The stretch of the Mekong River adjacent to the provincial capital, Kratie town, is
home to a group of endangered freshwater Irrawaddy dolphins. This particular part of the mainstream
Mekong is designated as a (relatively small) dolphin conservation zone and deep pool protected area;
however, there is no designated wildlife protected area in the mainstream Mekong. The Phnom Prich
wildlife sanctuary in the Snoul District bordering with the Mondulkiri Province is outside the project
area. There are concerns about the impact of upstream dam development (in Vietnam) and effluent
from upstream mining operations (within Cambodia) on water quality. Indigenous Peoples (IP)
communities are present in this province, comprising about 17.18% of the total population in the
province, such as Phnorng people and Kouy people.
Page 3 of 13


﻿Mondulkiri province (total area 14,288 square kilometers) is situated on the South - East plateau
(approx. altitude around 200-1000 metres), it's capital Sen Monorom is about 375 Km from Phnom
Penh. In addition to smaller rivers, which enlarge during the rainy season, there are two larger rivers
crossing the province (the Preaek Chhbaar and the Preaek Te River). Within the province, four major
O
U         conservation areas have been established, including: (a) Seima Biodiversity Conservation Area with
some portions shared with Kratie Province (305,440 ha); (b) Mondulkiri Protected Forest (429,438
ha); (c) Phnom Prech Lumphat; and (d) Nam Lear wildlife sanctuary. Mondulkiri also shares some
portions of the Lumphat Wildlife Sanctuary with Ratanakiri Province and the Snoul Wildlife
Sanctuary with Kratie Province. Indigenous Peoples (IP) communities are present in this province,
comprising about 70.70% of the total population in the province, such as Phnong and the Tompuonn
people.
Ratanakiri province (total area is about 10,782 square kilometers) is situated on the north - east
plateau (approx. altitude around 200-400 metres), 636 Km from Phnom Penh. There are two larger
rivers crossing the province (Sre Pork and Sresan River). Within the province, Virachey National
Park was established in 2004 by the MOE, with coverage area of 3.325 square kilometers; it is the
largest National Park among seven others in Cambodia and offers an incredible insight into the
variety of both Cambodia's still existing wilderness and wildlife. Indigenous Peoples (IP)
communities are present in this province, comprising about 71.42% of the total population in the
province, such as Phnong and the Tompuonn people.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Juan Martinez (GSURR)
Khang Van Pham (GENO2)
Makathy Tep (GENDR)
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
Viengkeo Phetnavongxay (GENDR)
0
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
0        Environmental           Yes          The project is categorized as "B" since it will involve (i)
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               rehabilitation of existing small rural infrastructures (e.g.,
village access roads, foot bridges, office buildings, etc.)
and construction of a small-scale hatchery in Stung Treng
Province (outside the Ramsar Site) under Component 1;
and (ii) upgrade and construction of hydrological
observation stations under Component 2. In addition, the
project will finance several technical studies linked to the
PDO. The overall environmental impact of the proposed
project would be positive, as the project aims to reduce
the fishing pressure and establish a framework for proper
management of the fisheries resources and habitats. The
impacts from the planned new hatchery are also
considered to be manageable. The other potential negative
impacts of the project include limited land acquisition,
dust, noise, and construction wastes resulting from small-
scale civil works. However, these impacts are assessed to
Page 4 of 13


﻿be small, localized and temporary.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         The project triggers the Bank safeguards policy on
4.04                                Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) because activities under
Components 1 and 2 are planned in villages located along
the Mekong River in Northern Cambodia. While the
selection of the exact villages to be supported by the
project would be done during the implementation period,
a part of the project area may be located within the Stung
Treng Ramsar Area as well as in other designated national
parks.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project will have no impact on forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          There will be no pest management activities under the
project, nor any hazardous or dangerous chemical usage.
Physical Cultural       Yes         The fish hatchery subproject is the only identified works
Resources OP/BP 4.11                contract that will require significant excavation and earth
works which may result in chance archaeological fmds.
The hatchery EMP includes a check on potential impacts
on Physical Cultural Resources (PCR). Archaeological
chance finds will be covered by a chance-finds procedures
clause included in the works contract. In the event any
other significant civil works projects are undertaken, the
chance-finds procedures will be included in the contract.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         In the target provinces, the population of indigenous and
BP 4.10                             minority groups range from 12% in Stung Treng, 17% in
Kratie, 74% in Ratanakiri, and 70% in Mondulkiri,
comprising a number of Chinese and/or Vietnamese
minority groups and another seven indigenous groups:
Phnong, Kouy, Mil, Khonh, Kraol, Steang, and
Thanmoun. The ethnic minority communities to be
involved in the project are expected to benefit from
investment and livelihood support/ rural infrastructure
investments. An Indigenous People Planning Framework
(IPPF) has been developed to ensure adequate
consultation with and participation of the local population
during the planning and implementation of the Project.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The project triggers the Bank safeguards policy on
OP/BP 4.12                          Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) because the project
will involve small-scale land acquisition. The investments
proposed are of small scale and/or are rehabilitation by
nature; however, the project might involve unavoidable
land appropriation mainly for the construction of small-
scale community infrastructure. Also, the project will
support the construction of office buildings which may
require minor land acquisition. Furthermore, in
Page 5 of 13


﻿developing community fisheries management plans, fish
conservation areas may be established, resulting in
reduced or restricted access of local communities to
fishery resources during certain times of the year due to
efforts to enforce national laws or local regulations in
protected and/or conservation areas.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           There are no dams involved in the project.
o         4.37
Projects on International  Yes        The Mekong River is an International Waterway and
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  therefore OP 7.50 is triggered.
Projects in Disputed     No           The project geographical scope does not include any
Areas OP/BP 7.60                      disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment): In accordance with OP 4.01, the project is categorized
as "B" since it will involve (i) rehabilitation of existing small rural infrastructures (e.g., village
access roads, foot bridges, office buildings, etc.) and construction of a small-scale hatchery in
Stung Treng Province (outside the Ramsar Site) under Component 1; and (ii) upgrade and
construction of hydrological observation stations under Component 2. In addition, the project will
finance several technical studies linked to the PDO. The overall environmental impact of the
proposed project would be positive, as the project aims to reduce the fishing pressure and establish
a framework for proper management of the fisheries resources and habitats. The impacts from the
planned new hatchery are also considered to be manageable. The other potential negative impacts
of the project include limited land acquisition, dust, noise, and construction wastes resulting from
O
U           small-scale civil works. However, these impacts are assessed to be small, localized and temporary.
OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats): The project triggers the Bank safeguards policy on Natural
Habitats (OP 4.04) because activities under Components 1 and 2 are planned in villages located
along the Mekong River in Northern Cambodia. While the selection of the exact villages to be
supported by the project would be done during the implementation period, a part of the project
area may be located within the Stung Treng Ramsar Area as well as in other designated national
parks. The overall impacts of the project will be positive, as the proposed investments will enable
hydrological and water quality (i.e., sediment) data collection and analysis in the 3P and 4S sub
basins, support rehabilitation of rural infrastructure and demonstration for supplementary
livelihood activities (e.g., household ponds for agriculture) to support local livelihoods and reduce
fishing pressures and establish sound fisheries resources management in the selected fishing
villages along the mainstream Mekong in the two provinces (Kratie and Stung Treng) through
community participation. These investments would not cause any significant impacts due to their
small scale and simplicity.
OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement): The project triggers the Bank safeguards policy on
Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) because the project will involve small-scale land acquisition.
The investments proposed are of small scale and/or are rehabilitation by nature; however, the
Page 6 of 13


﻿project might involve unavoidable land appropriation mainly for the construction of small-scale
community infrastructure. Also, the project will support the construction of office buildings which
may require minor land acquisition. Furthermore, in developing community fisheries management
plans, fish conservation areas may be established, resulting in reduced restrict access of local
O
communities to fishery resources during certain times of the year due to efforts to enforce national
laws or local regulations in protected and/or conservation areas. A review conducted during
project preparation found that the scale of the expected impacts is generally minor and can be
meaningfully mitigated through proper measures applied during implementation.
OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples): In the target provinces, the population of indigenous and
minority groups range from 12% in Stung Treng, 17% in Kratie, 74% in Ratanakiri, and 70% in
Mondulkiri, comprising a number of Chinese and/or Vietnamese minority groups and another
seven indigenous groups: Phnong, Kouy, Mil, Khonh, Kraol, Steang, and Thanmoun. The ethnic
minority communities to be involved in the project are expected to benefit from investment and
livelihood support/ rural infrastructure investments. An Indigenous People Planning Framework
(IPPF) has been developed to ensure adequate consultation with and participation of the local
population during the planning and implementation of the Project. The IPPF includes description
of the impacts, socio-economic characteristics of the ethnic group(s), and suggested mitigation
measures. This IPPF will help maximize project benefits to the ethnic minority communities and
mitigate any possible adverse impacts. The framework also provides a sample community
consultation framework, an outline of an Indigenous People's Develo pment Plan (IPDP), and
monitoring/reporting requirements. This plan will help maximize project benefits to the ethnic
minority communities and mitigate any possible adverse impacts.
OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways): The Mekong River is an International
Waterway and therefore OP 7.50 is triggered. The overall Mekong IWRM Program, including all
three national IWRM proje cts, was approved by the MRC's Council in November 2009. MRC
member states include Vietnam, Thailand, Cambodia, and Lao PDR. The OP 7.50 notification
requirements for these four riparian states were thus met through the MRC Council approval.
China and Myanmar are upper Mekong River riparian states; they are not MRC members but
participate as Dialogue Partners. During the preparation of Mekong IWRMP-1, the Bank notified
China and Myanmar, of Component 1 (Fisheries and Aquatic Resources Management
Component), including the proposed hatchery investment. This notification, on behalf of
a          Cambodia, was completed on September 30, 2010. No response was provided by these two
countries and so, for the purposes of OP 7.50, the riparian notification was considered completed
in 2010. On December 19, 2013 the East Asia and Pacific Region's Vice President confirmed that
the original notification process was still valid.
Investments proposed under Component 2 are exclusively technical assistance and installation of
hydromet monitoring stations, which are intended for monitoring purposes and do not alter the
flow or quantity of the river; therefore, they will fall into the category of the investments stipulated
under paragraph (b) of OP. 7.50, which waives riparian notification as an exception. On December
19, 2013 the East Asia and Pacific Region's Vice President confirmed that the original notification
process was still valid, and this was re-confirmed on June 30, 2015 by the World Bank's legal
department.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The fish hatchery subproject is the only identified
works contract that will require significant excavation and earth works which may result in chance
archaeological finds. The hatchery EMP includes a check on potential impacts on Physical
Cultural Resources (PCR). Archaeological chance finds will be covered by a chance-finds
Page 7 of 13


﻿procedures clause included in the works contract. In the event any other significant civil works
projects are undertaken, the chance-finds procedures will be included in the contract.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The overall environmental impact of the project is positive as the proposed investments will
enable hydrological and water quality (i.e. sediment) data collection and analysis and to pilot
community fisheries and contribute to the establishment of a common approach among the LMB
countries for sustainable community fisheries co-management in key spawning and feeding
habitats of regional significance. The physical investments proposed under the project - small-
scale rural infrastructures, construction of a small hatchery and construction of hydrological
observation stations - will not cause indirect and/or long-term impacts due to anticipated future
activities in the project area. There is no remarkable social adverse impact anticipated from the
implementation of project activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
None
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment): The Client has prepared an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) acceptable to the Bank. All potential negative impacts
associated with above-mentioned civil works, which are of small scale, will be minimized through
the application of good engineering practices and environmental codes of practices that would
provide measures to reduce dust, noise, and waste generations as well as by keeping nearby
communities informed. The ESMF includes among other aspects, (i) screening procedures to
determine if the planned subproject is in a critical or non-critical natural habitat; and to avoid any
significant conversion or degradation of any critical natural habitat, as well as (ii) guidelines to
develop mitigation measures to minimize or avoid damage to the natural habitats.
O
If a proposed activity or subproject requires a specific EA document in accordance with national
environmental law or the World Bank, the CNMC (for Component 2) and Fisheries
Administration (FiA) (for Component 1) will prepare appropriate documents and secure clearance
from the MOE as well as the Bank. Any large-scale activity/subproject that requires a full
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) by the Government and the Bank (e.g., category A) will
be considered as an ineligible subproject/activity. Good engineering practices and environmental
codes of practices (ECOPs) that will be included in bidding documents or contracts are given in
Annex 4 of the ESMF. On the hatchery, the Client has prepared an Environmental Management
Plan (EMP) acceptable to the Bank that details mitigation plan, monitoring plan, implementation
arrangement and costs to ensure that potential negative environmental impacts due to construction
and operation of the hatchery are adequately managed.
OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats): Implementation of Component 1 for Cambodia will involve the
Ramsar Site within Stung Treng. 21 villages within the Ramsar Site have been identified as
potential target villages. Special attention will be given to ensure that the activities within the
Ramsar Site, such as rehabilitation of rural infrastructure, will be undertaken with the highest care
and in a manner consistent with the management plan of the site. Activities will also be undertaken
in close coordination with the MOE, which is responsible for site management, and the WWF,
which is currently providing technical and financial support for the Ramsar Site. The project
Page 8 of 13


﻿would only support the rehabilitation of existing foot paths, bridges, schools and clinics - no new
construction; these are permissible activities under the current draft Ramsar Site Management
Plan. The proposed investment must be approved by the communes and be included in the
commune development plan. The project will not support investments that have the potential to
O
cause significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats, directly or indirectly. Once the
rural infrastructure investments are identified for any of these 21 villages, the proposal and the
site-specific ECOP will be sent to the MOE for review and concurrence prior to the
commencement of the procurement of the civil works contractors. The FiA will prepare a report
every quarter and provide it to the Bank for its review. MOE will also send a representative to the
National Steering Committee. In this way, the project will ensure full compliance with the OP/BP
4.04 (Natural Habitats).
OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement): Regarding potential impacts due to land acquisition, a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared as a standalone document to mitigate
negative impacts when land acquisition is involved. The RPF defines the definition of Project
Affected Persons (PAPs), eligibility and entitlements, content of annual Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP), implementation procedures and institutional arrangements, and the consultation process
during implementation, including grievance procedures and monitoring requirement. Voluntary
land donation will be allowed only when affected people agree to donate with a full knowledge of
their entitlements to compensation and other conditions provided in the RPF are met. In particular,
where affected people do not derive project benefits directly, such as when office buildings of
government agencies are built or rehabilitated, and when impacts are not minor, voluntary
donation will not be allowed.
In case that the resource access restrictions is applied, the relevant CMU will help affected
villagers carry out participatory processes to develop the Village Resource Use Agreement, and
confirm their broad community support to access restrictions provided in the Agreement. The
Village Resource Use Agreement will meet all requirements under OP 4.12 and include measure
to mitigate the short term impact on livelihood that may result from such restrictions.
o
OP/BP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples): The project will follow the key principles of the WB's policy
regarding Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), which are to ensure that: (a) the consultation process
constitutes free, prior and informed consultations leading to 'broad community support'; (b)
0           indigenous peoples do not suffer adverse impacts during the development process; and (c) they
receive project benefits which are culturally appropriate and gender and intergenerationally
inclusive." An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been prepared as a standalone
document to provide guidance on preparation of an Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (IPDP)
including a consultation process and mitigation measures when indigenous peoples are involved.
In this project, the IPDP will be prepared on an annual basis and at the provincial level.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11): The hatchery EMP includes a check on potential
impacts on Physical Cultural Resources (PCR). Archaeological chance finds will be covered by a
chance-finds procedures clause included in the works contract. In the event any other significant
civil works projects are undertaken, the chance-finds procedures will be included in the contract.
Procedures for dealing with chance finds are also presented in the environmental codes of
practices in the ESMF.
Borrower capacity: Given that the Client is not familiar with the Bank safeguard policy
requirements, training in safeguard principles and instruments -- such as the RPF, IPPF, ESMF,
Page 9 of 13


﻿EMP and Project Operation Manual (POM) will be provided to the project staff, contractors and
local authorities during project implementation. The project will provide safeguard training to the
implementing agencies and at least one training session at the inception and one training/year
during the following years.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
Key stakeholders: CNMC will be designated as the executing agency and will be responsible for
overall project implementation. Component 1 would be managed by the FiA, which will establish
a component management unit (CMU1) to manage the implementation of the component,
including procurement, financial management, safeguards, and technical aspects (design and
construction supervision). Component 2 would be managed by CNMC, which will also establish a
Component Management Unit (CMU2). MOWRAM will also second a few staff to CMU2 to
manage the component. Besides, the project has participation of the Ministry of Environment
(MoE), Ministry of Industry, Mining and Energy, and Ministry of Economy and Finance, WWF,
local governments and community fisheries.
Consultation and Disclosure: The process of developing the proposed project is based on extensive
consultations with various stakeholders, mainly with local governments and villagers. A series of
consultations were carried out in Kratie and Stung Treng provinces since January 2010 in
conjunction with the preparation of M-IWRM1 to confirm the interest and support of communities
in the project, and to take their views into the project design. Additional public consultation took
place in early 2011 to present the planned activities under Component 1 and the proposed
safeguards documents.
In December 2013, a workshop was held with all key stakeholders, including representatives of 20
selected CFis, relevant national and provincial government officers, local NGOs and International
Organizations (including representatives from the WWF) who are currently working on the
fisheries sector and on water resources management in the project provinces. The specific
objectives of the workshops included: re-confirming the social and environmental safeguard
documents, which were prepared in 2010; informing stakeholders of the social and environmental
impacts including benefits and potential negative impacts as well as measures to enhance social
and environmental benefits and avoid/mitigate/compensate potential negative social and
environmental impacts highlighted in the ESMF, RPF and IPPF; discussing potential changes in
*           project design from 2010 to 2013 within the target fisheries community in Stung Treng and Kratie
provinces; and introducing component 2 on river basin management at the 3S and 4P sub basins.
Consultation workshops were also held on 25 and 27 March 2014 in Kratie and Stung Treng
respectively. These consultation workshops were carried out with the following scope: (a) inform
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) and community fisheries on the project objective; (b) share
lessons learned (success and failure) of fisheries communities/integrated water resource
management; (c) collect ideas on how to sustain fisheries communities/integrated water resource
management and (d) present details on the hatchery investment and the relevant draft
environmental management plan (EMP).
Comments and suggestions provided by the key stakeholders have been incorporated into the
revised ESMF, EMP, RFP, and IPPF documents. All these revised safeguard instruments have
been disclosed locally in local language on May 8, 2014 and submitted to the Bank's InfoShop in
English for disclosure on May 26, 2014
Page 10 of 13


﻿During implementation, as part of the planned activities, local affected people will be consulted
with and participate in the development of community based fishery resource management plans.
RPF provides processes and procedures that should be followed for the purpose. Site specific
O
Q)         resettlement action plans (RAPs) and Indigenous People's Development Plans (IPDPs) shall be
prepared as part of the annual implementation plan once the target villages are selected.
O
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              22-May-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-May-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Cambodia                                                 08-May-2014
Comments: The Khmer language documents can be found at www.cnmc.gov.kh. The documents
are also available in provincial offices of the four involved provinces.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              22-May-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-May-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Cambodia                                                 08-May-2014
Comments: The Khmer language documents can be found at www.cnmc.gov.kh. The documents
are also available in provincial offices of the four involved provinces.
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                         22-May-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-May-2014
"In country" Disclosure
0
Cambodia                                                 08-May-2014
Comments: The Khmer language documents can be found at www.cnmc.gov.kh. The documents
are also available in provincial offices of the four involved provinces.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X] No[   ]   NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Page 11I of 13


﻿Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X]  No[  ]  NA[  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ]  No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
O
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
O
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 12 of 13


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Greg J. Browder
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                 Date: 12-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 13 of 13


