                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC19414

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Macedonia, former Yugoslav                    P160951
                                                                               Project ID:
                                                  Republic of
                            Project Name:         Enhancing the implementation of Public Procurement in Macedonia
                            Team Leader(s): Antonia G. Viyachka,Joseph Huntington La Cascia
                            Estimated Date 30-Sep-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit: GGO03                        Lending         IPF
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.3                    Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              Strengthening Accountability and the Fiduciary
                                                                                                                                 0.3
                              Environment
                            Environment        C - Not Required
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the grant is to support the Government to enhance the performance of public
                           procurement in FYR Macedonia by improving the existing e-procurement system functionalities and
                           developing performance indicators for monitoring the performance of the public procurement system
                           and building capacity of the Public Procurement Bureau (PPB). The grant will finance the following
                           activities:

                           Performance Indicators
                           The Public Procurement Bureau (PPB) has comprehensive database of all procurement procedures.
                           This is a result of the reporting requirements contracting authorities have according to the law. This
                           data is also well presented in PPB➢❨ s annual reports. However, further assistance is needed to
                           develop public procurement performance indicators by making various cross-references of this data,
                           so that future trends and patterns could be projected. Furthermore, this data has a strong
                           anticorruption potential that is currently not being used, and therefore red flags need to be integrated
                           in the e-procurement system.

                           E-procurement ➢❨ security & software updates (new functionality)
                           Currently, PPB owns and manages the national e-procurement system used by all public sector
                           entities. Technical assistance is requested to include new functionalities to the existing system, such
                           as (i) publication of procurement notices of international donors, in order to increase transparency
Public Disclosure Copy




                           given the fact that local economic operators know the e-GP system as a unique place to search for
                           business opportunities with the public sector; (ii) e-Appeal functionality as currently it is paper-based
                           between the Economic Operators and State Appeals Commission; and (iii) pre-view of the tender
                           documents for Economic Operators without subscribing to the system.

                           Capacity Building
                           Assistance is needed for building capacity of PPB staff on using the new performance indicators that
                           will be introduced as a result of project activities and red flags. This includes sharing experiences
                           with other countries on these topics.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Public Procurement Bureau in FYR Macedonia continues to expand its e-Procurement efforts.
                           As part of the agency➢❨ s draft strategy for the development of the e-Procurement system
                           (2016-2020) it is planned to completely automate the procurement processes by 2018. This works
                           well with the activities proposed in this proposal. Furthermore, many non-governmental
                           organizations including the Center for Civil Communications sponsored by USAID have supported
                           the similar initiatives. The concrete tools and capacity-building in this project will be sustainable.
                           The enhancement of the e-procurement portal, and the performance indicators will be used on a daily
                           basis in the forthcoming years which will result in improving significantly the efficiency and
                           transparency of public procurement in FYR Macedonia on the long term and will permit a better
                           collaboration both with other countries in the Region and with international organizations such as the
                           European Union and the World Bank. The important aspect is better knowledge of the integrity
                           threats in the procurement processes by being able to identify corruption and fraud which will lead to
                           a constant improvement of procurement practices.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Antonia G. Viyachka,Joseph Huntington La Cascia
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Brandon Enrique Carter (SA)                                  Date: 31-Aug-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Hiba M. F. Tahboub (PMGR)                                    Date: 01-Sep-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
