                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR19146
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:        Sierra Leone                   Project ID: P154904
                            Project Name: Labor-intensive Public Works to Mitigate Ebola Impacts (P154904)
                            Task Team
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated                                      Estimated      15-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSP07                           Lending        Investment Project Financing
                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:         Other social services (100%)
                            Theme:          Improving labor markets (15%), Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social
                                                Care Services (65%), Social Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                            No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         2.95           Total Bank Financing:                                             0.00
                            Financing Gap:              2.95
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                               Financing Gap                                                                                             2.95
                               Total                                                                                                     0.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a     No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description
                           The project contributes to the scale up of the national labor-intensive public works program, to help
                           mitigate both immediate and longer term socioeconomic impacts. The labor-intensive public works
                           (LIPW) program was previously financed through a US$10 million component of the YESP;


                                                                                  Page 1 of 6
                         however, these activities closed in January 2015. Similar to the arrangements under the previous
                         project, this project will be implemented by the National Commission for Social Action (NaCSA).
                         The Project targets 12,000 youth in poor households in approximately 150 communities within the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         four districts with the highest extreme poverty incidence in the country, Bombali, Kono, Moyamba,
                         and Western Rural, which are also among the districts which faced the highest Ebola caseloads
                         during the outbreak.

                         LIPW is uniquely placed to support the recovery process through multiple channels: (i) providing an
                         alternative source of livelihoods to youth in poor households that have suffered job losses or loss of
                         an income earner; (ii) helping maintain or create community assets that might not otherwise be
                         invested in due to lack of funds or over-stretched capacity at both central and decentralized levels;
                         (iii) stimulating other small-scale income generating activities both by reducing household risk and
                         providing access to capital. Indeed, evidence from a recent randomized impact evaluation of the
                         ongoing LIPW program shows that it not only increases household consumption, but also promotes
                         asset accumulation and creation of household enterprises, and increases access to health services,
                         among other positive impacts. Together with cash transfers, LIPW has been at the core of recent
                         Government efforts to build SP systems and has reached nearly 40,000 beneficiaries.

                         The project therefore finances: grants to targeted communities for the implementation of LIPW sub-
                         projects, including for the procurement of materials (e.g., small equipment and tools); cash transfers
                         to youth in targeted households in exchange for their participation in the LIPW sub-project
                         implementation; and program management and capacity building for efficient project implementation
                         and monitoring.

                         On March 9, 2015, the Acting Country Director, approved the request to process this project under
                         paragraph 12 of OP 10 and to apply the condensed procedures for project preparation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This project is characterized by the implementation of many small scale sub-projects, which are
                         geographically spread and often located in remote rural communities. Road networks and
                         communications are generally poor, which poses a great challenge for monitoring safeguards
                         implementation. However, safeguards implementation is facilitated by the project implementation
                         arrangements in which Community Oversight Committees are responsible for the physical
                         implementation of the sub-projects, with support and monitoring by NaCSA District Coordinators.
                         NaCSA has developed an Environmental and Social screening checklist list for sub-projects to be
                         applied to each sub-project for improved social and environmental sustainability.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09    No


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               No new safeguards issues will be associated with this restructuring other than those identified
                              during project preparation. The application of safeguards policies (OP4.01 Environment
                              Assessment and OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement) primarily concern sub-project activities
                              involving communal agriculture and road rehabilitation and the need to ensure that these activities
                              does not result in forced displacement or loss of livelihoods. Voluntary land donated for
                              communal agriculture are backed by a signed MOU and depending on the agreement, typically a
                              non-monetary benefit or no incentive is provided to the land owner.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                               The project➢❨ s long-term environmental and social impacts are expected to be positive overall
                              by providing alternative source of livelihood to youth in poor households, investing in community
                              assets that would stimulate small scale income generation and providing access to capital. The
                              safeguards risks however are minimal and manageable.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                               NaCSA has experience in implementing World Bank-financed projects since 2003. NaCSA was
                              the main implementing agency for the LIPW component of the previous YESP which ended in
                              June 30, 2016. Implementation of this grant built on and used the safeguard frameworks under the
                              YES LIPW. The updated ESMF and RPF were finalized and disclosed in August 2015. NaCSA
                              have staff at the national and regional levels as focal points for safeguards implementation. They
                              undertake sub-project screening subprojects activities for potential environmental and social
                              impacts per the guidelines within the adopted ESMF and RPF in collaboration with the designated
                              Safeguards Environmental and Social Officers (ESOs) at the Local Councils. The national and
                              regional NaSCA se focal persons are not qualified environmental and social development


                                                                        Page 3 of 6
                           specialists notwithstanding, they have received training over the years to strengthen the capacity.
                           Additionally, during the June, 2014 mission two NaCSA staff at the regional level were designated
                           and trained to manage safeguards implementation and NaCSA developed forms, guidance, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           checklists to apply to each subproject at the sub-project identification stage. A safeguard training
                           program was also conducted in April 15, 2016 in Sierra Leone with participation from some
                           NaCSA staff including the national safeguards focal person and some Regional Coordinators. To
                           further strengthen safeguards implementation, the project also held a training event in May 2016
                           for the Community Oversight Committees who will be managing the day-to-day implementation
                           of the sub-projects. Nonetheless, the project➢❨ s need to recruit or add to the team a person with
                           background on environment and resettlement issues have always been emphasized.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the National Commission for Social Action (NaCSA), Local Councils
                           (Bombali, Kono, Moyamba, and Western Rural), local communities within the four districts with
                           the highest extreme poverty incidence in the country, Bombali, Kono, Moyamba, and Western
                           Rural, which are also among the districts which faced the highest Ebola caseloads during the
                           outbreak. The project has a functional anti-corruption and grievance redress mechanisms for
                           receiving and addressing project and corruption related grievances.

                           The initial safeguards documents were all disclosed in-country and at the info shop. All updated
                           documents and reports stemming from the restructuring will be made available to project affected
                           groups, local NGOs, and the public at large as required by the laws of Sierra Leone and the World
                           Bank safeguards policies.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:

                                                                     Page 4 of 6
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             report?
                            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                             Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             degradation of critical natural habitats?
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                         Page 5 of 6
                         Task Team Leader(s): Name:
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                Date: 30-Jun-2016
                         Practice Manager/    Name: Penelope Jane Aske Williams (PMGR) Date: 30-Jun-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Page 6 of 6
