                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC17003

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Indonesia                      Project ID:      P159191
                            Project Name:   KIAT GURU: KINERJA DAN AKUNTABILITAS GURU - IMPROVING
                                            TEACHER PERFORMANCE AND ACCOUNTABILITY
                            Team Leader(s): Robert Wrobel
                            Estimated Date 31-Mar-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:      GSUID                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Sub-national government administration (10%), Public administration-
                                                Education (20%), Primary education (70%)
                            Theme(s):           Administrative and civil service reform (20%), Other accountability/anti-
                                                corruption (30%), Participation and civic engagement (50%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 4.44137                      Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                0.81837
                              Indonesia - Program for Community Empowerment                                              3.623
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           9.      The Project Development Objective is to improve availability of primary school providers’
                           service delivery in targeted areas. The objective will be reached by making teachers more
                           accountable and by empowering communities to participate in education.
                           C. Project Description
                           11.     KIAT Guru will achieve its PDO through a Recipient-Executed Trust Fund (RETF) and a
                           Bank-Executed Trust Fund (BETF) activities. The RETF component will operationalize mechanisms
                           in support of the MoEC reforms, which are likely to include:

                           a.      Community Empowerment Mechanism providing community members with an explicit role
                           to monitor and evaluate teacher service performance, and to ensure teacher accountability; and
                           b.      Pay for Performance Mechanism tying payment of Tunjangan Khusus (APBN-allocated
                         teacher special allowance) with teacher service delivery, defined as: (i) Availability of service, or
                         teachers’ presence in school and in classroom as scheduled; and (ii) Quality of service, or broader
                         indicators of service performance (including teacher presence) as agreed between teachers and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities.

                         12.     The RETF will consist of one component: Community Empowerment, Facilitation Support,
                         and Technical Assistance to National, District, and Village Governments. This component, worth US
                         $3,623,000, will support the following activities in up to 200 villages in up to 5 districts:

                         a.       Technical assistance for procurement and management of technical and community
                         development specialists, to be hired at the national, district, and sub-district levels to work with the
                         governments, service providers, parents, community members, and broader education stakeholders to
                         implement Community Empowerment and Pay for Performance Mechanisms;
                         b.       Workshops to engage cross-sectoral ministries or departments in policy discussions and
                         recommendations, trainings for community facilitators and village cadres, and coordination meetings
                         at the national, district, sub-district, and village levels;
                         c.       Office rentals and administrative support at the national and district levels; and
                         d.       Tools and equipment for community facilitation processes and field operations, and training
                         and documentation services.

                         13.      The RETF will be executed by an implementing institution (hereafter the Recipient), who
                         will be selected according to the following procedures. Several entities will be shortlisted based on
                         publicly available materials, focusing on previous track record as grant recipients for large-scale
                         activities. They will be evaluated against the following selection criteria:

                         a.       Demonstrated xperience managing technical assistance and implementing large-scale
                         activities focusing on policy advocacy and capacity development for local governments (preferably
                         focusing on responsive and accountable governance) and community empowerment facilitation
                         (preferably on basic services, especially in education sector);
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b.       Strong networks of local governments, technical experts and community facilitators.
                         Geographical focus of the activities are in disadvantaged districts (preferably in Eastern and Central
                         Indonesia) and in rural areas;
                         c.       Has an ongoing portfolio of working promting responsive governance and community
                         empowerment, can promote the activity to potential target districts, can sustain the lessons learned
                         beyond the live of the activity to non-target districts, and potentially become an implementing
                         partner for Government of Indonesia to expand the activity to other areas; and
                         d.       Has strong financial management capacity proven by financial audited report and the
                         continued partnership and trust from various International Development Partners, and preferably has
                         a good understanding of the World Bank systems and procedures.

                         14.     The BETF will provide support to government to rigorously monitor and evaluate the
                         effectiveness of the interventions trialed through the RETF. This component, referred to as
                         Monitoring, Learning and Evaluation, will be worth US$1,110,000, and will finance the following:

                         a.      Technical specialists, to be hired at the national levels to develop the design and analysis of
                         monitoring, learning and evaluation activities of Community Empowerment and Pay for Performance
                         Mechanisms approved by the KIAT Guru Steering Committee. The monitoring and learning data will
                         be collected by technical and community development specialists hired through the RETF, while the
                         evaluation data will be collected by technical specialists hired through BETF;
                           b.     Baseline surveys that include mixed-methods data collection in up to 200 villages, tools and
                           equipment to conduct the baseline surveys; and
                           c.     Implementation support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will provide technical assistance and will not finance any physical investments. All TA
                           activities, recommendations, and advice, will be consistent with the objectives of World Bank
                           environmental and social safeguard policies.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Manuals for community facilitation have been developed during KIAT Guru Pre-Pilot Phase. The
                           Bank’s safeguards specialists will review the manuals to ensure that they adhere to the World Bank’s
                           environmental and social safeguard policies. All TA will be trained with the policies to do no harm,
                           and to include and to not discriminate against indigenous people whereby applicable.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Fajar Argo Djati (GSUID)
                           Flavio Chaves (GWADR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             As the overarching umbrella policy, OP 4.01 is
                           BP 4.01                                             triggered given the need to trigger OP 4.10. The
                                                                               TA will not finance any physical activities nor
                                                                               support studies that will lead to future physical
                                                                               activities or other activities with environmental
                                                                               implications. Therefore, no separate
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               environmental instrument or assessment is
                                                                               required concerning OP 4.01.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       Yes             The project covers up to 200 villages, some of
                                                                               which may be inhabited by indigenous peoples
                                                                               who would likely benefit from improved access
                                                                               to better quality basic education services. The
                                                                               Project Operational Manual (POM) will
                                                                               establish screening procedures and negative lists
                                                                               for activities financed under this project. The
                                                                               Bank’s safeguard specialist will review KIAT
                                                                               Guru manuals to advise on relevant policies and
                                                                               actions to ensure that IPs can participate and
                                                                               benefit from project activities. Community
                                                                               facilitators and village cadres will receive
                                                                                             appropriate training on Free, Prior and Informed
                                                                                             Consultations and community participation.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Robert Wrobel
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                           Date: 16-Mar-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Kevin A Tomlinson (PMGR)                                     Date: 17-Mar-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
