INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13124
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Indonesia                  Project ID:  P155047
Project Name:   Indonesia: Geothermal Energy Upstream Development Project (P 155047)
Task Team       Peter Johansen
Leader(s):
Estimated       31-Mar-2016                Estimated    28-Jul-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEO2                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other Renewable Energy (100%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Climate change
(30%), Other environment and natural resources manageme nt (30%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    360.30            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                             Amount
Borrower                                                      300.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           0.00
Climate Investment Funds                                       50.00
FRANCE French Agency for Development                            0.30
Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds           6.25
NEW ZEALAND, Govt. of (Except for Min. of Foreign               3.75
Affairs)
Total                                                         360.30
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives


﻿18.    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to facilitate investments in geothermal-based
electricity.
C. Project Description
O
19.    Key results indicators to monitor progress toward achievement of the PDO are:
* Financial closure on geothermal power plant projects securing investments in new capacity
(MW)
* Private capital mobilized (US$)
* Estimated GHG emission reduction compared to a business-as-usual baseline (tCO2/year)
20.    In addition, the following intermediate result indicator will be adopted to track Citizen
Engagement:
* Villages located next to exploration sites with at least one public consultation held (%)
21.    Project Design: The proposed intervention complements Gol's efforts to reform the
country's energy sector, supported through a wider WBG assistance program including a
Development Policy Loan which is expected to include specific prior actions and indicative triggers
related to geothermal development.
22.    The Project will specifically address:
(i) the need for continued support for implementation of geothermal policy, tariff and
licensing reform building on recently completed and ongoing technical assistance (TA)
engagements; and
(ii) development of an effective risk mitigation tool in support of geothermal exploratory
drilling using successful elements from international best practice.
23.    The Project will target current and prospective geothermal business permits holders across
the Indonesian archipelago, including the main geothermal markets of Java and Sumatra. For
prospective licensees, the Project will target both high and medium enthalpy resources. Emphasis
will be on the utilization of medium-enthalpy resources to displace high-cost fossil alternatives
outside the main load centers in Eastern Indonesia - where electrification rates are lowest and
poverty rates are highest.
24.    The proposed Project consists of two components. Component 1 would target the
operationalization of the revamped GFF through a risk-sharing arrangement with a CTF US$50
million convertible loan. Support eligibility would apply to both prospective and existing license
holders.
Prospective Licensees:
25.    If the exploration - to be funded by GFF with support from the Project and executed by a
service company on behalf of Gol - is successful, a development and operation license will be issued
to a developer through a competitive auction. At the time of financial closure, the developer will be
required to refund the total costs of the exploration to GFF plus a risk premium to be paid to a
dedicated facility. This replenishment of the GFF and CTF support would ensure sustainability in the
risk mitigation scheme.
26.    If the project does not come to financial closure, the licensee will not pay the full cost of the


﻿exploration back to the GFF. At this point the GFF will be refunded from the funds accumulated in
the CTF-backed dedicated facility from payment of risk premiums. If the funds are insufficient, part
(tentatively 50%) of the shortfall will be covered through a WB/CTF contingent loan pay-out, which
could be partially or fully refunded if the dedicated facility receives additional funds from risk
O
premiums.
27.    Finally, it is suggested that the CTF funds will be given as a loan, and that the loan be
converted into a grant if there is an unpaid balance in favor of the WB/CTF after 15 years of
operation.
Existing Licensees:
28.    In order to provide an incentive for exploration drilling to existing license holders the CTF
and GFF funds could be used to reduce the cost of an insurance scheme for instance by entitling
licensees to sell the geotechnical data obtained through "dry-hole drilling" related to a given field to
the Geological Agency (Badan Geologi) at a price that would cover some of the drilling costs. In
case where existing licensees abandon field development all together the returned license could then
be re-auctioned and, upon new licensing, the GFF/CTF facility procedures and conditions for
prospective license holders would apply.
29.    Component 2 would comprise a coordinated multi-donor technical assistance package for
which the key partners and areas of support have been identified as follows:
* Geothermal Up-Stream Development (US$6.25 million): Building on the previous GEF
engagement with the Indonesian geothermal sector, GEF support will mainly be focused on
strengthening the indigenous capabilities for geothermal development by providing the resources
needed in order to establish an efficient and effective exploration and tendering program . This effort
will be supported by the Ministry of Finance with an indicative US$5 million allocation. The
partnership is key to attracting CTF financing (US$50 million) and ultimately unlocking government
and private sector investment commitments of about US$2.5 billion.
* The Government of New Zealan d: (US$3.75 million): The resources put forward by the
Government of New Zealand will support: (i) the effective collation and analysis of existing and new
resources data through establishment of an effective, GIS based database, probably to be housed
a      within Badan Geologi; (ii) the establishment of a robust resource and reserve estimation and
reporting protocol to an internationally acceptable standard; (iii) the prioritization of potential sites
for geothermal development; and (iv) capacity building for tendering as well as executing an
exploration program.
30.    Building on previous engagement with the Climate Change Development Policy Loans,
additional support (tentative US$300 thousand) for Component 2 may be provided by Agence
Franqaise de D6veloppement (AFD). Further details will be provided during preparation following
AFD's internal technical discussions.
31.    In a later phase it is envisaged that an IBRD loan in the amount of US$300 million could
support mid-stream investments such as production drilling of steam fields. Furthermore, a
partnership with the Carbon Partnership Facility (CPF) on "New Scaled-up Crediting Mechanisms"
for emission reductions will be explored. A detailed description of the project design is provided in
the supplementary Information Note.


﻿D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
32.    The Project will target current and prospective geothermal business permit holders across the
Indonesian archipelago, including the main geothermal markets of Java and Sumatra. For prospective
licensees, the Project will target both high and medium enthalpy resources. Emphasis will be on the
utilization of medium-enthalpy resources to displace high-cost fossil alternatives outside the main
load centers in Eastern Indonesia - where electrification rates are lowest and poverty rates are
highest.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
33.    The Project Management Unit (PMU) will be a newly-constituted body under the Ministry of
Energy and Mineral Resources (MEMR). It will engage consultants to prepare an Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF) including a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), since
specific exploration sites will not have been identified prior to appraisal or Board approval.
Similarly, since sites are unknown, the presence or attachment of indigenous peoples in each sub-
project area must be screened, following an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPF) to be
included in the ESMF.
34.    The ESMF will assess existing experience with environmental and social safeguards in the
sector, and make recommendation for the safeguards capacity that will need to be developed in and/
or available to the PMU. Prior to project effectiveness, MEMR will ensure that these
recommendations have been implemented, whether by direct hiring, secondments from government
agencies or academic institutions, or consultancies. The TA component will support training,
equipment, and, to the extent that Bank procurement policies and government regulations allow,
staffing. The PMU will contract for the site-specific ESIAs and/or ESMPs for green-field sites.
Existing IUP holders will be responsible for preparing their own ESIAs and/or ESMPs, under the
oversight of PMU.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
0
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Exploration involves construction of access roads,
OP/BP 4.01                              mobilization and operation of large, heavy drilling
rigs, construction of work camps. Potential impacts
include: (i) impacts on soils, vegetation, biodiversity
and the surface water network due to the construction
of access roads and drilling platforms during the
exploration phase, and production drillings, steam
pipelines, powerhouses, road networks, and
transmission lines during the operational phase; (ii)
potential damage to, or conversion of natural
habitats, as a significant percentage of geothermal
resources is located in or near terrain on which forest
cover is to be maintained for watershed protection;
(iii) temporary and permanent land acquisition, or


﻿damage to, or loss of assets or livelihoods; (iv)
damage or disturbances to physical cultural
resources; (v) damage or disturbances to geothermal
features, water supplies, community infrastructure;
and (vi) production, handling, storage and disposal of
drilling mud and fluids during the exploration phase;
(vii) production, storage and handling of brines,
noise and visual impacts during the production
phase. The project is accordingly assigned to
Category A for environmental assessment. The
ESMF will provide three stages of screening: (1)
desk review of the long list of potential sites to
exclude non-starters such as sites within biodiversity
reserves; (2) document review/field reconnaissance
to identify any fatal flaws in sites proposed for
further consideration, such as no way to evacuate
power except through a protected area; and (3)
screening to determine what level of environmental
assessment should be prepared for a site where
exploration is planned. The ESMF will include
model terms of reference for ESIAs and ESMPs. In
addition to assessment of exploration impacts, ESIAs
and ESMPs will identify the key potential impacts of
site development and operation along with mitigation
requirements and approximate costs, as this
information will be relevant to the decision whether
or not to explore. OP 4.01 and the other policies
triggered are also triggered for the technical
assistance on regulations for geothermal energy
development to ensure that proposed regulatory,
tariff and licensing reforms: (i) do not result in
consequences inconsistent with the requirements and
principles of Bank safeguards policies; (ii) do
incorporate those principles as well as the
requirements of Indonesian laws and regulations; and
(iii) are exposed to stakeholders including
environmental, civil society, and indigenous peoples
organizations. The project team will review and
approve the TORs for TA activities. The ESMF will
provide guidelines for assessing environmental and
social consequences of proposed reforms, to be
applied by the entities conducting the TA, and the
team will review the results of such assessments
prior to implementation of the reforms. The WBG
EHS Guidelines will apply to the project, both the
general guidelines and those for geothermal power
generation.


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          In Indonesia, some of the geothermal resources are
found in terrain that is designated as hutan lindung
(HL), to remain in forest cover for watershed
protection. While human activities have modified
some of the HL, much of it remains as natural
habitat. Exploration involves construction of access
roads, well pads, and accommodations; transport and
operation of heavy drilling rigs; and management of
drilling fluids. Development adds further drilling,
construction of above-ground steam-gathering
systems and brine storage and reinjection systems,
workshops, power plants and power transmission
lines. The impacts of exploration will be assessed in
ESIAs as described under OP 4.01 above. The
ESIAs will also consider the key potential impacts of
development in order to inform decision-makers
about the "developability" of a site prior to the
decision to explore. Degradation of critical natural
habitat will be avoided. This policy is also triggered
for the technical assistance component as explained
under OP 4.01 above.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         Offsets are required under OP 4.04 for conversion of
natural habitat and under Indonesian law for removal
of forest in HL. Indonesian law requires new forest
planting in a ratio of 2:1, hence the project will
involve forest management. This policy is also
triggered for the technical assistance component as
explained under OP 4.01 above.
O
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project does not involve pest management.
O
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         It is likely that PCR will be found near some
OP/BP 4.11                               exploration projects. In some cases in Indonesia, the
manifestasi of geothermal energy have themselves
been considered sacred by local communities. This
policy is also triggered for the technical assistance
component as explained under OP 4.01 above.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         Because the project is national in scope and has a
4.10                                     focus on islands in eastern Indonesia, the possibility
exists that sites considered for exploration will be on
lands of indigenous peoples. For this reason, an
IPPF will be prepared prior to appraisal, based on a
social assessment of the potential impacts and risks
concerning indigenous peoples (and other local
communities) experienced from existing geothermal
developments. The IPPF will define the procedure to
be followed in determining whether indigenous


﻿peoples may be affected, and guidelines for
preparing IPPs.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The Bank's experience with geothermal projects in
BP 4.12                                   Indonesia indicates that land acquisition can often be
carried out by means of commercial transactions
rather than expropriation, and involuntary
resettlement does not occur. However, and LARPF
will be prepared to establish the principles and
procedures for land acquisition and resettlement in
case there are instances when an agency with the
power to expropriate is doing the acquisition. The
LARPF will provide guidance for preparation of
LARAPs.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    Yes          The policy is triggered as a precautionary measure to
ensure that storage and settling ponds for drilling
fluids and brine storage ponds are designed by
qualified professionals and properly inspected and
maintained in accordance with the policy's principles
for small dams.
Projects on International    No           Exploration will not affect the quality or quantity of
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      international waterways or groundwater.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project will not operate in disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
O
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
tbd
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Johansen
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 03-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Dejan R. Ostojic (PMGR)                   Date: 04-Dec-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


