                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC16102

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Albania                        Project ID:      P158380
                            Project Name:   SUPPORT TO EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRIES TRANSPARENCY
                                            INITIATIVE COMPLIANCE PROCESS PROJECT
                            Team Leader(s): Ilhem Salamon
                            Estimated Date 15-Dec-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEEX1                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Oil and gas (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Other accountability/anti-corruption (50%), Participation and civic
                                                 engagement (30%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                                 (20%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.4                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Extractives Global Programmatic Support                                                     0.4
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance the transparency in the extractive sectors in
                           Albania by supporting the implementation of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (EITI).
                           C. Project Description
                           EITI is a global Standard to promote open and accountable management of natural resources. GoA
                           expressed its support to EITI in February 2009, and Albania became an EITI candidate in May 2009.
                           The implementation of the EITI agenda is ensured by a technical Secretariat, which was created by a
                           Ministerial Council’s decision on July 07, 2010 and operates under the leadership of a Multi
                           Stakeholder Group (MSG), created by a Decree issued by the Prime Minister in July 21, 2011. The
                           MSG includes representatives of civil society, extractive industries’ operators, and government. The
                           MSG is chaired by the Deputy Minister of Energy and Industry.

                           For GoA, the need to boost the contribution of the extractives sector to economic growth and
                         employment is clear and requires enhancing sector governance to foster private sector investments in
                         large infrastructure projects. While the challenge is significant, substantial progress has already been
                         recorded under the strong leadership of Albania’s EITI National Secretariat. After rich debates and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         stakeholder consultations, innovative sector laws have been promulgated to establish principles of
                         transparency and accountability in the mining sector (Law No. 10304 “On the Mining sector in the
                         Republic of Albania” dated 15 July 2010) and the hydrocarbon sector (Hydrocarbon Law number
                         7746, dated July 28, 1993 and amended on March 12, 2015). Albania became an EITI compliant in
                         May 2013, after successfully publishing four EITI reports covering the years 2009 to 2012.

                         In October 2013, the World Bank approved a Trust Fund in the amount of US$300,000 which was
                         scaled up to US$420,000 in July 2015 to support the government of Albania’s effort to remain
                         compliant to the global standard of accountability and transparency (Albania – MDTF for EITI Post-
                         Compliance Grant). The grant, which will close on December 31st, 2015 enabled Albania to: (i)
                         publish the EITI Reports for 2011, 2012, 2013 and 2014 under the proactive supervision of Albania
                         EITI MSG; (ii) support to the operating costs of EITI National Secretariat; (iii) enhance stakeholders
                         capacity through EITI training; and (iv) develop analytical work, including a study articulating how
                         to include the hydro power sector in the EITI reporting in Albania and a study investigating how to
                         develop IT applications to systemize EITI data reporting.

                         While reaching compliance with the Global standard necessitated substantial effort and commitment
                         from the Albania EITI MSG and National Secretariat, the challenges ahead remain massive. To make
                         sure that Albania can meet its ambitious objectives of transparency and improved governance, it
                         must: (i) periodically publish EITI reports including the most updated contextual and financial data,
                         covering all extractive industries and the hydropower sector. In addition; (ii) communicate
                         extensively and effectively on the EITI requirements and process, (ii) reach out to all relevant
                         stakeholders in the EITI process and provide them with tailored capacity to engage in the EITI
                         process, (iii) build the analytical and legal work needed to underpin the reform agenda associated the
                         EITI compliance process. The proposed grant is meant to support these critical efforts, the
                         publication of the next EITI reports and other key activities needed to ensure the sustainability and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mainstreaming of EITI in Albania.

                         Project Components

                         The proposed grant is meant to support critical efforts to help the country maintain EITI compliance.
                         A follow-up grant will be needed to ensure the sustainability and mainstreaming of EITI in Albania.
                         The signing of key contracts under the proposed project will be needed to trigger access to a follow-
                         on grant.

                         Component A: EITI Implementation Support (US$ 150,000). This component will support the
                         activities essential to EITI implementation and to meet Albania’s obligations to maintain its
                         compliant status.

                         • Annual EITI reports for Albania (US$ 150,000). Recruitment of Independent Administrator (IA) in
                         charge of the preparation of two annual EITI reports covering all extractive industries and for the
                         calendar years 2015 and 2016.

                         When additional Extractive Global Programmatic Support (EGPS) financing becomes available to
                         Albania, a follow-on project will be prepared with the objectives to use the funds to finance: (i) the
                         set-up of integrated government system for generating EITI data more efficiently, following the
                         option developed in a feasibility study financed under a previous support to EITI implementation
                         (Albania – MDTF for EITI Post-Compliance Grant) (US$400,000); (ii) a study identifying options to
                         enhance the contribution of the extractive industries to economic growth and employment in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Albania; (US$ 300,000) (iii) a strategy to enhance the participation of the private sector to the
                         petroleum sector and support on-going efforts of the Government to restructure and reorganize the
                         crude oil and petroleum sector (US$ 300,000). Such strategy and any associated work to this strategy
                         would be prepared in compliance with and taking into account WB's safeguards and related
                         operational policies.

                         Component B: Capacity Building Activities (US$ 150,000). This component will support core
                         training on EITI and natural resources management.

                         • Tailored training for all relevant stakeholders, including Albania’s EITI National Secretariat and
                         MSG, government officials, parliamentarians, companies operating in the Extractives Industries (EI),
                         civil society (including NGOs, the media, and youth) on matters related to the extractive industries,
                         EITI Standard, and overall transparency in the sector (US$ 75,000).
                         • Advisory services for state agencies and companies operating in the EI to address their particular
                         needs in complying with EITI reporting requirements (US$ 75,000);

                         When additional EGPS financing becomes available to Albania, the funds will finance: (i) additional
                         training to deepen Albania’s EITI MSG and National Secretariat knowledge of issues associated with
                         resource management (US$ 50,000); and (iii) tailored training to investigative journalists on the
                         reporting on the EI and EITI (US$ 50,000).

                         Component C: Communication and Outreach (US$ 75,000). This component will support the
                         implementation of the Albania EITI Communication Strategy for the first year of project
                         implementation and will include the following activities:

                         • Print and visual media outreach campaigns (US$ 30,000). Support for the EITI National Secretariat
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to publish and disseminate crucial information on the EITI implementation through radio, TV, and
                         print media outreach campaigns, in order to inform the public on the overall extractives industry,
                         EITI implementation and related events;
                         • Organization of awareness raising events (US$ 35,000). Round tables, press conferences,
                         conferences, workshops will be organized to increase the overall understanding of the key issues in
                         the management of the extractives sectors.
                         • Internet and social media activities (US$ 10,000). Support for the management of Albania’s EITI
                         website and social media accounts that contains information specifically related to the EITI
                         implementation in Albania as well as wider information on activities related to transparency of
                         extractive industries and hydropower in Albania, as well as global news and trends on EITI
                         implementation experiences from other countries.

                         When additional EGPS financing becomes available, the funds will be used to finance a second year
                         of implementation.

                         Component D: Project Management (USD$ 25,000). This Component will support the first year of
                         project implementation.

                         • Support to Albania EITI National Secretariat. The project will finance two members of Albania
                         EITI National Secretariat (IT specialist and procurement specialist) on individual consultant
                           contracts to cover specific assignments as needed and provide support for operating costs of day to
                           day activities carried out by the EITI Secretariat, under the oversight of the MSG. GoA covers the
                           costs of national Secretariat staff, office space, office maintenance, internet, phone, banking charges
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and associated utility costs, while the grant will cover the operational costs associated including
                           travel costs related to the work of the Secretariat and of MSG members.

                           When additional EGPS financing becomes available, the funds will be used to finance a second year
                           of implementation. Triggers will be added to the Project Paper for the completion of specific actions
                           during this phase before financing for the next phase kicks in.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is a technical assistance for Albania. It is meant at enhancing transparency and
                           accountability in extractive industries’ revenue management. It involves no physical investment or
                           recommendation that would be relevant for safeguard analysis.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not relevant for the project.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Esra Arikan (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               This operation does not trigger any particular
                           BP 4.01                                               safeguards policies as the activities are
                                                                                 essentially training in nature. When additional
                                                                                 Extractive Global Programmatic Support
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 (EGPS) financing becomes available to Albania,
                                                                                 a follow-on project will be prepared and will
                                                                                 include a strategy to enhance the participation of
                                                                                 the private sector to the petroleum sector and
                                                                                 support on-going efforts of the Government to
                                                                                 restructure and reorganize the crude oil and
                                                                                 petroleum sector. Such strategy and any
                                                                                 associated work to this strategy would be
                                                                                 prepared in compliance with and taking into
                                                                                 account WB's safeguards and related operational
                                                                                 policies. All TORs prepared for this technical
                                                                                 activity study will meet the Bank’s safeguard
                                                                                 policies.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Ilhem Salamon
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Brandon Enrique Carter (SA)                                  Date: 25-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Paulo De Sa (PMGR)                                           Date: 25-Nov-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
