                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR18601
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Antigua and Barbuda                          Project ID:           P126791
                            Project Name:       Public and Social Sector Transformation Project (PSST) (P126791)
                            Task Team           Juan Martin Moreno,Daniela Veronica Felcman
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           26-Mar-2013             Estimated     05-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSP04                     Lending       Specific Investment Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                       No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        10.00           Total Bank Financing:      10.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                               0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 10.00
                              Total                                                                                                 10.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The objective of the Project is to assist the Borrower in: (i) strengthening its capacity in managing
                           public policies and the public service; (ii) improving the efficiency of social protection spending
                           through an integrated monitoring and targeting system; and (iii) improving the income and
                           employability of the vulnerable population through temporary employment and training programs.
                           Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                           The objective of the Project is to assist the Borrower in: (i) strengthening its capacity in managing


                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                         public policies and the public service; (ii) improving the efficiency of social protection spending
                         through an integrated monitoring and targeting system; and (iii) improving the income and
                         employability of the vulnerable population through temporary employment and training programs.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed Level 1 restructuring would entail revision of the Project Development Objective, and
                         the triggering of new safeguard policies. The restructuring would also include the following changes
                         to the original Project design: (i) closing of all remaining activities under Components 1 and 2; (ii)
                         reallocation of additional funds from Component 1 to Component 5 (Project Management); (iii)
                         cancellation of Component 3; (iv) cancellation of US$3.985 million, thereby reducing the loan
                         amount to US$6.015 million; (v) extension of the Project closing date for one year, to December 31,
                         2019; and (vi) revision of the Results Framework to reflect changes in components and activities.
                         The restructured Project will be composed of the following:

                         - Component 4: Support ALMPs (maintaining its original allocation of US$4.10 million). The
                         primary objective of this Component is to increase the income and employability of the poor
                         unemployed. Activities will focus on the population between the ages of 17 to 50 years old affected
                         by economic crisis. Two programs are being supported: a Temporary Employment Program (TEP),
                         and a Training Program (TP). The TEP provides income support to the less experienced, low-
                         income, unemployed through temporary employment plus a life-skills training program, while the TP
                         will provide re-training and competence certification to the more experienced among the low-income
                         unemployed population. This approach will allow the Labour Department (LD) to provide
                         employment programs tailored to the employment needs of different groups of the vulnerable
                         populations. The approach will also give the LD flexibility in tailoring employment programs to
                         economic conditions. For example, the TEP can be expanded in times of crisis and contracted during
                         better economic conditions; while in contrast, the TP can be expanded during better economic
                         conditions and scaled down in times of crisis. In terms of process, all TEP beneficiaries will have to
                         comply with workfare activities in the form of refurbishment or small new infrastructure, productive
                         activities, maintenance, and community services. To improve the efficiency in service delivery, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project has also financed the creation of the One Stop Job Centre in a central location within the
                         capital St. John's. The Center is responsible for interviewing job seekers; providing job counseling
                         registration to TP and TEP; providing intermediation services; and making referrals to the
                         competency certification system. Additionally, the Project will support the operation of the
                         certification of competencies in the country through the financing of technical assistance for better
                         definition of operational procedures and training of competency assessors. Finally, the Project has
                         supported the implementation of a tracking survey for beneficiaries and the control group to assess
                         the placement rate and the income level resulting from the TEP intervention.

                         - Component 5. Project Management (allocation will increase from US$1.14 to US$1.57 million).
                         This component finances the Project Management Unit (PMU) under the Ministry of Finance. The
                         Project would provide financing to hire a project coordinator, a financial management specialist, and
                         a procurement specialist. This component also finances the required annual financial audits and two
                         process evaluations during project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Antigua and Barbuda - The Project will be implemented country-wide.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         Cristina Elizabeth Coirolo (GSU04)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental               Yes        The planned works and services that the Project will
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  finance will focus on relatively small sub-projects of
                                                                community interest (please see below for examples). An
                                                                Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was
                                                                prepared by the GOAB. It provides guidance on
                                                                classifying and evaluating proposed employment
                                                                activities, using a typology that also will be part of the
                                                                OM for sub-project screening, design, approval,
                                                                implementation, and closing. The EMF describes negative
                                                                environmental impacts that different types of sub-projects
                                                                could cause and guides on respective management
                                                                measures to prevent, mitigate or compensate them. The
                                                                EMF was revised to include the three additional
                                                                safeguards triggered (below).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes        Some Project activities may be added within designated
                         4.04                                   national parks, so the policy is triggered as a precaution.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No         The Project will not finance activities that would affect
                                                                forests or communities that depend on their services
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            Activities are being considered to support potential
                                                                projects, such as the control of invasive Giant African
                                                                Land Snails, which would involve pest control products
                                                                (slug bait), therefore the policy is triggered.
                         Physical Cultural           Yes        Project activities may be added for assistance with
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                   restoration of historic structures (forts), so the policy is
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                triggered.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            The Project will not finance activities that would affect
                         BP 4.10                                indigenous people groups.
                         Involuntary Resettlement No            The Borrower shall not carry out any Project activities
                         OP/BP 4.12                             that would result in Resettlement. The Borrower, through
                                                                MNSL, shall ensure that: (a) any land to be acquired, as
                                                                part of Project implementation, is acquired on an
                                                                informed consent for voluntary donation or a willing
                                                                buyer and willing seller basis, all in a manner acceptable
                                                                to the Bank, including in accordance with the provisions
                                                                in theEMF; and (b) prior to such acquisition of land,
                                                                furnish evidence acceptable to the Bank that the
                                                                requirements set in the EMF have been satisfied.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No         The Project will not finance any type of dams or activities
                         4.37                                   that would depend on existing dams.
                         Projects on International   No         The Project will not finance activities that would affect
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   international waterways.
                                                     No         There are no disputed areas within the project area



                                                                  Page 3 of 7
                            Projects in Disputed
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Project is classified as Category B given the small-scale, temporary, and reversible impacts
                              that could result from construction sub-projects carried-out primarily with manual labor by up to
                              15 workers.

                             In order to comply with the OP 4.01, the original EMF was prepared in February 2013 and
                             disclosed in-country in March 2013. The EMF includes a description of the project's eligible
                             activities and includes a negative list on those activities that, because of their nature or potential
                             impacts, will not be supported as reflected in the safeguards table above. In addition, the EMF
                             describes the relevant legal and institutional framework as well as the institutional arrangements
                             for project implementation and its environmental management. The Environment Division (ED) of
                             the Ministry of Agriculture, Lands, Housing and the Environment (MALHE) are responsible for
                             managing environmental issues. The Labour Department Technical Unit (LDTU), responsible for
                             the implementation of the workfare component of the project, coordinates the participation of the
                             ED during the sub-projects' cycle. The project may support an increase in LDTU staff, as required.

                             The EMF was written for the TEP component of the Project, and was developed for simple works
                             that exclude environmentally complex projects such as those that would trigger the natural habitat,
                             physical cultural resources, or pest management policies. However, since the PMU and Labor
                             Department are seeking to expand the base of project beneficiaries and have identified a number of
                             potential sub-projects that would trigger the referenced policies, the EMF has been revised.
                             Therefore, taking advantage that the Project is currently undergoing a restructuring, the policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             have been triggered and the EMF was revised, consulted, and re-disclosed both in-country and
                             through InfoShop. The EMF includes three annexes with specific procedures to mitigate impacts
                             of more complex projects that include the newly triggered safeguards.

                             Activities to be considered under the restructuring could potentially impact physical cultural
                             resources, thus triggering OP4.11, for possible work at three historic sites. The EMP reinforces the
                             provision that all works take place under direct supervision of NPA staff, and that additional
                             training is given to workers to avoid unintentional activities that could inadvertently harm physical
                             cultural resources. This will avoid any ambiguity with the intent of the Policy objective to "assist
                             in the preservation of cultural property and prevent any destruction or damage." The policy has
                             been triggered and an annex included into the revised EMF to provide guidance in the elaboration
                             of EMPs. These activities include labor-intensive works such as weed-cutting to clear brush and
                             help maintain areas which have previously been investigated and/or restored; the capping of brick
                             walls to preserve them until future restoration efforts can begin; and, other clearly defined tasks
                             which are conducted under the direct supervision of the designated authority (NPA) and its site
                             expert.
                             Another safeguard issue for works within the National Park system regards natural habitats. Work
                             on restoration or maintenance of nature trails will require EMPs to ensure that environmental
                             aspects are addressed and that provisions of OP4.04 (Natural Habitats) are followed. Accordingly
                             the policy was triggered and the EMF was revised to include direct supervision of works in these


                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           areas by NPA staff.

                           Regarding the Pest Management Policy OP4.09, an example of the a potential sub-project to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           competitively selected under the TEP is the Department of Agriculture's program to monitor and
                           remove the invasive Giant African Snail, which has infested perhaps 70 percent of the island. The
                           snail is highly destructive to flora, is prolific, and carries human disease (rat lungworm nematode).
                           The Government has been addressing the problem since 2008 and in 2014 the Ministry of
                           Agriculture's Chief Plant Protection Officer attended training in Miami-Dade County, USA, where
                           years of experience have kept the pest in check. Most work involves accurate monitoring and
                           observation, as well as community involvement in reporting and collecting the snail, but
                           eradication is also pursued by using bait stations with iron phosphate and metaldehyde.
                           Accordingly, OP4.09 (Pest Management) is triggered. There have been a number of EIAs and
                           studies in Florida that will provide guidelines and the basis for a Pest Management Plan (PMP).
                           Triggering of the pest management policy will also allow for extermination or fumigation of
                           buildings, or use of pest control agents in the Botanical Gardens, if needed.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The program is not expected to have any potential large scale issues or irreversible impacts as no
                           major works are contemplated. Typical works anticipated will relate to improvements to existing
                           infrastructure on a small scale. Screening processes to evaluate and management measures to
                           implement sub-projects to assure the proper application of safeguard considerations are detailed in
                           the EMF and the OM. Positive potential impacts can be expected from the presentation and
                           selection of environmental sub-projects aimed at promoting conservation and sustainable use of
                           natural resources and improving environmental conditions of the island.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             To avoid or minimize potential adverse impacts of sub-projects, the chosen strategy is to restrict
                           the scope of proposals to be presented in competitive selection processes. Besides simplifying
Public Disclosure Copy




                           evaluation, this will also imply diminishing potential negative environmental impacts, since
                           complex-to-evaluate sub-projects have been excluded through the negative list.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Five basic measures comprise the borrower's strategy to address the safeguards policies: (a) the
                           revision of the current EMF that has been reviewed by the Bank team; (b) the provision of an
                           oversight and consultation role by the Environmental Division of the Government as chief
                           technical body to manage environmental issues; (c) the provision of induction courses for Local
                           Organizations in charge of sub-projects implementation to train them in the process of sub-project
                           proposal presentation to ensure inclusion of adequate environmental and health and safety
                           measures and/or equipment; (d) training for teams of workers in regard to environmental
                           management and health and safety; and (e) a revision of the OM that includes guidelines based on
                           the new EMF and the three additional safeguards triggered under this restructuring, to be followed
                           during the project cycle.

                           The revised EMF was consulted and then disclosed both through InfoShop and in country, on July
                           26 and July 27, respectively.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                            The main stakeholders are the non-profit Local Organizations such as NGOs and Statutory
                           Bodies responsible for presenting sub-project proposals to develop community-oriented works or
                           services. Beyond the consultation of the revised EMF that took place in July 2016, the induction
Public Disclosure Copy




                           courses will be primarily designed for the LOs. This will ensure that local conditions, potential
                           nuisances, and other environmental impacts will be communicated effectively and considered in
                           sub-project design and environmental management plans. The induction course plus the public
                           availability of the EMF are also mechanisms to make the safeguard policies readily available for
                           stakeholders
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       19-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    04-Aug-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Antigua and Barbuda                                               27-Jul-2016
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       NA
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    NA
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Antigua and Barbuda                                               27-Jul-2016
                           Comments: n/a . we are using the EMF disclosure date so that the system allows us to proceed.
                                         Please see explanation below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         The specific management plans will be presented jointly with the proposals during the competitive
                         selection process. If approved, the disclosure of the management plans will take place jointly with
                         the approved sub-project.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?


                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Juan Martin Moreno,Daniela Veronica Felcman
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                       Date:
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Truman G. Packard (PMGR)             Date: 26-Sep-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
