INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR16847
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Feb-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Egypt, Arab Republic of    Project ID:  P116194
Project Name: EG-Giza North Power Project (P116194)
Task Team       Mohab Awad Mokhtar Hallouda
Leader(s):
Estimated                                  Estimated    08-Jun-2010
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEO5                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Thermal Power Generation (100%)
Theme:          Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    1412.11            Total Bank Financing:  600.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                      475.11
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          600.00
EC European Investment Bank                                    307.00
OPEC FUND                                                       30.00
Total                                                         1412.11
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The project development objective is to contribute to improving the security and efficiency of
Page 1 of 9


﻿electricity supply within the Borrower#s territory by adding new
generation capacity based on efficient thermal power generation technology.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The project development objective is to contribute to improving the security and efficiency of
electricity supply within the Borrower#s territory by adding new
generation capacity based on efficient thermal power generation technology.
3. Project Description
The following is based upon the original Giza North power projects with updates to reflect the
impact of the project activities to be supported by the Additional Financing as appropriate.
The proposed project is an integral part of Egypt's strategy which aims toexpand the use of natural
gas as a clean source of energy; this would be achieved through delivery of natural gas to houses,
industrial facilities and power plants. The EG-Giza North Power Project (the original and additional
financing) (P116194) have three main components: Component 1 namely the power plant
component, construction of 2250 MW Combined Cycle Gas Turbine; Component 2, The
construction of transmission lines to connect power plant to national grid; Component 3 The
construction of gas pipeline to strengthen the gas supply network and ensure supply of gas to power
plant.
The power plant is 92% completed, the transmission lines are 95% completed (approximately 58 km)
and the gas connections are 96% completed (approximately 105 km) and all are in operation.
Within Component 3: Gas Pipeline Construction which aims to provide natural gas to North Giza
power station and to strengthen the national network of gas, is implemented by the Egyptian
Company for Natural Gas (GASCO) with the assistance of the World Bank.
In accordance with Egypt's energy strategy, it was agreed between Government of Egypt and The
World Bank to reallocate the Project savings of up to US$ 206 million to expand the scope and
introduce Part A-3 (or in the PAD component 3-B Construction of Gas pipelines) to procure goods
for an additional set of pipelines in order to strengthen the gas supply network in order to supply gas
to the additional power plants in new areas in Egypt. In this regard, it is planned to procure, construct
and operate new gas transmission pipelines with a total length of approximately 358.4 km to the 8
power plants as follows:
* Six October Power Station, expected operation date: June 2017
This line of length 400 meters with diameter 20 inches and will feed 6 October power station, the
route will pass mainly in a desert area.
*      Damnhour expected operation date: February 2018
This line is of length 4 kilometers, with a diameter 24 inches and will feed Damnhour power station,
the route will pass mainly in privately owned agricultural land.
*      E1-Syof Power Station, expected operation date: September 2017
This line is of length 3.5 kilometers with a diameter 16 inches and will feed feed E1-Syof power
station. The route will pass mainly in privately owned agricultural land.
*      El-Mahmodia Power Station, expected operation date: September 2017
There will be 3 lines feeding this station: the first line will be of length 7 kilometers with diameter 16
inches; the second line will be of length 15 kilometers with diameter 30 inches; the third line will be
Page 2 of 9


﻿of length 27 kilometers with diameter 42 inches. The routes of the 3 lines will be passing through
privately owned agricultural land.
*     El-Suez Power Station, expected operation date: June 2017
)         This line is of length 2.5 kilometers with diameter 16 inches and will feed El-Suez power station.
The route will be passing in desert land.
*      Soumid import gas pipe line, expected operation date: April 2017
This line is of length 4 kilometers with a diameter 42 inches and will feed the New Capital power
station through another gas pipe line which is not included within the scope of this ESIA. 2 k.m of
the pipeline will be on platform (already constructed by summed company) and the other 2 k.m will
be in desert.
*      New Capital/ Dahshour gas pipeline, expected operation date: March 2017
This line is of length 115 kilometers with diameter 32 inches and will feed Beni Sweif power station.
The route will be passing in agricultural lands and desert lands.
*       Dahshour / El Wasta gas pipeline, expected operation date: December 2017
This line is of length 65 kilometers with diameter 36 inches and will feed Beni-Sweif power station.
The route will be passing in agricultural lands and desert lands.
*       El-Wasta/Beni-Sweif gas pipeline, expected operation date: June 2017
This line is of length 65 kilometers with diameter 36 inches, and will feed feeding Beni-Sweif power
station.
*       El-Gamel /Damita gas pipeline. Expected operation in December 2016
This line is of length 50 kilometers with diameter 42 inches and will feed Burullus power station.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Component 1: The power plant is located at Giza North, on the El-Beheiry canal in El-Kata village,
the Sixth of October governorate. It is on El-Manashi / El-Khatatba road, with Riah El-Beheiry canal
from the east and agriculture land from the north, south and west sides. The site is located
approximately 30 kilometers northwest of Cairo City and along the Manshyyet E1-Qanater / Etay El-
Baroud Regional Road, which runs parallel to the El-Rayyah El- Beheiry canal. The site is a part of
the flat agricultural land partly covered with fruit trees and palm trees. The site has historically been
used for cultivation of wheat and vegetables and showed no evidence of any current or past
encroachment or squatters. The site with approximately 295,000 square meters of flat land is flanked
on three sides (west, north and east) by agriculture lands with similar land use. The main road runs
parallel to the southern side of the site connecting to the city - Sixth of October, which is 15 km east
with a reported population of over a million people. The site did not indicate presence of any
industrial contamination or waste disposal or cultural properties. The site of the Giza North power
plant was chosen due to its proximity to water canal, gas network and the national electricity
transmission network.
Component 2: Final routes for transmission lines were identified based on economic, environmental
and social parameters. The shortest possible routes were selected while avoiding, as much as
possible, disrupting any environmental or physical cultural resources as well as avoiding damaging
any crops or trees. The identification of the locations for the tower footings also avoided, to a large
Page 3 of 9


﻿extent, the loss of crops or cultivated lands
Component 3: The 105 km Nubaria - Metnama pipeline, already completed, was buried below the
ground level at a depth of 2-3 meters. It runs through agricultural lands and cross transportation
routes and waterways. Farming was temporarily. After completion of works, the lands which were
temporary acquired were be fully restored to original condition, and farmers were allowed to
cultivate.
The proposed new pipelines which will be financed by the savings of the Giza North Project will be
implemented in different parts of Egypt to feed 8 power plants located in the Delta region, Suez
Canal region and North of Upper Egypt. The pipelines will pass through state-owned desert lands
and privately-owned agricultural lands. GASCO has prepared ESIA and RAP ToRs in order to
determine the baseline conditions in the locations where the pipelines will pass through. The routes
of the gas pipelines to be financed by the savings have been identified. Some of them will traverse
privately owned agricultural land.
There will be some restriction within the right of way with respect to future construction that may
potentially damage the pipeline. All river and water body crossings for the pipeline will use
Horizontal Directional Drilling (HDD) technique to pass under the river bed, which is an
internationally accepted standard practice to minimize environmental obstruction to water course.
Most of the land acquisition will be temporary and limited to the construction period. Lands for valve
rooms are expected to be acquired permanently. With regard to temporary land acquisition it should
be noted that GASCO has a wide experience, including working with the World Bank projects in
implementing transparent and effective crop compensation mechanisms which are in compliance
with Bank safeguard policies. Farmers will be compensated for loss of agricultural income prior to
the start of physical works. This approach has successfully been applied in several previous Bank-
funded projects and the proposed gas pipeline construction should benefit from this experience.
Compensation rates are well known and detailed records are kept. A Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) has been prepared, consulted and disclosed by GASCO. Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
will be prepared before the construction of any of the proposed gas pipelines to ensure that Project
Affected Persons (PAPs) will be properly compensated.
O
Borrower's Institutional Capacity for implementation of Safeguard Policies
The Borrower has been financing power projects with international financing institutions for a
number of years and is thus experienced with the Bank's environmental and social safeguard
policies. EEHC has strong institutional capacity with respect to Bank's safeguard policies having two
Bank financed large Category A projects under supervision. Although this is the first World Bank
project to be implemented by GASCO, it has implemented many similar projects financed locally
and with other international agencies which have similar safeguard policies to those of the Bank.
GASCO has adequate institutional capacity with regard to safeguard issues. Both EEHC and GASCO
are assisted by independent consultants that are technically strong and are familiar with Bank's
safeguard policies and procedures. In addition, Egypt has strict environmental regulations on ESIAs
in conjunction with large infrastructure projects and each ESIA undertaken needs formal approval by
the Egyptian Environmental Affairs Agency (EEAA). For this project, three safeguard instruments
were prepared to comply with the World Bank safeguard policies. A comprehensive environmental
and social impact assessment was prepared to comply with OP/BP4.01, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) were prepared to comply with OP/BP 4.12.
Page 4 of 9


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Chaogang Wang (GSU05)
Ehab Mohamed Mohamed Shaalan (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The majority of the impacts of the proposed project are mainly associated with the construction
phase. There are potential negative impacts on air quality, noise levels, soil quality and fresh water
bodies. Generation of solid and hazardous wastes during construction is also expected. In
addition, workers health and safety should be carefully considered. Since the gas pipeline routes
will pass through desert lands as well as agricultural lands, loss of crops and temporary land
acquisition are anticipated. During operation, risks of fires or explosions should be carefully
assessed and mitigation measures should be determined.
For the additional works supported by the savings GASCO has prepared ToRs for conducting
ESIA's, RAP's and QRA's for all pipelines. The ToR's have been reviewed and cleared by the
Bank environmental and social safeguards team. The ToRs have also been publically disclosed on
GASCO website and consulted upon during the public consultation which was held in Cairo on
Page 5 of 9


﻿January 12th, 2016.
An independent consultant will be recruited in order to prepare the site specific ESIA/ESMP/RAP
studies according to Bank requirements as well as national requirements.
o
GASCO has determined the pipeline routing in accordance with normal international practice,
which seeks to avoid, as far as possible, the crossing of major infrastructure/ natural features
(roads, railways, rivers, etc.) and to minimize disturbance to the agricultural land. The gas
pipelines will be buried underground along the identified routes. No permanent land acquisitions
are anticipated. However, GASCO has already prepared an RPF for the pipelines which were
constructed as part of Giza North Power Plant project. The RPF will be updated in order to guide
the implementation of the Resettlement Action Plans which will be utilized to compensate any
PAPs for the additional works.
According to the information provided by GASCO to the Bank, the routes of the gas pipelines to
be financed by the savings have been preliminary identified and acquisition of private owned
agricultural land will not be avoidable. Therefore, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and ESIA
will need to be prepared for each pipeline. The site specific RAP/ESIA will be approved by the
Bank and disclosed both in country and the Bank InfoShop prior to the commencement of the civil
works.
The power stations connected are considered as associated facilities. Therefore, environmental and
social due diligence have to be performed. In consideration of the land acquisition process will be
completed for all the power stations, as part of RAP preparation process, the RAP consultant will
check if there are any pending land issues involved in these associated power stations. In case
there are pending issues, action plans and/or mitigation measures should be included in the RAP.
Terms of Reference for due diligence for the associated facilities was prepared and publically
consulted upon during the public consultation session held in Cairo on January 12th, 2016. Once
cleared from the World Bank, the due diligence ToR will be disclosed.
O
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The updated ESIA for the project indicates that the environmental and social impacts associated
with the power plant and gas pipelines including the associated infrastructure, if mitigation
*           measures are implemented, will not be of major significance, unprecedented or irreversible. The
indirect impacts of associated infrastructures are summarized as follows:
Power Plants: The proposed additional works include the construction of a number of gas
pipelines in order to feed new and existing (with added extensions in same location) power plants
with natural gas. In principle, this will result in improving the overall air quality due to fuel
switching from fuel oil to natural gas. However, the Bank will conduct a due-diligence assessment
for these associated facilities (power plants) to ensure that ESIAs have been prepared and
nationally approved.
Road/railway crossings: The construction of the pipelines may cross local and regional roads as
well as railway tracks in some parts. This may result in traffic congestions and increased air
emissions and noise levels especially when passing across human settlements. The environment
Page 6 of 9


﻿impacts during construction will be mitigated and monitored using the ESIA and ESMP of each
pipeline segment.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
A "no action alternative" is environmentally undesired since the newly constructed power plants
will need significant quantities of natural gas (locally produced or imported). The only alternative
would be the dependency on imported fuel oils which will have significant negative impacts on the
environment.
The proposed routes for the gas pipelines were chosen according to clear criteria which take into
consideration the shortest distances and maximum avoidance of passing through privately owned
agricultural lands as well as completely avoiding passing through any protected areas or locations
which may have any cultural importance. GASCO has also made a systematic effort to avoid any
buildings and structures, including graveyards, religious sites and any possible historical areas.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the new gas pipelines constructed from savings and as a result of the close working
relationship with the Bank in the ongoing Giza North and Helwan South power plant projects,
GASCO has established a PMU fully staffed with competent full time environmental and social
staff.
GASCO Project Management Units will have the overall responsibility for implementation of
Environment and Social Management Plans and the RPFs. The PMU has already in-house
expertise and personnel who are competent to supervise the ESIA studies, RAP studies and the
implementation of the ESMPs. GASCO also has the capacity to prepare, supervise and implement
QRA studies and recommendations. GASCO nominated staff members who will work closely
with contractors and subcontractors to ensure that all environment and social impact mitigation
measures including occupation, health and safety guidelines are mainstreamed into the project
design; monitored and supervised.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
GASCO prepared an updated ESIA and RPF in addition to ToRs for route/site specific ESIAs/
RAPs and QRAs. Key stakeholders to the project are identified as follows:
1.     Relevant Government authorities:
-      Affected governorates
-      Directorates of agriculture, irrigation, social solidarity, environmental affairs, railways,
roads
-      Electricity sector
-      Petroleum sector
2.     Civil society organizations
3.     Project Affected Persons
-      These people are primarily the land owners and farmers utilizing the lands which will be
temporarily acquired during construction phase.
-      GASCO has a well experienced social and compensation committee which will undergo
Page 7 of 9


﻿the actual census of affected persons prior to construction
- The compensation will be determined based on a fair and transparent process which will
be comprehensively described in the RAP study.
O
At this stage, prior to appraisal, GASCO has conducted a pubic consultation session on January
12th,2016 where all relevant stakeholders were invited and voiced their ideas and concerns. The
outcomes of the consultation session were documented and included in the updated ESIA which is
publically disclosed.
The ToRs for the site specific ESIA/RAP, QRA and due diligence were also presented during the
public consultation session.
Before the construction phase, GASCO determined that at least two public consultation sessions
will take place in addition to ongoing consultation process which will be undertaken throughout
the specific ESIA/RAP preparation phase. Since GASCO has previously prepared ESIAs/RAPs
according to Bank guidelines, GASCO has gained experience in carrying out public consultation
events, identifying affected people and properly addressing any grievances through its established
GRM.
GASCO is also familiar with the national and Bank requirements concerning disclosure
requirements. GASCO will prepare a disclosure/communication plan through which all produced
documents will be publicly disclosed to the general public and directly affected people.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Feb-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Feb-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Egypt, Arab Republic of                                  09-Feb-2016
Comments: www.gasco.com.eg/?page_id=5999
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Feb-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                           09-Feb-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Egypt, Arab Republic of                                  09-Feb-2016
Comments: www.gasco.com.eg/?page_id=5999
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Page 8 of 9


﻿Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
o          in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [ X]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [  ]  TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mohab Awad Mokhtar Hallouda
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Nina Chee (SA)                       Date: 09-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Charles Joseph Cormier (PMGR)        Date: 09-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


