                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA19170
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                              Project ID:   P151281
                            Project Name:     CAPACITY STRENGTHENING FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF MINAMATA
                                              CONVENTION ON MERCURY PROJECT (P151281)
                            Task Team         Jiang Ru,Ms. Anisi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       09-May-2016                          Estimated   30-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GEN02                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Persistent Organic Pollutants
                            Area:
                            Sector(s):        Central government administration (80%), Other Mining and Extractive
                                              Industries (10%), Other industry (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (70%), Pollution management and
                                              environmental health (30%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      16.00           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                8.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                       8.00
                              Total                                                                                  16.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         The PDOs are to (a) develop a national strategy on mercury and related action plans, and (b) improve
                         China's mercury management capacity and readiness to implement this strategy in selected provinces.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will support the development of the National mercury strategy, including sectoral action
                         plans, and to develop provincial level action plans in three provinces and implement pilot activities in
                         these provinces. The sectors to be considered cover all the elements addressed by the Minamata
                         Convention of relevance to China, and will build on the other existing projects referred to above
                         where appropriate. The three pilot provinces of Guizhou, Hunan, and Shaanxi, are selected as they
                         are the provinces with the significant mercury issues, including mines still in operation or with valid
                         permits, number of smelters in operation, and number of downstream mercury-related businesses.
                         The sectoral action plans will largely be developed as stand-alone documents that will also be
                         brought together and synthesized into the National Strategy. The provincial action plans will be
                         developed in parallel, with experiences and lessons learned in developing the Provincial Strategies
                         captured in real time and directly informing the development of the National Strategy. The final
                         provincial action plans will follow the framework of the National Strategy.

                         Component 1: Development of National Strategy and Sectoral and Provincial Action Plans. This
                         component aims at delivering the National Mercury Strategy and related Action Plans. MEP/FECO
                         supported by consultants will work closely with industry associations and other stakeholders to
                         deliver analytical reports and proposals constituting the various elements of a comprehensive
                         national strategy. FECO will be responsible for oversight and ultimate quality control, and for
                         seeking stakeholders➢❨ participation and buy-in throughout, and bringing the strategy forward to
                         MEP for broader adoption. Specific Sectoral action plans will be developed to address issues related
                         to: (a) mercury supply sources and trade; (b) mercury added products; (c) industrial point sources
                         (coal-fired power plants, coal-fired industrial boilers, municipal solid waste and hospital waste,
                         cement clinker production, and non-ferrous metals smelting); and (d) waste and contaminated sites.
                         In some instances, and similar to other jurisdictions, it is envisaged that proposed mercury controls
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and guidelines would not be specific to mercury, but rather would be integrated in multi-pollutant
                         control texts and provisions. Cross-cutting elements will address (a) environment and health
                         monitoring; (b) monitoring and management of social impacts; and (c) research and development.
                         The sector action plans will be developed first and feed into the National Strategy. The project will
                         support stakeholder engagement activities throughout and also development of specific action plans
                         in the pilot provinces of Guizhou, Hunan and Shaanxi.

                         Component 2: Capacity Building for Mercury Management and Risk Assessment. This component
                         aims at building capacity for mercury management in provincial DEPs from the three pilot provinces,
                         and other stakeholders through targeted activities, and to establish some of the building blocks that
                         will support China➢❨ s long-term environmentally sound management of mercury, and mercury
                         reduction and phase-out efforts. Activities will include: (a) the development of a National Mercury
                         Management Information System (MIS) to include data on mercury production, supply, use, releases,
                         emissions, import and export, and allow for tracking of mercury material flow and support to
                         decision making, tested first in the pilot Provinces; (b) assessment of mercury management and
                         recycling technologies and practices in relevant sectors; (c) upgrade of the provincial environmental
                         analytical laboratory of each participating province, and training and inter-laboratory comparison and
                         knowledge sharing; and (d) environmental risk assessment of selected mercury contaminated sites to
                         improve understanding of the scope and impact of mercury contamination in China. Activities to be
                         carried out in the pilot Provinces are responsive to their strong interests to utilize funding and


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         international expertise under the Project to identify and address their mercury priorities.
                         Implementation experiences and lessons will be collected, analyzed and disseminated through
                         activities in the pilot provinces and nationwide.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Project Management. This component will support FECO to properly manage project
                         implementation in collaboration with the provincial DEPs of the pilot province.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This is a national capacity building project to be implemented in Beijing and the three project
                         provinces. It will support China develop a sound national strategy on mercury management to
                         comply with the international environmental treaty on mercury, and the three project provinces
                         (Guizhou, Shannxi and Hunan) to develop their action plans on mercury in the context of the national
                         strategy. The project will not support any physical investments nor preparation of feasibility studies
                         and detailed remediation plans. At the site level, the project will support only risk assessment of
                         selected mercury contaminated sites located in the three provinces. It is also expected that the
                         development of a national strategy on sound mercury management will involve policy revisions that
                         may have downstream environmental and social impacts and implications for sites and communities
                         living on and/or close to mercury contaminated areas.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Chongwu Sun (GEN2A)
                         Songling Yao (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            This project will support China to develop a sound
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     national strategy on mercury management to comply with
                                                                    the international environmental treaty on mercury. Its
                                                                    development will be based on international best practices.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Successful implementation of this project will have
                                                                    positive impacts on reducing mercury pollution in the
                                                                    country and globally.

                                                                    This capacity building project will not support any
                                                                    physical investments but its output - the national strategy
                                                                    and action plans - will cover the full ranges of mercury
                                                                    issues (e.g. recommendations to mercury waste disposal
                                                                    and contaminated site management). It is recognized that
                                                                    downstream activities outside of and after this project to
                                                                    support the implementation of the strategy and action
                                                                    plans developed under the project may generate
                                                                    significant adverse environmental and social impacts. For
                                                                    example, rehabilitation and remediation of highly
                                                                    contaminated sites could pose significant occupational,
                                                                    environment and health risk to workers and communities
                                                                    from site preparation to hauling and disposal of
                                                                    contaminated media. Best practices will be promoted to
                                                                    manage environment and social risk and will be



                                                                     Page 3 of 10
                                                        embedded in the various TORs. Based on the fact that
                                                        there will be no physical investments and direct physical
                                                        impacts from the project, the environmental category of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        this project is proposed as Category B.

                                                        An environmental and social management framework
                                                        (ESMF) has been prepared during project preparation
                                                        based on international best practices and the Bank's
                                                        safeguard policies, including the Bank's Environmental,
                                                        Health and Safety Guidelines. During project
                                                        implementation, relevant elements of the ESMF will be
                                                        incorporated into TORs to ensure that environment and
                                                        social safeguard policy requirements are incorporated into
                                                        various assessments and development of strategies and
                                                        plans and the screening process for downstream
                                                        investments. The ESMF has been disclosed locally and at
                                                        InfoShop.

                                                        Preparation of this project has, and implementation of this
                                                        project will continue to, consulted broadly among
                                                        mercury related industrial associations, concerned
                                                        national and local government agencies, and interested
                                                        research institutes and universities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    This capacity building project will not include on-site
                         4.04                           investments and is not expected to have any impacts on
                                                        natural habitats. The ESMF includes procedures for
                                                        screening for impacts on natural habitats and requirements
                                                        of this policy will be integrated into the various TORs and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        the screening process for downstream investments beyond
                                                        the life of the project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    This capacity building project is not expected to have any
                                                        impacts on forestry. The ESMF includes procedures for
                                                        screening for impacts on forestry and the requirements of
                                                        this policy will be integrated into the various TORs and
                                                        the screening process for downstream investments beyond
                                                        the life of the project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     This capacity building project will not have any activities
                                                        related to pest management.
                         Physical Cultural        No    This capacity building project is not expected to have any
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           impacts on physical cultural resources. The ESMF
                                                        includes procedures for screening for impacts on physical
                                                        cultural resources, and the requirements of this policy will
                                                        be integrated into the various TORs and the screening
                                                        process for downstream investments beyond the life of the
                                                        project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The project aims to improve China's capacity to address



                                                         Page 4 of 10
                            BP 4.10                                   its mercury issues, reducing pollution and benefiting the
                                                                      population. As such, it will have positive social impacts,
                                                                      including on ethnic minorities living on or near mercury
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      contaminated areas.

                                                                      Component 1 activities on the development of the
                                                                      national strategy and action plans on sound mercury
                                                                      management will involve policy revisions that may have
                                                                      downstream impacts on ethnic minority communities
                                                                      living on and/or close to mercury contaminated areas. In
                                                                      addition, Component 2 activities on risk assessment at
                                                                      mercury contaminated sites may also have similar
                                                                      downstream impacts on ethnic minorities. As such, OP
                                                                      4.10, Indigenous Peoples, is triggered. To mitigate such
                                                                      potential impacts on ethnic minorities, relevant elements
                                                                      of the ESMF will be incorporated into TORs of various
                                                                      strategic development activities and site assessment tasks
                                                                      during project implementation.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              The national strategy to be developed under Component 1
                            OP/BP 4.12                                may require policy revisions that affect land use or
                                                                      resettlement issues at mercury contaminated sites. In
                                                                      addition, Component 2 activities on risk assessment at
                                                                      mercury contaminated sites may propose future
                                                                      remediation actions that may have similar impacts on
                                                                      local land uses. In addition, As such, OP 4.12, Involuntary
                                                                      Resettlement, is triggered. To mitigate such potential
                                                                      downstream risks on involuntary resettlement, elements of
                                                                      the ESMF will be incorporated into TORs of various
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      strategic development activities and the site assessment
                                                                      tasks during project implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            This capacity building project will not involve dams.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No            This project will not involve any international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No            This project will not involve any disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed project development objective is to improve China's capacity to address its mercury
                              issues in priority sectors under the Minamata Convention on Mercury. The project will not support
                              any physical investments nor preparation of feasibility studies and detailed remediation plans. As
                              such it will have no direct physical impacts. Successful implementation of this project will have
                              positive social and environment impacts on reducing mercury pollution in China and globally.


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                           Based on the nature of the project, i.e., technical assistance and capacity building, as well as
                           environmental screening conducted in project preparation, this project was classified as a Category
                           B project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project in the long term will generate positive social and environmental benefits by helping
                           China develop a sound national strategy and sectoral and provincial action plans to properly
                           manage its mercury pollution issues. It is expected that, however, implementation of downstream
                           activities outside of and after this project proposed by the strategy and action plans may generate
                           adverse environmental and social impacts. Specifically, Component 1 activities on the
                           development of the national strategy and sectoral and provincial action plans and Component 2
                           activities on risk assessment at some pilot sites (on mercury mines and industrial facilities) will
                           have downstream implications. For example, downstream activities to remediate mercury
                           contaminated sites may generate occupational, environment and community health impacts
                           associated with site preparation of contaminated sites, hauling and disposal of contaminated
                           materials. There may even be potential retrenchment of workers, livelihood and economic
                           displacement, and even physical displacement if people have to be moved out from contaminated
                           sites as part of site remediation and restoration. If presented, ethnic minorities may be affected by
                           such downstream activities. Such impacts need to properly screened and assessed during project
                           implementation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           NA.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environment:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The project aims to have significant benefits to provide technical assistance supporting China to
                           development a sound national strategy on mercury management to comply with international
                           environmental convention on mercury. Successful implementation of this project will have
                           positive impacts on reducing mercury pollution in China and globally. Given its nature, the project
                           triggers the Bank's OP4.01 Environmental Assessment. As a management tool, an Environmental
                           and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared with following key aspects:

                           (a)      Legal and policy requirements, both national and the World Bank's, to be taken into
                           account in the implementation of the project;
                           (b)      A framework and procedures for environmental and social assessment and related policies
                           and regulation requirements regarding management of mercury contaminated sites;
                           (c)      Guidelines on integrating environmental and social safeguard requirements into TORs and
                           goods procurement documents during project implementation;
                           (d)      Guidelines on screening, assessing and managing environmental and social impacts from
                           downstream investments resulting from the implementation of the national strategy and plans
                           developed under the project;
                           (e)      Public and stakeholder consultation and information disclosure requirements; and
                           (f)      Institutional arrangements for carrying out such site assessment and management
                           activities.



                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                         Social

                         The national strategy and sectoral and provincial action plans developed under Component 1 may
Public Disclosure Copy




                         contain actions with downstream social impacts on the general public and vulnerable groups
                         including ethnic minorities. In addition, site level activities under Component 2 may lead to
                         downstream actions that may affect the land use status of these sites. As such, the project triggers
                         the Bank's OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement and OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples.

                         Safeguard Measures
                         To ensure proper identification and mitigation of such social impacts, the ESMF has been prepared
                         to guide project implementation with the content noted above. Relevant elements of the ESMF
                         will be incorporated into TORs of the project sponsored technical assistance activities during
                         project implementation to ensure that environment and social safeguard policy requirements are
                         incorporated into various assessments and development of strategies and plans and the screening
                         process for downstream investments.

                         In addition, the ESMF provides guidance on how social and environmental safeguard issues
                         should be identified and addressed for downstream activities beyond the scope of this project. The
                         ESMF also includes a grievance redress mechanism and monitoring and institutional
                         arrangements.

                         The ESMF was disclosed locally through the MEP/FECO website on April 13, 2016 and at
                         InfoShop on March 29, 2016.

                         Beyond these safeguard instruments, the national strategy will include an Action Plan for
                         Environmental and Health Monitoring taking full consideration of the specific situations of
                         women and children, and including costs and funding sources available to further improve the
                         country➢❨ s monitoring over mercury contamination impacts. In addition, the national strategy
                         will include a Social Management Strategy based on the ESMF and applicable laws and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regulations, taking due consideration of possible elements specific to ethnic minorities, and
                         possible gender differentiated impact. The social management strategy will assess the specific and
                         collective impact of the various measures and action plans proposed by the National Mercury
                         Strategy, and will outline mitigation measures in line with the ESMF. In doing so, the project will
                         fully incorporate environmental and social safeguards issues into the national strategy.

                         Client Capacity
                         The PMO of this project ➢❨ Foreign Economic Cooperation Office (FECO) of the Ministry of
                         Environmental Protection (MEP) - has managed a large number of Bank projects and developed
                         extensive experiences on the preparation and implementation of Bank safeguards instruments. For
                         this project, all safeguard activities are fully budgeted with project financing. FECO will perform
                         internal monitoring through a dedicated staff who will also manage the implementation of ESMF.
                         The staff will help FECO screen safeguard risks of site level activities and ensure the
                         incorporation of the relevant elements of the ESMF be fully incorporated in TORs for strategy
                         development and site assessment. The staff will also collect and compile M&E information, and
                         prepare two monitoring reports annually. Through this M&E and daily supervision exercises,
                         FECO will supervise implementation progress and process of the ESMF. FECO will strengthen
                         institutional arrangements for ESMF implementation in all project activities and organize training
                         as needed to improve capacity of relevant stakeholders.


                                                                   Page 7 of 10
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During project preparation, information of this project and the ESMF have been disclosed in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Chinese on the MEP/FECO website for public review. In addition, mercury related industrial
                           associations have been consulted on proposed project activities. These engagements will be
                           maintained during project implementation to ensure project outcomes are endorsed by all
                           stakeholders. All grievances and their resolutions will be recorded and reported during project
                           implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Mar-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            13-Apr-2016
                           Comments: ESMF disclosed on a MEP website.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            13-Apr-2016
                           Comments: ESMF disclosed on a MEP website.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            13-Apr-2016
                           Comments: ESMF disclosed on a MEP website.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?



                                                                    Page 8 of 10
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jiang Ru,Ms. Anisi
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Surhid P. Gautam (SA)    Date: 27-Jun-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)   Date: 29-Jun-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               Page 10 of 10
