                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                       Report No.:ISDSA21135
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                28-Mar-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed              28-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                         Mexico                       Project ID:             P154998
    Project Name:                    Mexico City Water Supply Service Improvement Project (P154998)
    Task Team Leader(s):             Charles Delfieux
    Estimated Appraisal              17-Mar-2017                  Estimated Board         06-Jul-2017
    Date:                                                         Date:
    Managing Unit:                   GWA04                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                      Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           50.00                         Total Bank Financing: 40.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                    Amount
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                    40.00
    Local Govts. (Prov., District, City) of Borrowing Country                                                10.00
    Total                                                                                                    50.00
    Environmental Category:          B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?      No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the quality and efficiency of the water supply service
    in selected areas of Mexico City.
    3. Project Description
    The Program for Water Supply Services of Mexico City. In order to respond to Mexico City’s water challenges,
    the Government of Mexico City (GoCDMX) adopted in 2014 the Program of Sustainability and Management of
    Water Services (Programa de Sustentabilidad y Gestión de los Servicios Hídricos), with the overall objective to
    sustainably meet the needs for drinking water of the City while allowing for the conservation of the water
    resources and the environment. The Program sets the goals, strategies, and actions for an integrated management
    in the provision of water services Mexico City. The first phase of the Program of Sustainability and
    Management of Water Services is embedded into the Program for Water Supply Services of Mexico City
    (Programa Hídrico de la Ciudad de México), whose objectives are to: (i) improve the efficiency and quality of

                                                   Page 1 of 12
the water services; and (ii) increase the production capacity in targeted areas.

The World Bank’s financial and technical assistance has been requested to support the achievement of the first
objective of the Program for Water Supply Services of Mexico City. The strategy of the GoCDMX and
SACMEX to achieve this objective consists of designing and implementing contracts linking payments to
delivery of results, hereafter referred to as Performance-Based Contracts (PBCs), to primarily: (i) reduce
leakage; and (ii) provide a continuous water supply. Those PBCs will be implemented by Contractors selected
through a transparent and competitive process. The PBCs are also expected to improve the financial
performance of SACMEX over the long run.

The Project will support the implementation of the first PBC within selected areas as an initial step towards
city-wide roll out. SACMEX has defined 5 mega-sectors encompassing the 16 administrative Delegations of
Mexico City and has adopted a phased approach to progressively bid and award the PBCs in those 5 mega-
sectors of the City. As a first phase, SACMEX will start implementing the first PBC in selected areas located in
“Mega-sector 3”. This mega-sector has been selected by SACMEX based on the hydraulic, leakage and service
conditions required to achieve the objectives of the PBC. While the Project supports the implementation of the
PBC in the selected areas, SACMEX and Mexico City plan to implement the PBCs in the rest of “Mega-sector
3” and in the remaining 4 mega-sectors as part of a subsequent phase.

Objectives of the PBC. The objectives of the PBC are to improve continuity of supply and reduce NRW through
a mix of leakage reduction and key elements of commercial losses such as illegal connections and consumption,
meter reading errors and incorrect customer categorization. These objectives are built in the Contract’s
compensation scheme.

Description of the PBC. The PBC will be executed by the Contractor in selected areas of “Mega-sector 3” . The
Contract will have a duration of 4.5 years, during which the Contractor will be responsible for the active control
of leakages and of network related commercial losses and for the improvement of water supply distribution. The
Contractor will gradually intervene in the selected areas by progressively establishing District Metered Areas
(DMAs) across the selected areas. The scope of work of the Contractor will also include the planning and
execution of the investments required to achieve the performance targets of the Contract and financed by the
World Bank loan through BANOBRAS. SACMEX will continue being responsible for the delivery of water
supply service in the selected areas. The duration and nature of the PBC will allow introducing new practices
and levels of service into SACMEX.

Component financed by the World Bank loan. The World Bank loan will finance investments in each DMA. All
DMAs are expected to be progressively established within the 4.5 years of the Contract. These investments
include: design, installation or rehabilitation of water mains, valves, pressure and flow measurement devices and
other distribution network accessories; design, installation or rehabilitation of customer water connections
including installation of micro-meters; and leakage repair on water mains and customer connections. This
Component will also finance the supervision of the execution of the above activities.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The Project is located in selected areas of Mexico City. The contract will be executed by the Contractor in
selected areas located in “Mega-sector 3” . These are urbanized areas in Mexico City. The Contractor will be
responsible for the active control of leakages and of network related commercial losses and for the improvement
of water supply distribution. The Contractor will gradually intervene in the selected areas by progressively
establishing District Metered Areas (DMAs) across the selected areas. The scope of work of the Contractor will
also include the planning and execution of the investments required to achieve the performance targets of the
Contract and financed by the World Bank loan through BANOBRAS. SACMEX will continue being


                                                 Page 2 of 12
responsible for the delivery of water supply service in the selected areas.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Diacono Raul Vera Hernandez( GEN04 )
 Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo( GSU04 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes            The Project is proposed to be classified as Category
                                                              B, since the anticipated negative environmental and
                                                              social impacts are relatively limited in scope and
                                                              magnitude, and mitigation measures are fairly
                                                              standard. The potential negative impacts are
                                                              associated with the works executed by the
                                                              Contractor in the selected areas in the Mexico City
                                                              urban environment, which has been highly
                                                              impacted by humans. The activities involve (i)
                                                              active leakage and commercial losses control, and
                                                              (ii) planning and execution of the investments
                                                              required to achieve the targets associated with the
                                                              performance indicators of the Contract reflecting
                                                              the improvement of the efficiency and quality of
                                                              water supply service, and design, installation or
                                                              rehabilitation of water mains, valves, pressure and
                                                              flow measurement devices and other distribution
                                                              network accessories; design, installation or
                                                              rehabilitation of customer water connections
                                                              including installation of micro-meters; and leakage
                                                              repair on water mains and customer connections.
                                                              The Project does not involve any activities
                                                              associated with the upstream water supply (e.g.,
                                                              collection and storage of raw water) or wastewater
                                                              collection and treatment, which remain the
                                                              responsibility of SACMEX. The activities
                                                              envisioned under the Contract do not contemplate
                                                              the expansion of the water supply distribution
                                                              network, just the rehabilitation of existing systems
                                                              in the urban environment, thus no indirect impacts
                                                              are anticipated due to new water supply collection
                                                              or additional wastewater generation beyond existing
                                                              levels.

                                                              Since the specific works of the PBC are not
                                                              presently known, an Environmental, Social, Health
                                                              and Safety Management Framework (ESHSMF)
                                                              has been prepared. The ESHSMF includes a
                                                              screening and assessment procedure to identify,
                                                              assess and manage potential environmental and
                                                              social impacts and risks under the Contract. The


                                                 Page 3 of 12
           ESHSMF addresses SACMEX, the Contractor and
           the beneficiary Delegations. The ESHSMF
           identifies the environmental and social
           requirements for the Contractor, which will be
           included in the bidding documents and in the
           Contract. These will incorporate the principles and
           guidelines of the World Bank Group´s
           Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines and
           the EHS Guidelines on Water and Sanitation.

           The creation and use of the ESHSMF should avoid
           and mitigate potential environmental impacts due to
           the execution of works to replace the distribution
           network and to rehabilitate and repair leaks, such as
           the following:

           -Environmental impacts: Impact to the atmosphere
           by generation of dust, gases and noise derived from
           the movement of materials and operation of
           machinery and equipment on public roads; and the
           increase in emissions of cars in transit through the
           work area due to deviations and increased traffic.
           Impact on soil and water due to improper handling
           of construction waste and hazardous waste, in
           public road storage and transportation and final
           disposal. Possible damage to soil, air and water due
           to leaks or fires resulting from damage to existing
           facilities in the work area such as Gas Natural,
           Pemex and CFE.

           -Safety hazards to workers: Damage to health and
           physical integrity derived from road accidents due
           to lack of road signs and safety signs on the site;
           And lack of personal protective equipment and of
           training on the use of tools and equipment.

           Consequently, the ESHSMF establishes also the
           need for mitigation measures related mainly to the
           control of construction waste, control of emissions
           of gases, dust and noise, road signs, safety signs on
           the site and with the supervision and training for the
           proper use of personal protective equipment,
           adequate storage of chemicals and safe procedures
           in the vicinity of gas pipelines, electric power and
           other at risk.

           Measures to mitigate social impacts are related to
           the planned information to the community in each
           affected area, the consultation on them and the
           attention and follow up of complaints and


Page 4 of 12
                                                     suggestions of the users.

                                                     The ESHSMF includes references to works
                                                     contracts for the Contractor and defines the
                                                     responsibilities under execution and supervision
                                                     related to such contracts.

                                                     The ESHSMF also includes relevant aspects such as
                                                     a subproject selection procedure and assignment of
                                                     environmental requirements according to their level
                                                     of environmental risk, in accordance with the
                                                     applicable national environmental, health and
                                                     occupational safety legislation; and in accordance
                                                     with the World Bank Group's EHS guidelines (the
                                                     Guidelines can be found here:
                                                     www.ifc.org/ehsguidelines); and propose a set of
                                                     good environmental and safety and hygiene
                                                     practices that should be applied in all cases; In
                                                     addition to the establishment of an efficient Project-
                                                     level Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) for
                                                     the development of the works.

                                                     During project implementation, and based on the
                                                     “screening and assessment procedures,” the
                                                     ESHSMF will set out requirements and provide
                                                     guidance for the preparation, and
                                                     disclosure/consultation, of site-specific ESHSMS.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No          This policy should not be triggered since the Project
                                                     will not involve any conversion of natural habitats
                                                     or critical natural habitats, as the anticipated works
                                                     involve existing infrastructure in urban
                                                     environments.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No          This policy should not be triggered since the Project
                                                     will not affect forests or forest dependent
                                                     communities, and it will not involve changes in the
                                                     management of forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No          This policy should not be triggered since the Project
                                                     will not involve the purchase or use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes         While the Project does not contemplate significant
                                                     impacts on physical cultural resources, there is
                                                     some potential for encountering physical cultural
                                                     resources during the rehabilitation of existing water
                                                     supply distribution networks in Mexico City. The
                                                     ESHSMF includes procedures to address chance
                                                     findings of archeological and cultural resources
                                                     during construction works supported by the Project.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            Yes         Screening of Indigenous Peoples in the Project area
                                                     concluded that there are two different groups of

                                          Page 5 of 12
                                                  Indigenous Peoples in the Project area: (a) The
                                                  Pueblos Originarios that descend from Nahua
                                                  Peoples settled in Mexico City in pre-Hispanic
                                                  times, and (b) the Indigenous Groups migrating
                                                  from other States to Mexico City through times. It
                                                  is expected that few groups if any reside in the
                                                  Project area. In any case, an Indigenous Peoples
                                                  Planning Framework (IPPF) was elaborated by the
                                                  implementing agency and consulted with the
                                                  Consejo de Pueblos y Barrios Originarios (under
                                                  the Secretariat of Interior). During the pre-
                                                  investment phase of the Project, screening of
                                                  Indigenous peoples and their specific coordinates
                                                  within each sector will take place. The Framework
                                                  incorporates a strategy to consult with them,
                                                  include them and ensure they benefit from the
                                                  Project in an equitable manner. Indigenous Peoples
                                                  Plans will be prepared by SACMEX in coordination
                                                  with the Delegations and the Consejo de Pueblos
                                                  Originarios, and submitted to the Bank.

                                                  The IPPF was consulted with the Consejo de
                                                  Pueblos y Barrios Originarios on January 16 and
                                                  February 3, 2017, and with the Delegations on
                                                  January 11, and February 15, 2017.

                                                  The framework has been disseminated through the
                                                  webpages of SACMEX on March 24, 2017, and the
                                                  World Bank external website on March 27, 2017.
                                                  An ex-post evaluation will take place with a sample
                                                  of Indigenous Peoples affected.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes         The civil works will include replacement of water
                                                  mains that are exclusively under the street, thus
                                                  affecting street vendors located on sidewalks. As
                                                  site-specific locations are not identified during
                                                  Project preparation, a Resettlement Policy
                                                  Framework was elaborated by SACMEX instead of
                                                  a Plan. The Framework includes a census (with cut-
                                                  of-date) and screening of eligible vendors who have
                                                  authorization of the Delegation to use the sites.
                                                  Mobile street vendors (there are hundreds of them)
                                                  move around in their activity, and avoid streets
                                                  where public works take place. These vendors will
                                                  not be offered relocation because they are mobile
                                                  and they do not have authorization from the
                                                  Delegation. Eligible vendors will be temporarily
                                                  relocated to a contiguous location within the same
                                                  Delegation (few streets away) while the works take
                                                  place, and they will be returned back to their
                                                  original sites upon completion of the works. In

                                       Page 6 of 12
                                                                  order to minimize complaints, the Citizen
                                                                  Engagement Units of the Delegations will ensure
                                                                  that the receiving sites offer the same or better
                                                                  conditions as to not affect their incomes, social or
                                                                  business networking. The Social Management
                                                                  strategy of the Project will ensure the vendors are
                                                                  well informed, and agreeable to the temporary
                                                                  relocation. This strategy is common practice in the
                                                                  Delegations.
                                                                  The Resettlement Policy Framework was consulted
                                                                  with the Delegations on January 11 and February
                                                                  15, 2017; and with the Consejo de Pueblos y
                                                                  Barrios Originarios on January 16 and February 3,
                                                                  2017.

                                                                  The Resettlement Policy Framework was
                                                                  disseminated through the webpages of SACMEX
                                                                  on March 24, 2017, and on the World Bank external
                                                                  website on March 27, 2017.

                                                                  An ex-post evaluation will take place with a sample
                                                                  of street vendors affected.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No             This policy should not be triggered since the Project
                                                                  will not support the construction or rehabilitation of
                                                                  dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  This policy should not be triggered, as the Project
    7.50                                                          will not finance activities involving the use or
                                                                  potential pollution of international waterways.
                                                                  There is no international water body in the Project
                                                                  area.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No             This policy should not be triggered, as the Project
                                                                  will not finance activities in disputed areas as
                                                                  defined in the policy.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    Environmental:
    There will be no large scale, significant and / or irreversible impacts. In addition, specific measures will be
    applied to avoid or mitigate potential impacts. The Project will be re-evaluated before its start to obtain the
    corresponding environmental authorization, according to the applicable local legislation. The development of an
    ESSHMS by the Contractor, approved by SACMEX, ensures compliance with applicable environmental
    legislation, and the reduction of impacts, which in themselves will not be significant.

    Social:
    There are no significant or irreversible social impacts related to the Project, as the civil works include the
    replacement or improvement of the water systems located along the streets. SACMEX and the Delegations’

                                                    Page 7 of 12
social management strategies include a communications scheme of information dissemination and project
socialization with the inhabitants in the sector to be affected through town meetings, banners, social media,
brochures, and dissemination of information through the Local Committees (including Comites de Pueblos
Originarios), explaining the nature of the civil works and the benefits (potable water 24/7) that will be brought
to the community. Also, typically, contractors do not block the entire street, but half of it, to allow for traffic.

However, street vendors using the sidewalks in the sectors to be intervened will be temporarily affected, as they
will not be able to continue with their activities during the construction period (days or weeks) on their sites.
Therefore, a Resettlement Policy Framework was elaborated by the Implementing Agency to ensure all vendors
eligible for relocation (those who have previous authorization by the Delegation) that are included in the census
(with a cut-off-date) are consulted, well-informed, and temporarily relocated to agreeable sites, to not affect
their income, or business. Relocation time may vary between few days to several weeks at a time.

The Indigenous groups (Pueblos Originarios, and Comunidades Indígenas Residentes en Ciudad de México) will
benefit from the Project as much as the rest of the population in the sectors intervened. However, the OP.4.10 is
triggered and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework was elaborated by SACMEX in consultation with the
Consejo de Pueblos y Barrios Originarios to ensure Indigenous Peoples that may live in the sectors being
affected, part-take of project benefits, participate in Project activities including training (i.e. Cultura del Agua),
and that their views are taken into consideration for the Project in their respective areas.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Environmental:
There will be no indirect and / or long-term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the Project area. It is
expected that environmental compliance of SACMEX and of the Contractor will improve, thanks to the
enrichment of environmental management. It is possible that different activities financed by the Project (not
related to one another) can be executed in the same area of intervention of this Project, that is, in the same street.

Social:
There are no long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the Project area. On the contrary, there are
long-term benefits to all the beneficiaries of the Project, as water mains that will be replaced are up to 70 years
old. It is expected that the water quality will improve, people will enjoy potable water 24/7, the health of the
population will improve, women will need to spend less time fetching and collecting water, children and the
elderly will greatly benefit from the Project.

The relocation of street vendors is commonly done by Delegations and will be temporary. There are
approximately 100,000 vendors in Mexico City, and the Delegations manage and relocate them as needed.
Nevertheless, the Resettlement Policy Framework sets provisions to ensure vendors are relocated in the least
stressful way, to nearby locations agreeable with the vendors, and they will be returned to their original sites
after works are finished. SACMEX is responsible for carrying out Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) to be
submitted to the Bank. Also, an ex-post evaluation is planned with a sample of vendors affected in different
sectors of the delegations.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Environmental:
The Project has been developed in detail to minimize the environmental impacts derived, which in all cases are
not significant. Additionally, complying with the environmental assessment rated by the authority and the
application of local environmental legislation will be sufficient to reduce environmental impacts to the
minimum.

Social:

                                                  Page 8 of 12
All alternatives to avoid or minimize adverse impacts have been carefully considered. Through the Citizen
Engagement scheme, and through addressing the vendors relocation issues, and making sure that Indigenous
Peoples are not only not affected adversely but they part-take of the benefits of potable water 24/7, the Project is
confident to have selected the best possible alternatives to promote benefits and minimize potential negative
impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental:
To meet OP 4.01, SACMEX developed an ESSHMF and also contractually commits the Contractor to the
development of an ESSHMS. The activities of the Project will be re-evaluated before its start to obtain the
corresponding environmental authorization, according to the applicable local legislation.
SACMEX has a lot of experience in the development of ToR and work contacts and the supervision of its
compliance. In particular, it has environmental specialists responsible for compliance with applicable
environmental legislation. All this will allow to manage the ESSHMF in an appropriate way.

Social:
The OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement is triggered due to the fact that the civil works to be executed will entail
the temporary relocation of street vendors settled on sidewalks. Site-specific locations are not identified during
Project preparation. Therefore, SACMEX prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework aligned with the Mexican
norms and OP4.12 to ensure street vendors are temporarily relocated to contiguous locations within the same
Delegation, not to affect their income or access to other services, and returned back to their original place. There
is certainty that neither land acquisition nor permanent involuntary resettlement of social units or economic
activities will be needed for this project, as the works include exclusively water system replacements under the
street pavement.

The OP4.10 of Indigenous Peoples is triggered and SACMEX, in consultation with the Consejo de Pueblos y
Barrios Originarios (under the Secretariat of Interior), prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
(IPPF) that includes the Indigenous peoples residing in Mexico City before the Spanish Conquest, and those that
have migrated from other States and settled in neighborhoods of Mexico City. The IPPF was consulted with the
Consejo de Pueblos y Barrios Originarios on January 16 and February 3, 2017. Results of the consultations can
be found in the IPPF.

Citizen Engagement. The ESHSMF includes the citizen engagement process coordinated by the Institutional
Strengthening Directorate of SACMEX, and the Delegations. It also includes a gender scheme, the Grievance
and Redress Mechanism, and the social safeguards.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environmental:
The consultation was addressed to the Delegations of Mexico City that have an informed vision of the City and
are directly linked to the population benefiting from the Project, due to the daily development of the reception of
citizen demands related to the operation of the water distribution infrastructure. The Delegations are responsible
for their attention or, where appropriate, their channeling to the appropriate instances. In addition, they know in
details the problems of operation of the water distribution system of the City and the execution of the
corresponding preventive and corrective maintenance works and have developed specific strategies to carry out
the mentioned activities with the least possible social and environmental impact, by carrying out own works or
by supporting SACMEX in carrying out the works under its responsibility.
The draft Environmental Management Framework was sent to the delegations on 9 and 10 February and their
comments were received between 14 and 16 of February. The comments received related to the participation of
the Delegations in the operation of the distribution system and confirmed that they have the human and

                                                 Page 9 of 12
   logistical resources to support what is described in the Management Framework.

   Social:
   For the implementation of OP/BP 4.10, the key stakeholders are the Pueblos and Barrios Originarios and the
   Indigenous Communities in CDMX that are represented by the Consejo de Pueblos y Barrios Originarios.
   Activities carried out by the latter are coordinated with their respective Delegations. The Participation of Civil
   Engagement Units of the Delegations are key players as they will carry out the Social Management scheme,
   which will identify the presence or not of Pueblos or Barrios Originarios in every sector that will be intervened
   with public works. The Institutional Strengthening Directorate of SACMEX is responsible for overseeing the
   compliance of the IPPF and the RPF in the event it is triggered.

   The main results of the consultation are:
   (a) The Consejo approved the IPPF;
   (b) The Consejo corroborated that they know the Pueblos and Barrios Originarios, in fact, they have mapped
   them and are in the process of creating an Atlas with their exact locations, for which, they are carrying out
   consultations with Pueblos in CDMX.
   (c) The Consejo reiterated that they will be available to join the Delegation and SACMEX for the meeting with
   the Pueblo for the elaboration of the IPP (Action Plan).
   (d) The Delegations corroborated that they know for the most-part where Pueblos Originarios live. Some have
   lost their land, or sold it to mestizos.
   (e) The Indigenous Institutions that the Delegations know come from Colonial times (Mayordomías and
   Cofradías). Celebrations of Patron Saints are important for Indigenous Peoples.
   (f) The Delegations agree with the IPPF and do not see any issues in implementing it as the policy is triggered,
   with the support of the Consejo.

   For the implementation of OP/BP4.12, the key stakeholders are the street vendors, the Participation or Civil
   Engagement Units of the Delegations, and SACMEX. The Delegations have a record of the street vendors
   allowed and the Delegations are responsible for socializing the Project and disseminating the procedures for
   temporary relocation of vendors. During the planning stages and before the civil works start, the street vendors
   are contacted by the Delegations, and informed about the Project benefits, and the temporary relocation of their
   vending carts to contiguous streets in such a way that they will not lose access to income or social/business
   networking activities. Relocation of street vendors is common a practice in the Delegations to allow for
   construction of public works.

   The results of the consultations were added to the RPF. Some of the results are:
   (a) The Delegations agreed with the RPF and its procedure to identify, inform, assist in temporary mobilization,
   and return them back to original spots.
   (b) The Delegation Benito Juarez and the other 3 delegations indicated they have a lot of experience relocating
   street vendors for their own safety.
   (c) The Delegations indicated that the street vendors have leaders to represent them, organize them. In the event
   of mobilization, the Delegation will need to coordinate with the Leaders.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              16-Jan-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           27-Mar-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




                                                   Page 10 of 12
    Mexico                                                                  24-Mar-2017
 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Jan-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Mar-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Mexico                                                                     24-Mar-2017
 Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      16-Jan-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Mar-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHINDCTRY




 Mexico                                                                     24-Mar-2017
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [X]   No []         NA        []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [X]   No []         NA        []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes [X]   No []         NA        []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [X]   No []         NA        []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [X]   No []         NA        []
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning                  Yes [X]   No []         NA        []
 Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation
 with affected Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]   No []         NA        []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design   Yes []    No []         NA        [X]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Practice Manager?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [X]   No []         NA        []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]   No []         NA        []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?

                                                Page 11 of 12
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes [X]     No []       TBD   []

          100 Provide estimated number of people to be affected
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []      No [X]      TBD   []
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                  Name:Charles Delfieux
         Approved By:
         Practice Manager/Manager:             Name: Rita E. Cestti (PMGR)          Date: 28-Mar-2017




                                                          Page 12 of 12
