INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12750
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Armenia                     Project ID:  P150327
Project Name: Local Economy and Infrastructure Development Project (P150327)
Task Team       Ahmed A. R. Eiweida,Zaruhi Tokhmakhyan
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Nov-2015                 Estimated    22-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU09                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Sub-national government administration (20%), SME Finance (10%), Rural and
Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (35%), General water, sani tation and flood
protection sector (35%)
Theme(s):       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%), Cultural Heritage (20%),
Urban Economic Development (25%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
Delivery (35%), Infrastructure services for private sector development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:      68.75             Total Bank Financing:    55.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                     13.75
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        55.00
Total                                                                        68.75
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve infrastructure services and institutional capacity
for increased tourism contribution to local economy in selected regions of Armenia.
Page 1 of 11


﻿3. Project Description
Local Economy and Infrastructure Development Project (LEIDP) will support the increased
contribution of tourism to the local economies of selected regions. It will do so by implementing an
integrated approach entailing infrastructure investment, urban regeneration, cultural heritage
restoration, skills development, tourism product development and diversification, and attracting
private sector investment. The Project will help create and build tourism circuits that connect
multiple sites in the selected regions. Together, these activities will help attract more visitors to the
a         regions and increasing their spending and this will, in turn, fuel job creation and local economic
growth. LEIDP comprises three components:
Component 1: Urban Regeneration and Tourism Circuit Development (US$48 million):
1.1 Heritage Hub Regeneration
This sub-component includes restoration of public infrastructure, building facades, public spaces,
museums, roads and water. Based on product development and marketing potential, infrastructure
needs, and Marz employment needs, the destination hubs with the greatest potential to be catalysts
for tourism development along the Corridor are: Areni, Goris, and Meghri.
1.2 Tourism Circuits Development
This sub-component will finance implementation of an integrated approach to cultural heritage site
upgrading and improved management in the most attractive cultural heritage sites located along the
main tourism circuit/route in Southern and Northern Corridors. These activities include: a) site
management plans, b) construction of tourism facilities at each attraction, such as information
centers, caf6s, rest areas, public toilets, parking, c) preservation of cultural heritage monuments,
museums, etc., and improving the Southern Corridor access roads. Based on the ESW, the following
spokes were selected for enhancement of tourism circuit: Garni (temple and gorge), Geghard
Monastery, Khor Virap Monastery, Areni cave, Mozrov cave, Yeghegis, Shaki waterfall, Karahunge,
and Khndzoresk. Two World Heritage Sites in the Northern Corridor, Haghpat and Sanahin, will also
be restored and developed.
1.3 Public-Private Infrastructure (PPI)
This sub-component will finance selected public sector investments in municipal or regional
infrastructure which will benefit the selected community as a whole and will lead to increased
medium-size private sector investments along the corridors. To encourage private sector investments
in the region, this component is to support a selected number of private sector entities which show
interest in and capacity to invest along the Corridors in the tourism sectors or in agro-processing, but
seek complementary public infrastructure necessary to make their investments viable (e.g., public
facilities within vicinity of the investments, road/sidewalk, water/sanitation, communications, etc.).
They would be subject to screening by a selection committee and there will be appropriate conditions
tied to that. Selection of private sector investments will be based on transparent and competitive
processes. The support offered will include streamlined business startup procedures and provisions of
the public infrastructure mentioned above.
Component 2: Institutional Development (US$7 million):
Capacity Building: Enhancing the institutional capacity and performance of the Development
Foundation of Armenia and other tourism and cultural heritage entities (local and regional) to carry
out the following activities: destination management and promotion, marketing and promotion;
Page 2 of 11


﻿workforce development with specific gender focus; construction supervision and sustainable site
management of cultural heritage; and performance monitoring and evaluation activities with specific
gender disaggregation.
O
U         Business Advisory Services for SME Development: Private investors, particularly those investing in
small and medium enterprises, shall be incentivized through the provision of various incentive
schemes such as public infrastructure and streamlined business start-up procedures. This component
can help encourage local communities to start up, or expand, small and medium enterprises. This
component will provide business advisory services for SME development - for example, to guest-
houses, restaurants, handicraft workshops, organic food and beverage firms; so that SMEs can access
micro-credit financing resources available at the Ministry of Economy.
Component 3: Contingent Emergency Response (US$0 million):
Contingent Emergency Response (CER) component is introduced with no allocated funds. Having
this component is a precautionary measure that would allow the Government of Armenia and the
Bank to quickly channel the loan financing for emergency recovery efforts following an adverse
natural or man-made disaster and declaration by the Government of Armenia of a State of Disaster
and Emergency. The built-in CER with an associated new disbursement category would allow the
Government of Armenia to request the Bank to reallocate loan proceeds to this sub-component
towards an emergency response for the municipal infrastructure sector within the five regions
targeted by this Project in the Borrower's territory. The new disbursement category will have a zero
dollar allocation, with 100 percent IBRD financing.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Kotayq, Ararat, Lori, Vayots Dzor and Syuniq Marzes of Armenia
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
0        Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
Michelle P. Rebosio Calderon (GSURR)
Sophia V. Georgieva (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The Project carries investment components in support to
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                infrastructure development and therefore triggers OP/BP
4.01. None of the Project-supported activities are
expected to have significant, long term, or irreversible
impacts on the natural environment, therefore the Project
is classified as environmental Category B. An
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) is prepared to guide site-specific safeguards work
including sub-project screening, classification,
environmental and social review is a format
commensurate to identified risks, environmental and
social management planning, and monitoring.
Page 3 of 11


﻿A Strategic Environmental, Cultural Heritage and Social
Assessment (SECHSA) of the five regional socio-
economic development plans and of the South Corridor
Tourism Development Strategy is being carried out to
assess their strengths and weaknesses and to analyze how
the Project design and implementation may be shaped by
and/or contribute to their materialization. The SECHSA
examines the likely long term and cumulative impacts of
the Project and possible future developments that may be
induced by the Project implementation. Presentations
summarizing key findings and recommendations of
SECHSA were made to focus groups within the regions
targeted by the Project, followed by consultations and
feedback from stakeholders. Draft final SECHSA report
will be disclosed and public comments will be solicited
prior to finalization of this document.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          OP/BP 4.04 is triggered to ensure that any interventions
4.04                                  into the protected areas and the areas in their immediate
vicinity are fully harmonized and supportive of the habitat
conservation goals. Site-specific Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) reports, Environmental
and Social Reviews (ESRs) and/or Environmental and
Social Management Plans (ESMPs) to be developed based
on the screening and determination criteria set forth in
ESMF for individual sub-projects related to protected
areas will explain how the above principles are integrated
into the design and implementation arrangements of each
sub-project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural        Yes          The Project aims at attracting increased flow of tourists to
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  the natural and cultural heritage sites selected for Project
interventions. This would imply improvement of access to
these sites and development of tourist infrastructure
around them. Implementation of civil works in and around
the historical monuments and other elements of the
cultural heritage carries a risk of affecting their aesthetic
value, accidental damage, or gradual deterioration. These
risks will be specified and their mitigation measures laid
out in sub-project specific ESMPs.
OP/BP 4.11 is triggered to ensure that no element of
cultural heritage is affected negatively neither during
construction nor operation of the infrastructure provided
Page 4 of 11


﻿under the project. Site-specific ESIA reports or ESRs will
cover the aspect of cultural heritage preservation and
carry relevant mitigation measures, as well as
arrangements for monitoring their implementation. More
specifically, ESIA reports or ESRs will point out a need
for obtaining clearance to enter a cultural heritage site
from and/or agree design of works with the Ministry of
Culture; spell out methodology for performing any works
that physically touch the protected monuments; note a
need to prepare a site management plan; and give other
specific guidance as required case-by-case.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          While the specific sites and nature of civil works under
OP/BP 4.12                            the Project are not yet known, land use and permanent or
temporary land acquisition is expected. A Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared. The RPF
provides detailed guidance and criteria for the
development of investment-specific Resettlement Action
Plans (RAPs), which would to be prepared and
implemented prior to commencement of works at a site
where resettlement or land acquisition was required. The
RPF will be included as an annex to the Project
Operations Manual.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No
4.37
Projects on International  Yes        The Project covers Ararat, Kotayk, Lori, Syunik and
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  Vayots Dzor administrative regions (marzes) of Armenia
and may finance works on water supply, sanitation and
irrigation infrastructure. Because large part of the
Project's target area falls within the watershed of river
Araks - an international waterway as defined by OP/BP
7.50 - there is a likelihood that the Project may finance
infrastructure works on water supply, sanitation, and/or
irrigation schemes abstracting and/or discharging water an
international waterway and the Policy is therefore
triggered. Because large part of the Project's target area
falls within the watershed of river Araks - an international
waterway as defined by OP/BP 7.50, there is likelihood
that the Project may finance infrastructure works on water
supply, sanitation, and/or irrigation schemes abstracting
and/or discharging water an international waterway.
However new construction of water-related infrastructure
will be excluded from the Project funding and extensions
to the existing schemes will be such as to not exceed the
original scheme, change its nature or so alter or expand its
Page 5 of 11


﻿scope and extent as to make it appear a new or different
scheme. Investments for rehabilitation of the existing
schemes that are aimed at cutting water loss due to
seepage, leaks, overflows, and malfunctioning of
hydraulic structures will be supported on the condition
that no alteration of water intake and/or discharge results
from the Project implementation. These rules of
screening, selecting and approving investment proposals
are included in the ESMF and will also be part of the
Project Operations Manual.
Because the interventions are unlikely to: (i) adversely
change the quality or quantity of water flows to the other
riparians; and (ii) be affected by the other riparians'
possible water use, communication to the riparians is
deemed unnecessary and exception from the notification
requirement is being sought from the regional Vice
President.
Projects in Disputed     No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
LEIDP will finance infrastructure rehabilitation and development sub-projects that according to
the OP/BP 4.01 are classified as environmental Category B. No large scale significant adverse
environmental impacts are expected from the Project implementation. The majority of the civil
works to be supported under the LEIDP are typical and carry environmental implications which
are common for small to medium scale infrastructure projects. The Armenia Territorial
Development Fund (ATDF), which is the Project implementing entity, is well experienced in
preparing and applying environmental mitigation measures to such type of civil works and is
currently boosting its institutional capacity to manage social implications of the Project
implementation. One challenge during conduct of regular works towards upgrading the existing
small to medium scale urban infrastructure will be the immediate proximity of some work sites to
the cultural and natural heritage sites. Such interventions carry additional risks of damaging
monuments in case the design and methodological approaches used are unfit for conservation of
the historical and aesthetic value of these sites or if tourist visitation of these sites, increased as a
result of the Project interventions, is not managed in a sustainable manner. The design of LEIDP
carries reliable mechanism for screening, raising, and addressing the above risks in both the
review and the implementation phases of sub-projects.
PPI initiatives will be screened for eligibility according to pre-set criteria and if selected, the
Project-supported activities will be subject to regular sub-project cycle. Sub-projects under
Component 3 of the Project are likely to be prepared and implemented following short track, due
to urgency of interventions. Therefore, simplified stand-alone Environmental and Social
Management Plans will be developed for mitigating risks of their implementation.
Page 6 of 11


﻿While no physical relocation of households is expected, land acquisition (of private land or
reallocation of public, community, Church-owned lands) is likely to occur in many sub-projects.
Project activities may also have temporary or permanent impact on livelihoods and small
O
businesses located in the project area. Investments may involve construction and/or rehabilitation
of infrastructure related to the local economy and tourism development, such as parks and
recreation areas, visitor centers, rest stops, parking lots, lifeline roads or small bridges,
marketplace spaces, among others. Most sub-projects are likely to be implemented on public or
church-owned land (in the cases of vicinity to historic churches or monasteries); however some
privately-owned land may also be affected. Sub-project designs may include proposals to demolish
old or unused structures on the sub-project site.
Due to these possible impacts, careful screening will be undertaken, based on provisions specified
in the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF). Site-specific safeguard screening reports, environmental and social
management documents, and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), if applicable, will be completed
for each sub-project.
The national vision for development is formulated in the Armenia Development Strategy covering
a decade ending 2025. The five regional administrative units (marzes) of Armenia targeted by
LEIDP have respective regional socio-economic development plans produced by the Government
of Armenia. South Corridor Tourism Destination Strategy is also developed covering Kotayk,
Ararat, Vayots Dzor and Syunik marzes. For the purpose of maximizing positive impacts of
LEIDP interventions, its preparation includes a Strategic Environmental, Cultural Heritage, and
Social Assessment (SECHSA) of these plans and strategy in or der to explore what long-term and
cumulative impacts are expected from their implementation and how LEIDP can assist in
achieving the goals of these strategies as well as help to fill their gaps and help to address
weaknesses. The SECHSA also explores the ways for citizens' engagement in the implementation
of regional and tourism development strategies and LEIDP, mechanisms to help communities
benefit from benefit from Project activities, and processes to address the needs of women,
minorities, and disadvantaged.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Project implementation will have long term positive impact on the economic growth in the target
regions of Armenia through increased tourist visitation, improved infrastructure and utilities in the
selected municipalities, and enhanced business activity. This is expected to improve the livelihood
of the residents of municipalities selected for direct interventions as well as to potentially raise
incomes of communities residing in the proximity to the cultural monuments and natural assets.
Indirect long term risks of the stimulated visitation and investment nearby and around the heritage
sites is the possibility of exceeding their carrying capacity as well as potential loss of the aesthetic
value of the landscapes surrounding tourist sites due to over-development in their buffer zones.
This risk may be effectively mitigation through the development of heritage site management
plans that are based on the estimation of the carrying capacity of these sites. Potential indirect
impacts may also include disruption to pedestrians, disruption to visitors of tourist sites while
rehabilitation and construction activities are ongoing in the sub-project area, and/or disruption of
small businesses in the area. Any impacts on property, assets, or livelihoods - including profits of
small business - will require the preparation of a RAP or an abbreviated RAP, and will be
Page 7 of 11


﻿compensated as per provisions stated in the RPF. Additional disruptions to the community will be
addressed in site-specific ESMPs, as described in ESMF.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Alternatives considered for each sub-project to minimize adverse impacts will be described in sub-
project screening forms as per ESMF.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Project implementing entity produced the ESMF which carries detailed guidance on handling
environmental, cultural, and social aspects of the Project implementation. ESMF will be included
into the Operations Manual (OM) of the Project. To handle the anticipated temporary impacts of
sub-projects and to address other possible resettlement issues, ATDF also developed the RPF.
ESMF and RPF will be used for carrying out investment-specific Environmental and Social
Impact Assessments (ESIAs), developing Environmental and Social Reviews (ESRs), stand-alone
Environmental and Social Management Plans ESMPs, whichever applicable; and RAPs, as
required. The local municipalities will be responsible for the implementation of RAPs with the
assistance of the ATDF prior to commencement of construction at the individual project sites,
while implementation of ESMPs at the construction phase will be enforced on works contractors
directly by the ATDF.
ATDF will be the implementing agency responsible for safeguard compliance and monitoring.
ATDF has a long standing experience implementing World Bank-financed projects. Safeguards
performance under those projects varies between moderately satisfactory and satisfactory. No
environmental or social damage has been recorded during implementation of any activity under
ATDF's portfolio supported by the World Bank. Shortfalls revealed through implementation
support included individual cases of erroneous environmental classification of sub-projects and
sub-standard quality of record keeping on the outcomes of environmental monitoring. At the same
time, due to the nature of previously implemented projects, ATDF has limited experience and staff
capacity for undertaking land acquisition and resettlement. ATDF has contracted a social
safeguard specialist in October 2015. The World Bank has recommended that ATDF considers all
available opportunities for professional training to build capacity of newly recruited social
specialist. It has also recommended that Project Agreement includes a provision that ATDF will
retain a social safeguard specialist with qualifications acceptable to the Bank throughout the
duration of the Project. ATDF shall retain an environmental consultant's position currently filled
by an experienced specialist and recruit a second person as soon as feasible, because of
considerably increasing volume of safeguards work facing ATDF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include: local authorities, residents of the wider Project area (e.g. in
communities where sub-project works will be conducted as well as neighboring communities who
may also benefit from the project and be affected by temporary disruptions related to the Project),
the Apostolic Church of Armenia (as owner of some of the lands on which project activities will
be conducted), NGOs, and business associations.
ATDF disclosed draft final ESMF and RPF in Armenian and English languages and held a
stakeholder consultation meeting to discuss these documents. They will be re-disclosed with the
minutes of consultation process attached. Public consultations are ongoing as part of SECHSA
Page 8 of 11


﻿process. The final draft SECHSA report will be disclosed and discussed alike ESMF and RPF. In
each sub-project site, public consultations (promotional meetings) will be held in the respective
community at the design stage of sub-project activities. These consultations will present
preliminary sub-project design, solicit feedback on the proposed activities, explain environmental
O
and social safeguard provisions to be followed, and share details on the grievance redress
mechanism of the Project. Once ESMP and RAP (where applicable) are drafted, they will be
disclosed in both languages and also be shared in public consultations at the sub-project
community. All consultations will be advertised through the web site of ATDF and local media as
suitable under local circumstances. Consultations will be open to all participants including local
authorities, NGOs, and community residents in the broader sub-project area. ATDF, through its
social specialist, will pro-actively facilitate participation of potentially affected persons, women,
and vulnerable groups in public consultations.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              27-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Nov-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Armenia                                                  30-Oct-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              27-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Nov-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Armenia                                                  30-Oct-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Page 9 of 11


﻿Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?          Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [  ]
O
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [X] No [   ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
o          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                Yes [  ]  No [   ]   NA [  ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Page 10 of 1I


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida,Zaruhi Tokhmakhyan
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                   Date: 05-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: David N. Sislen (PMGR)               Date: 05-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


