                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC18234

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Rwanda                          Project ID:      P160268
                            Project Name:        Rwanda Pilot Program for Climate Resilience
                            Team Leader(s):      Stephen Ling
                            Estimated Date       01-Sep-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEN01                           Lending          IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.5                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Climate Investment Funds                                                                      1.5
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to prepare a Strategic Program for Climate
                           Resilience (SPCR) and associated investment plan, and to establish an enabling environment that
                           allows for the mainstreaming of climate resilience into development planning and implementation.
                           C. Project Description
                           This grant will provide Technical Assistance in three phases, represented as Components 1-3.

                           Component 1: Identification of a programmatic approach towards mainstreaming climate resilience,
                           and preparation of the SPCR and accompanying strategic investment plan.

                           Identification of priority investment areas will include:
                           (i) Analysis of existing knowledge on climate to better understand the vulnerability and potential
                           gaps of the action areas identified in the GGCRS and INDC, and deepen the understanding of climate
                           risks to other key economic sectors. Special attention will be given to gender, poverty, and sectors,
                           sub-regions, communities, or natural resources that are at risk. The analysis will include an initial
                           economic analysis based on existing local and representative international comparators.
                           (ii) Detailed gap analysis of existing structures, policies, and coordination functions for each of the
                           action areas identified in the GGCRS and INDC, by taking account of existing initiatives and
                         programs financed by development partners. Proven models for intervention exist in many of these
                         areas, but there is a need to improve the detailed understanding of the bio-physical impacts of climate
                         (including future climate change), data and coordination systems across sectors, as well as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assessment of the total financing gaps and associated economic and social returns. Specific focus will
                         be given to watershed protection and management through comprehensive landscape interventions,
                         and climate information, knowledge and disaster risk management systems to support the
                         mainstreaming of climate change preparedness. Synergies with existing programs financed by the
                         World Bank and other Development Partners, as well as CIF programs such as the Scaling-up
                         Renewable Energy Program (SREP) and the Forest Investment Program (FIP) will be ensured.

                         (iii) Stakeholder consultation to share key messages generated by the gap analyses, and agree on
                         priority investment areas. Mapping of stakeholders (including identification of government ministries
                         and agencies, development partners, civil society, research and academic institutions, beneficiaries,
                         and private sector) will aid design of the process. A private sector round table to explore the potential
                         role the private sector can play in climate risk mitigation and transfer in Rwanda (e.g., agriculture
                         insurance for poor farmers).

                         Institutional analysis of current government structures to facilitate the mainstreaming of climate
                         resilience will identify (i) cross-ministerial and sectoral institutional gaps and overlaps, (ii) resource
                         needs, and (iii) communication gaps that may hinder awareness raising efforts; and clarify
                         institutional mandates for climate finance management. Finally, the analysis will identify capacity
                         building needs, including initial efforts that can be conducted with PPCR preparation funds.

                         M&E analysis and design will integrate climate resilience indicators into the national M&E
                         framework. Existing programmatic PPCR indicators will be taken into account.


                         Component 2. Identification of appropriate funding sources and packaging of investments
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This will provide a facility to tailor proposed investments to the application requirements of specific
                         financiers. It will be based on discussions with government and development partners to identify the
                         most appropriate financing sources (e.g., national budget, climate/environment trust funds, MDBs,
                         bilateral funding sources, private finance) and ways of parceling the investments.


                         Component 3. Initial capacity building and climate information systems investments

                         Based on the needs identified in the gap and institutional analysis, initial capacity building will
                         support SPCR delivery. This may include (i) establishing institutional structures proposed under the
                         GGCRS, such as the Technical Coordinating Committee, develop a communication strategy; (ii)
                         building capacity for monitoring and evaluating national climate resilience indicators identified in
                         key national strategies; (iii) building capacity for integrating international best practices in climate
                         adaptation; and (iv) raising awareness in proposed investment areas by focusing on specific
                         stakeholders including vulnerable communities and populations most affected by climate variability
                         and change in the country, NGOs, civil society, and academia.

                         The existing knowledge base on climate impact and adaptation will be strengthened through impact
                         modeling, vulnerability assessments and mapping in specific sectors. This will extend existing
                         vulnerability analyses through modeling of future climate change, and economic analysis to
                           strengthen investment rationales and detailed designs. Indicative priorities include: (i) climate
                           impacts on agriculture including crop yields (especially strategic crops), crop suitability zones,
                           livestock stress, and appropriate Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and agronomic practices; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           hydrological and water balance projections under future climate including indicative storage and
                           infrastructure investment needs, and flood and landslide modeling (including potentially LIDAR
                           survey of critical urban areas); and (iii) climate change impacts on hydropower, roads and other key
                           infrastructure.

                           Meteo Rwanda (RMA) and the Rwanda Natural Resources Authority (RNRA) share national
                           responsibilities for providing weather, climate and hydrological information services. They are
                           already receiving support to modernize from the Bank's LAFREC project, RMA from a FONERWA
                           grant supported by the UK Met Office, and RNRA from a Dutch-funded integrated water resources
                           management program. This SPCR preparation grant will supplement these investments, providing
                           complementary support to ensure RMA and RNRA can provide user-responsive information services
                           across timescales (from historic observations to short-term forecasting and seasonal/decadal
                           predictions).

                           Component 4. Project management

                           Technical coordination of the Phase 1 activities under the PPCR, financial management and
                           procurement, M&E, and presentation/dissemination of the Phase 1 outcomes.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           This recipient-executed grant is expected to provide technical assistance by mainly financing
                           consultant services, workshops and seminars, travel and transportation, and operating costs. Physical
                           investments or construction will not be financed under this grant.

                           The proposed project activities are therefore not expected to trigger any safeguard policies, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Category C is recommended as safeguard category.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The borrower has implemented similar Bank-financed operations in a manner acceptable to the
                           World Bank, and complies with its member countries' safeguard policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Helen Z. Shahriari (GSU07)
                           Svetlana Khvostova (GEN01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              This recipient-executed grant is expected to
                           BP 4.01                                              provide technical assistance by mainly financing
                                                                                consultant services, equipment, workshops and
                                                                                seminars, travel and transportation, and
                                                                                operating costs. Physical investments or
                                                                                construction will not be financed under this
                                                                                grant. Category C is recommended as safeguard
                                                                                             category, as the proposed project activities are
                                                                                             posing low or no safeguard risk and are not
                                                                                             expected to trigger any specific safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             policies.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No                   The project's activities are not expected to
                                                                                             adversely affect any natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No                   The project is not expected to cause any adverse
                                                                                             impacts on forests.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No                   The project is not expected to manage pests, or
                                                                                             support a strategy that promotes the use of
                                                                                             biological or environmental control methods
                                                                                             and reduces reliance on synthetic chemical
                                                                                             pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No                   The project is not expected to affect physical
                           BP 4.11                                                           cultural resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No                   The project activities are not expected to have
                                                                                             any adverse impacts on indigenous peoples.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No                   The project is not expected to cause any
                           4.12                                                              involuntary resettlement.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   The project is not expected to include any dam
                                                                                             construction or development.
                           Projects on International        No                               The project is not expected to be implemented
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              on international waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The project is not expected to be implemented
                           7.60                                                              in any disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Stephen Ling
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                                         Date: 01-Sep-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                                           Date: 02-Sep-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
