INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSC13010
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Turkey                     Project ID:   P155510
Project Name:     Renewable Energy Integration Technical Assistance Project
Team Leader(s): Mikul Bhatia
Estimated Date    30-Sep-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GEEO3                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        General energy sector (100%)
Theme(s):         Climate change (50%), Other environment and natural resources management
(50%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   1                    Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Clean Technology Fund                                                             1
O
-       Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
0
B. Project Development Objective(s)
To assist Turkey in enhancing capacity for transmission planning as well as grid management in
anticipation of increased share of renewable energy in the generation mix.
C. Project Description
The project involves capacity enhancement in the areas of : (i) Indicative Generation and
Transmission Scenario Planning, and (ii) SCADA Based Smart-grid systems.
Component -1: Capacity enhancement for transmission planning under a range of indicative
generationcapacity expansion scenarios.
This component would strengthen the transmission planning capabilities at TEIAS in wake of
increased penetration of renewable energy - especially wind energy over the medium-long term. The
component involves four steps:
a) Early training on transmission planning tools: This training would provide an update on the


﻿various generation and transmission planning tools available in the market, while providing deeper
insights into some tools as an example. The training would be conducted at the World Bank office in
Washington DC.
O
U       b) Review of planning issues and planning tools: Reviewing the methodology, available planning
tools, data requirements and training needs for comprehensive development of planning capacity in
.2      TEIAS.
c) Procurement of planning tool: Select and procure a new planning tool that best meets TEAIS's
requirements.
d) Training of TEIAS staff for using the new planning tools: Create capacity within TEIAS to handle
the new planning tools as well as strengthen their capability to address the more complex planning
aspects arising from the introduction of greater amounts of renewable energy, as well as private
sector led capacity increase. The training activity would also support the use of the planning tool for
the next planning cycle and design studies to develop a renewable energy integration strategy for the
100 GW capacity augmentation plan. This design studies would be an in-house activity conducted by
TEIAS staff. It would involve:
(i) Development of planning datasets based on available and new data
(ii) Specification of planning problem and scenarios
(iii) Planning analysis for Renewable Energy Integration for 20 GW Wind Scenario and for Long
Term Generation Augmentation in Turkey.
Component-2: Capacity enhancement for SCADA based Smart grid system.
Availability and performance of SCADA/EMS System have crucial importance for reliable operation
of Turkish Power System. Upgrade of SCADA/EMS system at TEIAS has been taken-up under the
APL-6 and REIP projects. It involves upgrade of the hardware and software of 11 existing control
centers under the TEIAS SCADA/EMS System and addition of new functions to this system.
Strengthening of the SCADA/EMS System as a result of this upgrade project shall also improve
capability for integration of large amount of renewable energy resources to Turkish Power System.
For effective use of the SCADA and EMS functionalities, TEIAS operators and engineers who are in
a charge of operation of the Turkish Power System, especially new staff needs training. TEIAS
engineers who are responsible for technical support to operational staff and first level maintenance of
SCADA/EMS System hardware and software need training. Moreover, works related to extension of
the system such as preparation of databases and displays for addition of new substations and power
plants to this system as well as works related modifications of the databases and displays as well as
in parallel with the changes and additions to the power system shall be responsibility of TEIAS
engineers. Training courses shall also cover new functions such as functions related to Wind Energy
Desk for wind energy resources to be implemented at NCC and ENCC within the scope of this
project.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project would be conducted broadly at the TEIAS office in Ankara, Turkey.
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


﻿F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Esra Arikan (GENDR)
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (OPSOR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies            Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/  No            The technical assistance actviity is focused on
BP 4.01                                     improved planning capabilities to address power
system security concerns arising from increased
share of renewable energy (wind) in the
generation mix. It involves the selection and
procurement of new software tools for assessing
different generation capacity scenarios and for
transmission planning based on the same. It
would involve traning on the software,
including technical support to TEIAS staff
during one exercise of assessing generation
capacity scenarios and transmission planning
analysis. While the direct linkages of this
activity with environmental and social
safeguards are limited, the safeguard specialists
on the Bank team would engage with the TEIAS
on the broader safeguards aspects involved in
the transmission planning process.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No
Pest Management OP 4.09       No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):       Name: Mikul Bhatia


﻿Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:       Name: Qays Hamad (SA)                                 Date: 30-May-2015
Practice Manager/         Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)                         Date: 01-Jun-2015
U        Manager:
S        1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
U


