INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA16534
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jan-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        South Eastern Europe and          ID:P145048
Country: Balkans                Project ID:     504
Balkans
Project Name: West Balkans Drina River Basin Management (P 145048)
Task Team       Anna Cestari
Leader(s):
Estimated       01-Feb-2016                Estimated    09-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO9                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal       International waters
Area:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Other environment and natural resources management (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       8.74            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                           4.37
Special Climate Change Fund                                                 4.37
Total                                                                       8.74
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
The objective of the Project is to improve mechanisms and capacity of the three counties to plan and
Page 1 of 10


﻿manage the transboundary Drina river basin, incorporating climate change adaptation.
3. Project Description
The following activities are envisaged under the project:
0
Component 1: Multi-state Cooperation in Transboundary DRB Management
Sub-component 1A: Development of an agreed SAP mainstreaming transboundary IWRM and
a climate change adaptation in national planning. This sub-component will contribute to improve
planning by supporting the following activities:
*      preparation of a DRB SAP including in-depth Transboundary Diagnostic and Analysis
(TDA);
*      preparation of hydraulic and hydrological models for the DRB with multi-purpose reservoir
operation optimization;
*      preparation of a DRB water resources study; and
*      preparation of a DRB floating waste study.
Sub-component 1 B: Institutional development and capacity building. This sub- component will
support cooperative transboundary management of DRB through the following activities:
*      establishment of a DTF;
*      capacity building and development of inter-ministerial committees at national and regional
level; and
*      Support consultation among the three countries on national and local policy and regulatory
reforms to facilitate transboundary DRB management, especially on national parks.
*      Participation in GEF IW:LEARN activities
Component 2: Pilot investments for Integrated DRB Management including Flood and Drought
Management and Climate Change Resilience
Sub-component 2A: Strengthening capacity for climate change resilience. This component will
support better preparedness for threats resulting from floods and droughts while making optimal use
of the environmental DRB assets and engaging local communities. The Project will support the
following activities:
S*     strengthening of four national Hydro-Meteorological Services (HMSs) through equip-ment
including hydro-meteorological observing system;
*      development of protocols for data exchange;
*      public awareness campaigns;
*      small grants program; and
*      support of flood and drought preparedness measures and enhanced early warning system.
Sub-component 2B: Pilot investments for climate change resilience. This sub-component will
support pilot project investments that reduce negative climate change impacts in all three riparian
countries. These pilots include improved flood protection measures along the river and its tributaries,
improved ground water resources monitoring, improved hydro-meteorological forecasting, soil
condition monitoring and establishment of reliable rating curves.
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring & Evaluation
This component supports overall project management, monitoring & evaluation (M&E) and studies.
Activities will include: financing of expenditures associated with overall project imple-mentation
Page 2 of 10


﻿costs including incremental costs associated with the Project Management Team (PMT) and the
Project Implementation Units (PIUs); project supervision and implementation assistance consultants;
and implementation of management plans and strategic stu-dies including an Environmental
Management Plan, a Social Management Plan, a Gender Action Plan, and strategic studies. It will
O
U         especially support the Regional PMT which will be responsible for overall project coordination at
regional (transboundary) level, and the Project Implementation Teams (PITs) in each of the riparian
countries, the latter being responsible for the day-to-day implementation of project activities at
national level.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented at the national level in all three riparian countries as it aims to
strengthen the capacity of the governments (including both entities of BiH) for sustainable
cooperative management of the transboundary Drina basin. Under Component 2 the project will
support pilot investments for climate change resilience including small infrastructure and small on-
the-grounds investments by local communities in each country within the Drina basin territory.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Jelena Lukic (GSUGL)
Nikola Ille (GENO3)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The Project is categorized as an environmental category B
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               project in accordance with OP 4.01 Environmental
Assessment. To assess the possible environmental impacts
of the Project and to set up principles, rules, guidelines
and procedures for preparation of site-specific plans to
mitigate the possible negative environmental impacts of
the proposed investments, an ESMF has been prepared,
Q)                                            approved and disclosed in three beneficiary' countries.
No major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated
under the Project. The overall WBDRBM Project impacts
are expected to be positive as project actions will
strengthen at regional, national and local level the
preparedness of countries of DRB for potential and
possible climate change impacts on DRB water resource
use and management as well as mitigate or prevent risks
posed by climate change to environment, humans and
settlements.
The ESMF identified environmental issues, linked to
construction and other civil works, to be managed during
implementation. Pollution and/or damage to environment
that may occur in the phase of construction, rehabilitation
and/or repair are temporary in their nature and of low to
medium impact in their scope and can be adequately
mitigated through the application of standard safety
measures and best practices in engineering design,
application of the code of good construction practice, and
Page 3 of 10


﻿regular operation and maintenance. These measures can
broadly be categorized as belonging to the general health
and safety measures for population and construction staff;
traffic safety measures; gas and emission control
measures; dust and noise control measures; waste
management measures; general construction-site control
measures; physical protection of natural and culture
heritage sites.
Based upon the general screening procedures, assessment
of environmental impacts related to sub-projects and
generic EMP, as elaborated in ESMF, contract-specific
EMP(s) will be fully developed for each specific sub-
project during the Project implementation. The EMPs will
than become an integral part of the bidding documents
and resulting contracts, and will be implemented by the
respective contractors. The screening process will take
into account the environmental requirements of legislation
in force at the national level and the World Bank
procedures. As such, the activities which would require
full EIA (corresponding to World Bank Category A
project) will not be eligible for funding under the Project.
For Component 1, a Strategic Environmental and Social
Assessment (SESA) will be prepared during project
implementation, with the summary ToR being disclosed
as a part of the ESMF. The SESA would include an initial
assessment of a long-list of proposed investments, with
the objective of highlighting any negative environmental
and/or social impacts and excluding the ones with
potentially significant negative impacts from further
consideration and investments.
S Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes        The policy is triggered since planned activities will
4.04                                 finance studies encompassing research works and
analyses at the Drina Basin level, which includes several
national parks, nature reserves and areas under UNESCO
protection.
Investments to be further considered and developed under
the Project will take into account the existing and future
protected areas within the DRB. For the investments
within, adjacent or in the vicinity of protected areas,
resulting site-specific EMPs, will include the mitigation
measures to ensure there will be no negative impacts
resulting from the implementation of proposed
investments. Investments that will have significant or
permanent negative impacts on protected natural habitats
will not be considered for implementation under the
Project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes          The policy is triggered since planned activities will
Page 4 of 10


﻿finance studies encompassing research works and
analyses at the Drina Basin level, where the significant
areas under forests exist. The existence of these areas will
have to be taken into account in order to avoid, minimize
and/or mitigate potentially negative impacts.
Investments under the Project that will be within, adjacent
or in the vicinity of natural forests will be considered only
in case they will have no significant or permanent
negative impacts on natural forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural        Yes          Although the identified sub-projects do not directly
Resources OP/BP 4.11                   encroach on any of the known cultural and historic
protected areas, the activities related to work in the river-
bed of Drina River and its tributaries, particularly in urban
areas, may lead to chance finds. Appropriate provisions
for archaeology investigation and/or rescue are proposed
in ESMF and generic EMP. These provisions will be
included in site-specific contracts for civil works during
the Project implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            The project will not fund any activities that may result in
BP 4.10                                displacement of indigenous people or affect their
livelihood.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          It is not expected that the project would require land
OP/BP 4.12                             acquisition or physical relocation. However, it cannot be
excluded ex ante that the project will not fund activities
that may result in land acquisition, or affect the
livelihoods of the population. OP 4.12 has been
precautionary triggered. According to currently available
data, project activities will be carried out on land owned
by municipalities or other public bodies. Potential impacts
may include temporary restriction of access to piece of
property, and potential removal of trees or structures (eg.
fences).
Three separate Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs)
have been prepared for BH, SRB, and MNE. Once the
specific impacts become known, the RPF will guide the
preparation of site-specific Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) where applicable. Sub-projects financed through
the provision of grants will be screened to ensure
minimum impact on private property.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           The Project will not fund the activities that are related to
4.37                                  the existing dams and reservoirs.
Projects on International  Yes         The proposed project will provide a number of
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   investments that will target improved water resource
management in the Drina River Basin which is part of the
Page 5 of 10


﻿Sava Basin. The Sava's riparian countries as well the
Sava River Basin Commission have been informed about
the Project through BH Ministry of Foreign Trade and
Economic Relations. Up to January 18, 2016 - no
comments nor objections have been received.
Projects in Disputed   No           No interventions will be undertaken in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
At this stage, it is not expected that the project would cause any significant land acquisition or
physical displacement. It is expected that any potential land impacts would be limited in scope and
duration, such as temporary restriction to the property during construction works, tree removal or
small structure removal (eg. fences).
No major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated under the Project. The overall WBDRBM
Project impacts are expected to be positive as project actions will strengthen at regional, national
and local level the preparedness of countries of DRB for potential and possible climate change
impacts on DRB water resource use and management as well as mitigate or prevent risks posed by
climate change to environment, humans and settlements.
The ESMF identified environmental issues, linked to construction and other civil works, to be
managed during implementation. Pollution and/or damage to environment that may occur in the
phase of construction, rehabilitation and/or repair are temporary in their nature and of low to
medium impact in their scope and can be adequately mitigated through the application of standard
safety measures and best practices in engineering design, application of the code of good
construction practice, and regular operation and maintenance. These measures can broadly be
categorized as belonging to the general health and safety measures for population and construction
staff; traffic safety measures; gas and emission control measures; dust and noise control measures;
waste management measures; general construction-site control measures; physical protection of
natural and culture heritage sites.
Based upon the general screening procedures, assessment of environmental impacts related to sub-
projects and generic EMP (as elaborated in ESMF) contract-specific EMP(s) will be fully
developed for each specific sub-project during the Project implementation. The EMPs will than
become an integral part of the bidding documents and resulting contracts, and will be implemented
by the respective contractors. The screening process will take into account the environmental
requirements of legislation in force at the national level and the World Bank procedures. As such,
the activities which would require full EIA (corresponding to World Bank Category A project)
will not be eligible for funding under the Project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The Project will have a long-term positive impacts through the strengthened cooperation and
coordination among relevant authorities in DRB, more efficient and integrated water resource
management in DRB, improved hydro-meteorological data collection, analysis and dissemination,
improved solid waste collection and waste water management, and improved local stakeholder
engagement and awareness on climate change.
Page 6 of 10


﻿For Component 1, a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) will be prepared
during project implementation, which would include an initial assessment of a long-list of
proposed investments, with the objective of highlighting any negative environmental and/or social
impacts and excluding the ones with potentially significant negative impacts from further
O
consideration and investments.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
O
impacts.
There is no feasible alternative to creation of long-term planning strategy for the Drina River
Basin. In absence of a medium and long-term planning, and with continuation of implementation
of segmented, single-sector development plans, and without increased cooperation between the
riparian countries - there is a significant probability that negative impacts of single-sector
development measures will materialize soon and on an increased scale.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrowers prepared three separate RPFs as guiding instruments to address any potential land
acquisition, economic or physical displacement. Sub-projects financed through the provision of
small grants will be screened to ensure minimum impact on private property.
The Borrower prepared and disclosed a separate ESMF, which include generic EMPs for selected
investments. Based upon the general screening procedures, assessment of environmental impacts
related to sub-projects and generic EMP, contract-specific EMP(s) will be fully developed for each
specific sub-project during the Project implementation. The EMPs will than become an integral
part of the bidding documents and resulting contracts, and will be implemented by the respective
contractors. The screening process will take into account the environmental requirements of
legislation in force at the national level and the World Bank procedures.
The Borrowers have adequate capacity to implement proposed mitigation measures. Implementing
government agencies have previous experiences with implementation of World Bank projects. In
instances where preparation of RAP would be needed, an experienced local consultant has been
identified to assist in preparation and implementation of RAPs.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Draft ESMF and RPFs were disclosed in local languages on the government agencies websites.
In country consultations on draft ESMF and RPFs will be carried out between January 18th and
19th 2016 in Niksic (Montenegro), Bajina Basta (Serbia) and Zvornik (BiH) in form of local
public meetings.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              21-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           22-Dec-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 7 of 10


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Bosnia and Herzegovina                                   19-Jan-2016
Comments:
O
Montenegro                                               18-Jan-2016
Comments:
O
Serbia                                                   18-Jan-2016
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           23-Dec-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Bosnia and Herzegovina                                   19-Jan-2016
Comments:
Montenegro                                               18-Jan-2016
Comments:
Serbia                                                   18-Jan-2016
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
N/A
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Page 8 of 10


﻿OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ]  No [X]    TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ]  No [ X]  NA [  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [    ]
O
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
Page 9 of 10


﻿III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anna Cestari
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)       Date: 25-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


