                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA15710
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Nov-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                              Project ID:    P150288
                            Project Name:      IN: Strengthening Governance and Service Delivery in Karnataka Panchayats
                                               (P150288)
                            Task Team          Farah Zahir
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       05-Jan-2016                           Estimated   10-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GGO18                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Decentralization (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        318.40             Total Bank Financing: 223.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    95.40
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      223.00
                              Total                                                                                      318.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to enhance the ability of Gram Panchayats to manage resources
                           and deliver services prioritized in their development plans in the least developed areas of Karnataka.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed Strengthening Governance and Service Delivery in Karnataka Project would be

                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                         implemented from 2016-22 through an IBRD loan of US$ 223 million with three components largely
                         consistent with the objective of deepening the decentralization process in Karnataka. The
                         components include: (a) Block grants to GPs through a mechanism that provides incentives for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         service delivery, local participation and accountability; (b) Institutional development to strengthen
                         GP capacity to manage resources and deliver services and of civil society to articulate local priorities
                         and provide oversight; and (c) Project management support.

                         Component A- Block Grants to Gram Panchayats (US$ 210.5 million)

                         This component will provide funding for block grants to 2815 GPs which will strengthen their
                         capacity to manage resource, deliver services and enhance their accountability towards the
                         community. It will finance block grants to GPs and fund activities and services listed in GP’s Five
                         Year Perspective Plans and budgets prepared on the basis of participatory processes. The utilization
                         of the block grant will rest on an institutional framework. It will be defined on the basis of
                         “minimum mandatory conditions” to be met by the project GPs and would be revised or updated
                         every two years based on the recent developments and progress made. Furthermore, in order to
                         reward well performing GPs, the block grants will be allocated on the basis of a formula driven basic
                         and incentive grant.

                         Component B - Institutional Development (US$ 10.1 million)

                         This component covers the range of holistic institutional development activities and investments
                         required to ensure the progress towards the PDO. The block grants would be accompanied by a suite
                         of targeted capacity building and technical assistance activities that will strengthen the capacities of
                         the PRI, strengthen monitoring systems and increase awareness among rural people. This component
                         will support the following activities:

                         B.1- Capacity Building of Panchayat Raj Institutions
                         Strengthen the capacity of PRIs to function effectively as local self-government and develop a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         capacity building model to support GPs. It will focus on enabling PRIs to administer participatory
                         planning and budgeting, manage public resources, improve own-source revenue mobilization, revive
                         and build capacities of the defunct standing committees, revisit the roles and responsibilities of the
                         PRI functionaries and upgrade/promote competent staff for efficient monitoring of Project indicators
                         and outcomes.

                         B.2- Community Engagement and Feedback
                         Strengthen participatory processes during the planning, implementation, and maintenance stages of
                         block grant activities.

                         B.3- Information Systems for Evidence Based Decision Making and Enhanced Accountability
                         Strengthen information systems at the GP level to ensure that updated information on service
                         delivery and resource management are available for decision-making and enhancing accountability.

                         Component C – Project Management Support (US$ 2.2 million)

                         This activity would put in place systems at the state level to enable it to oversee, facilitate and
                         manage the PRI system and the project GPs. It includes: Strengthening the Project Monitoring Unit
                         (PMU); Strengthening the Decentralization Analysis Cell (DAC); and Strengthening Abdul Nazeer
                         Sab State Institute for Rural Development (ANSSIRD).

                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be across the state of Karnataka and will cover a total number of 2,815 Gram
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Panchayats, including the “more backward” and the “most backward” taluks. Karnataka is home to a
                         number of communities that belong to scheduled tribes. They are spread over five regions of the
                         state, but are generally concentrated in the coastal and eastern parts, and the region of Malnad.
                         Scheduled tribes remain one of the most backward sections of the state, with low levels of literacy
                         and employment. Most scheduled tribe communities are located in remote areas and have their own
                         unique livelihood patterns, language, culture, dietary habits, and occupations. Participation of
                         scheduled tribes in PRIs also remains poor. Within scheduled tribes, the condition of women is far
                         worse, with majority of them remaining illiterate and without access to economic opportunities, due
                         to lack of skills for productive activities.

                         The physical characteristics of the project area relevant to the safeguard analysis are as follows:
                         •       The majority of the project area is drought affected (70 of 79 taluks were affected by drought
                         in 2011).
                         •       Parts of the project area experience groundwater stress – the groundwater status in 22 taluks
                         has been classified as ‘overexploited’.
                         •       13 of the project taluks have protected areas including national parks, wildlife sanctuaries
                         and tiger reserves.
                         •       7 villages in 2 of the project taluks are located in the ecologically sensitive areas of the
                         Western Ghats.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)
                         Sangeeta Kumari (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental              Yes            The project scope covers a range of activities which will
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     be funded by provision of small grants. These activities
                                                                    include construction of toilets, drains, and village roads.
                                                                    These works, due to their nature, are limited in number
                                                                    and micro-scale, and do not have the potential to cause
                                                                    significant negative environmental impacts. If well
                                                                    designed, executed and managed, these works can have
                                                                    positive impacts on the local environment including on
                                                                    human health (through improved sanitation and improved
                                                                    access to clean water). However, the impacts, though
                                                                    small, will need to be appropriately mitigated to ensure
                                                                    that there is no environmental impact or damage,
                                                                    especially in the ecological hotspots (Ecologically
                                                                    Sensitive Areas in Western Ghats, Over Exploited Zones
                                                                    of Groundwater, areas with water contamination, drought
                                                                    prone areas and coastal areas).
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes            13 of the project taluks have protected areas including
                          4.04                                      national parks, wildlife sanctuaries and tiger reserves. As
                                                                    the project will cover all GPs in the selected taluks, it is


                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                                                        likely that some of the GPs will be in proximity of these
                                                        protected areas. While the small sub-projects will be
                                                        implemented within the villages and are not expected to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        have any adverse impacts on natural habitats, it is
                                                        important to build capacities of the GP functionaries and
                                                        constituency to ensure that the works supported by the
                                                        block grants are environmentally benign and sustainable.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   7 villages in 2 of the project taluks are located in the
                                                        ecologically sensitive areas of the Western Ghats. These
                                                        would be part of the GPs supported by the project. While
                                                        tThe small sub-projects will be implemented within the
                                                        villages and are not expected to haveany adverse impacts
                                                        on the Western Ghat forests, it is important to build
                                                        capacities of the GP functionaries and constituency to
                                                        ensure that the works supported by the block grants are
                                                        environmentally benign and sustainable.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     No pesticides will be utilized or procured under the
                                                        project
                         Physical Cultural        No    The small sub-projects will be implemented within the
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           villages and are not expected to have any impacts on
                                                        cultural property
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The project will be active in areas that contain tribal
                         BP 4.10                        groups and hence this policy is triggered. Both the
                                                        Karnataka Panchayat system and the project include
                                                        various pro-tribal measures. However,considerable work
                                                        still remains to be done on the ground to ensure that basic
                                                        infrastructure and services are provided to all sections of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        the society. There remains challenges and barriers to
                                                        change which are reflected in the lives of tribals and other
                                                        historically disadvantaged sections of the society. A Draft
                                                        Tribal and Disadvantaged Groups Inclusion Plan (TDGIP)
                                                        has been prepared based on the social assessment and
                                                        consultations in the select Gram Panchayats that informs
                                                        the overall design of the project and its component.
                         Involuntary Resettlement No    As was the case in earlier project, there will be no
                         OP/BP 4.12                     involuntary resettlement. Small plots of private land may
                                                        be required for certain small infrastructure sub–projects
                                                        such as check dams, culverts, bore wells, pump houses
                                                        and drains. These will be acquired through voluntary
                                                        donations or purchase, provided they are legally available,
                                                        litigation free and under the legal guidelines of the state of
                                                        Karnataka. As was seen in earlier Karnataka Panchayat
                                                        Strengthening Project, similar approaches were already in
                                                        place for the state’s rural water and sanitation services
                                                        project and these would continue to be adopted for the
                                                        proposed Project. As was the case in KPSP, all voluntary



                                                         Page 4 of 9
                                                                        land transactions will meet the following criteria: i) the
                                                                        land in question will be free of squatters, encroachers or
                                                                        other claims of encumbrances; ii) lands will be chosen (by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        the community) after ensuring site suitability both from
                                                                        an environmental and social perspective; iii) verification
                                                                        of the voluntary nature of land donations in each case; iv)
                                                                        land transfers will be completed–land title will be vested
                                                                        in the GP through registered sale deed or MOU; and v)
                                                                        provision will be made for redress of grievances. Land
                                                                        will be accepted from owners whose holding will be less
                                                                        than the minimum economical viable stipulated size (2.5
                                                                        acres). Any land with disputed title and/or legal or illegal
                                                                        settlements will be excluded from the Project. These
                                                                        measures are reflected in the EMF and negative list of the
                                                                        Project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP         No             The Project is not expected to have any impact on dams.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International    No             The Project will not be implemented in or around
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed         No             The Project will not be implemented in or around disputed
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                            areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The nature and scale of GP works indicate that there is no likelihood of large-scale, significant,
                              irreversible adverse environment impacts. Rather, the works could contribute to positive impact on
                              environment and human health if the infrastructure is well designed and managed in sustainable
                              manner. However, some of the activities undertaken by GPs may have negative impact on local
                              environment by virtue of the location of infrastructure in ecologically sensitive areas, extraction of
                              construction materials from ecologically sensitive areas, improper disposal of wastes, improper
                              use and maintenance of the infrastructural facilities. The nature and scale of works, despite their
                              small size and localized influence and usage, could have negative impacts on local environment by
                              virtue of the location of infrastructure in ecologically sensitive areas, extraction of natural
                              resources for construction, disposal of wastes, issues in use and maintenance of infrastructural
                              facilities. The common environmental issues are related to (i) construction of small village roads
                              and drains; (ii) intra-village water supply facilities such as pipelines, cisterns with faucets and bore
                              wells; and (iii) small buildings.

                              As was the case in KPSP, there will be no involuntary resettlement. Small plots of private land
                              may be required for certain small infrastructure sub–projects such as check dams, culverts, bore
                              wells, pump houses and drains. These will be acquired through voluntary donations or purchase,
                              provided they are legally available, litigation free and under the legal guidelines of the state of
                              Karnataka.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities


                                                                          Page 5 of 9
                          in the project area:
                          The proposed Project is expected, over the long term, to have an overall positive development
                          impact by enhancing the capacity of the Gram Panchayats to deliver services. Moreover, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          process of capacity building will extend to building and maintaining social and environmental
                          management awareness into project investments, which are expected to become further
                          institutionalized for all such activities in the long term.

                          The proposed Project promotes more inclusive development in Karnataka given its geographical
                          focus and its support for mechanisms to address the needs of certain marginal groups in PRI
                          governance. The project beneficiaries include schedules tribes in the project area. Some of the
                          schedules tribes communities have their own unique livelihood patterns, language, culture, dietary
                          habits, and occupations. The schedules tribes are generally more vulnerable and poorer than the
                          general population who live below the poverty line in the same GP area. The social assessment
                          carried out for the project conclude that more than social group of a person, the aspects such as
                          awareness, literacy and capacities which are comparatively lower among schedules tribes
                          particularly women are the main reasons for exclusion from the local development process.

                           The Karnataka Panchayati Raj system and its various mechanisms have in-built provisions which
                           act as positive drivers to address the issues of exclusion, accountability and participation. The
                           planning guidelines, social audit mechanisms, Social Justice Committee and the reservation itself
                           are such mechanisms. Despite the significant work in creating the legislative and regulatory
                           environment, considerable effort remains on the ground to ensure that the basic infrastructure and
                           services are provided to all sections of the society. There remains challenges and barriers to
                           change which are reflected in the lives of tribals and other historically disadvantaged sections of
                           the society. The current project is being designed to build the capacity of Gram Panchayats and to
                           address these barriers and challenges through participatory planning, implementation and
                           supervision.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.

                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Government of OKarnataka has developed an Environmental Management Framework (EMF)
                           which has a 3 pronged implementation plan: (i) Environment Review of the works in the
                           Perspective Plans, Annual Action Plans and Monitoring & Evaluation Audit of implementation of
                           environment guidelines; (ii) Capacity building of project staff and GP functionaries on
                           environment management; and (iii) a special strategy and focused support to GPs in environment
                           hotspots such as - Ecologically Sensitive Areas in Western Ghats, Over Exploited Zones of
                           gGroundwater use, aAreas with water contamination, dDrought prone areas and cCoastal areas.
                           The EMF includes simple ‘Environment Review’ system for GP works comprises of a set of ‘Dos
                           and Don’t’s’ and ‘Environmental Guidelines’ that will ensure compliance with legal and
                           regulatory requirements as well as promote good designenvironment guidelines which will help
                           the GPs to identify environmental concerns in their panchayats and to propose for solutions as part
                           of perspective plans or Annual Action Plans. The Environment Review will be conducted on the
                           Perspective Plans and the Annual Action Plans to ensure environmental sustainability of the
                           activities works identified in the plans.




                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                           Borrower capacity is weak and the EMF details a capacity building plan which includes technical
                           trainings on integrating environment aspects into designs for the engineers and environment
                           engineers, training on environment management for the PRIs and awareness activities. An
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environment management cell will be established in ANSSIRD to address the capacity building
                           needs and suitable technical agenciesy will be hired to provide the training to the engineers and the
                           technical support to GPs in environmental hotspot areas.

                           The social assessment and consultations in the select Gram Panchayats has informed the overall
                           design of the project and its component. A Draft Tribal and Disadvantaged Groups Inclusion Plan
                           (TDGIP) has been prepared based on the social assessment and consultations specifically
                           organized with the tribal communities and their representatives. The TDGIP provides the key
                           issues, actions, M&E mechanism and institutional arrangements for ensuring inclusion of tribals
                           and other disadvantaged groups. A social expert has been designated to ensure implementation of
                           TDGIP in coordination with DAC, ANSSIRD, Tribal Research Institute and Panchayat level
                           functionaries. Social mobilizers at the GP level will help ensure participation of all sections of
                           society in plan preparation and monitoring at GP level.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The Project will be implemented in 25 districts in 79 block covering 2815 GPs. The key
                           stakeholders are the local government officials (elected representatives and government appointed
                           officials), the villages within the GP and the Government of Karnataka (particularly the Rural
                           Development and Social Welfare Departments). Consultations were conducted with
                           representatives of 8 GPs for obtaining information on potential works, impacts, capacity building
                           needs, etc.

                           To ascertain views and feedback from tribal communities consultations were organized in 5 most
                           backward and 5 more backward GPs with high tribal presence. A Draft Tribal and Disadvantaged
                           Groups Inclusion Plan has been prepared to inform the overall design of the project and its
Public Disclosure Copy




                           component. The Draft Tribal and Disadvantaged Groups Inclusion Plan (TDGIP) builds on the
                           conclusions of the social assessment and the feedback received during the consultations held at the
                           GP level and with representatives from relevant government departments and institutions. A
                           summary of the TDGIP in English and Kannada shall also be disclosed along with the final report
                           on the Government's website.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         00000000
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      00000000
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          00000000
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       00000000


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Farah Zahir
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Alexandre Arrobbio (PMGR)                     Date: 11-Dec-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
