                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC16436

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Turkmenistan                    Project ID:      P158751
                            Project Name:        Development of a National Welfare Monitoring System
                            Team Leader(s):      Sarosh Sattar
                            Estimated Date       21-Mar-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GPV03                           Lending          IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (100%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    0.35321                    Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                               0.35321
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           10.       The primary objective of the proposed task is to support the Government of Turkmenistan in
                           developing a modern national welfare monitoring system. This will require assisting the SSC to
                           improve their household survey questionnaire, collect consumption and income data, and adopt
                           international good practice in measuring poverty and the middle class (including non-monetary
                           aspects such as access to services and employment). By working on the main aspects of welfare
                           statistics, the aim is to ensure that the SSC upgrades its current household survey instrument and uses
                           it more effectively to help inform government policy. Currently, little is known to what degree
                           growth is translating into better living standards in the country.

                           11.      The Bank support was requested to support the efforts in improving the welfare
                           measurement system. More specifically, the project will build on the activities started by previous
                           TF to strengthen SSC’s capacity to timely collect high quality household surveys, introduce new
                           tools to quickly analyze household data and promote the use of micro data for distributional impact
                           analysis. The TF will be used for the introduction of new systems of conducting surveys to monitor
                           welfare and social indicators more frequently and cost effectively such as through Computer Assisted
                           Personal Interviewing (CAPI).
                         C. Project Description
                         13.     The proposed project would provide technical assistance to the State Committee of Statistics
                         (SCS) of Turkmenistan, especially the departments conducting the household survey, and transfer
Public Disclosure Copy




                         knowledge on best practices of welfare measurement and monitoring, including introduction to CAPI
                         (Computer Assisted Personal Interviewing) methodology based on Survey Solutions software. The
                         technical assistance is comprised of two main stages. The first stage will require a review of the
                         existing steps involved in measuring welfare such as sample design, survey questionnaire, and survey
                         implementation. The second stage will provide training to the Statistics Committee on CAPI
                         implementation with Survey Solutions software, welfare measurement and methodology including
                         the consumption aggregate, estimation of welfare lines, vulnerability and middle class measurement,
                         and non-monetary welfare index.

                         Stage 1: Household Survey Review

                         14.     The objective of this stage is to understand the existing official system for monitoring
                         monetary and non-monetary welfare (if any) and capacity of SCS in implementing CAPI in order to
                         ensure that the technical advice provided at later stages builds upon existing systems. This stage will
                         consist of workshops, consultations/interviews, technical review, and study tour.

                         15.      Based on review of baseline status of the welfare measurement system in SSC the project
                         consultant will conduct analysis and provide a high-level report and advice on the Turkmenistan
                         household survey on the following key survey aspects:
                         •        The sample design review and advice will cover the SCS’s sampling approach, sample
                         selection, sampling frame, sample size, and survey weights.
                         •        The review of the survey questionnaire will focus on issues of whether it collects relevant
                         and sufficient information for measuring monetary and non-monetary welfare in Turkmenistan.
                         •        The survey implementation review will aim to document the SCS’s activities that take place
                         before the fielding of the survey (for example, manuals, training, data entry), activities while the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         survey is in the field (such as supervision, transportation, communication, and data management),
                         data entry and processing, and activities required after the survey is complete (debriefing, preparation
                         of the final data set and documentation), and data analysis. Also, the capacity of the SCS staff to
                         implement CAPI for official household survey data collection will be evaluated.

                         16.     A review of the welfare measurement approach currently used for both monetary and non-
                         monetary poverty. The purpose of this review is to provide a common in-depth understanding of the
                         instrument used to measure welfare in Turkmenistan. The depth of the discussion will depend upon
                         the level of detail shared by the SCS officials. This phase will deliver one report which: (i) describes
                         the SCS’s sample design, survey questionnaire, survey implementation process, and welfare
                         measurement methodology and (ii) provides high priority recommendations for improving the
                         household survey in order to better measure welfare.A study tour of selected SCS officials to 3-4
                         countries [possibly, Moldova, Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan and Armenia] will be suggested in order to
                         see how different statistics departments approach collection and analysis of household survey data,
                         including in CAPI.

                         Stage 2: Welfare Measurement and New Technologies in Data Collection

                         17.    The objective of Stage 2 would be to provide practical training to the SCS on how to
                         measure monetary and non-monetary welfare including the size of the middle class (since poverty is
                           a sensitive issue), CAPI. This stage builds upon the knowledge gained from the review stage and
                           focuses on knowledge sharing.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           18.     The workshop on measuring monetary welfare will provide training on computing the
                           consumption aggregate, establishing/estimating a welfare lines, a middle class line, and measuring
                           the level/rate of vulnerability and the middle class. The data used for the training should be the
                           government’s existing official household survey data and this should be provided in confidence and
                           specifically for the purposes of this training.

                           19.     The workshop on non-monetary welfare will introduce the concept and techniques of
                           measuring welfare from multidimensional perspective. The workshop will provide an overview of
                           approaches used to measure multidimensional welfare and the methodology for estimating the index,
                           covering selection of dimensions, indicators, cut-offs and then decomposing the dynamics of the
                           index overtime.

                           20.      The workshop on CAPI will provide hands–on training on fundamentals of implementing
                           CAPI for official household survey. It starts with focused training on implementation of “Survey
                           Solutions”- a Bank software that is used to design, structure and implement the household
                           questionnaire in electronic (tablet) format. The workshop will cover topics relevant for setting up a
                           first survey in CAPI format: technical requirements for servers, wireless/transmission networks,
                           tablets and operation systems. Depending on capacity and interest of SCS the workshop can be
                           followed up by pilot field test of selected module of official household survey.

                           21.     An Operational Manual on all methodological aspects of measuring monetary and non-
                           monetary welfare will be produced to ensure sustainability of the methodology. Currently there is no
                           practice and methodology in place to construct a national welfare line in Turkmenistan. The team
                           will provide all the required methodological materials with international experience in welfare
                           measurement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Sarosh Sattar
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (SA)                              Date: 29-Apr-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Carolina Sanchez (PMGR)                                      Date: 29-Apr-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
