                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC14906

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Niger                          Project ID:      P156863
                            Project Name:   Nutrition-Sensitive Agriculture and Capacity Building of Small and Marginal
                                            Farmers
                            Team Leader(s): Soulemane Fofana
                            Estimated Date 20-May-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GFA01                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Crops (80%), Animal production (20%)
                            Theme(s):           Nutrition and food security (70%), Other rural development (30%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    2.5                        Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Japan Policy and Human Resources Development Fund                                           2.5
                            Environment         B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           11.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase nutritionally-adequate food
                           production in two selected provinces, leading to increased household food consumption and dietary
                           diversity.

                           12.      The PDO will be achieved by: (a) building capacity of small and marginal farmers
                           (especially women); (b) increasing the production of high-nutrient-content food, including fruits and
                           vegetables for consumption (and where feasible commercialization); and (c) sensitizing and
                           communicating (and thereby encouraging demand) on foods such as fruits and vegetables with a high
                           nutrition value.
                           C. Project Description
                           14.     The PHRD funded Project is being designed as an integral part of third phase of the IDA-
                           financed Community Action Program (CAP-3) and will be implemented by the PCU of CAP-3. The
                           CAP program seeks to reduce poverty through initiatives aimed at improving food security, raising
                           the income of rural producers, and increasing, securing, and diversifying food production. CAP is a
                         national program, but since the PHRD grant funding is limited, the PHRD-funded activities will
                         focus on nutrition work in only two regions (Maradi and Tahoua).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         15.      The PHRD will focus on increasing production of vegetables and fruits, including
                         biofortified crops, such as beans and sweet potatoes (OFSP). Female producers are expected to use
                         the limited space available for production of a range of fruits/vegetables, improving access to a
                         variety of micronutrient-rich foods to accompany the biofortified crops. It is expected that
                         production increases will be destined primarily for consumption by infants and their mothers, rather
                         than for sale, although it is understood that women farmers will need to sell a fraction of their crops
                         to meet their minimum cash requirements.

                         16.      The project will have three components: Component 1 will focus on mobilizing small
                         farmers, particularly women, and strengthening their capacities and knowledge of production of
                         fruits and vegetables. Component 2 will promote improved production of horticulture crops with
                         high nutritional value largely via small-scale irrigation from wells, which the project will finance.
                         Component 3 will support the sensitization and communication to promote food preparation, storage,
                         and consumption of horticultural products with high nutritional values.

                         17.      Component 1: Mobilizing small farmers and strengthening their capacities: The objective of
                         this priority area is to build capacity of small farmers to increase their knowledge on producing food
                         with a high nutritional value. This will include empowering small and marginal farmers, especially
                         women, strengthening of women producer groups/associations, promoting farmer-to-farmer services,
                         and linking the farmer associations with other public and private sector agencies for the projects’
                         nutrition-related purposes. Activities will include technical assistance, training, and investments in
                         farmer-led knowledge and to provide community-to-community extension services.

                         18.     Component 2: Promoting improved production of horticulture crops with high nutritional
                         value: The objective of this Component is to improve nutritional and livelihood outcomes for small
                         female farmers and their families. Activities will seek to improve productivity by technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assistance, training, and particularly investments in wells and small-scale irrigation covering around
                         250 hectares in the at least 100 villages to be selected.

                         19.      In some areas and/or to some extent, horticulture already is a part in the economic activities
                         of the population in terms of their production, marketing, processing, and transportation. This
                         component will support the introduction and/or intensification and diversification of horticultural
                         production with high nutritional value. It will support women producer groups, and communities in
                         the targeted regions with technical advice and inputs (seeds, plants, cuttings, inorganic and organic
                         fertilizers) to boost horticultural production of moringa; vegetables (tomatoes, cabbage, onion, carrot,
                         eggplant, watermelon, melons, etc.), tubers (cassava, sweet potato, potato, etc.), legumes (cowpeas,
                         green beans, peas, sesame, etc.) and citrus (lemon, orange, guava, tangelo, etc.), mango trees in their
                         own farms (in their own farms).

                         20.      Component 3: Sensitization and communication to promote increased consumption of
                         horticultural products with high nutritional value. Horticultural products are mentioned in the current
                         agricultural strategies of Niger, but the general public is often not well informed about the
                         importance of their consumption for human health. The commitment of the government, through this
                         project, will result in better information and communication for the consumption of horticultural
                         products. This will include training in conservation, small-scale processing and storage, cooking,
                         and related small equipment. The overall medium and long-term objective would be to increase fruit
                           and vegetable consumption from currently 35.4 kg per person and year. Even though the work under
                           this component would aim to increase consumption of horticultural crops in the villages of the two
                           targeted regions, there would likely be some benefits to neighboring villages in terms of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           dissemination of some of the messages.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           29.     The project will be implemented in two regions, namely Maradi and Tahoua, which are the
                           Regions with the highest level of malnutrition. More details on these provinces will be provided
                           during project appraisal.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           30.     The institutional capacity of the Ministry of Agriculture was assessed at the start of the 12-
                           year APL of the Community Action Program (CAP). The Ministry successfully implemented the first
                           two phases (CAP-1 and CAP-2), and since 2013 is implementing CAP-3. The Ministry of
                           Agriculture is well versed in the implementation of Bank supported projects, and has built up
                           capacity to handle the Bank's safeguard policies and instruments. The proposed project will draw
                           important lessons from the strengths and weaknesses of the two previous and the on-going phase.

                           31.     The Project Implementation Manual (PIM) for CAP-3 presents the main implementation
                           modalities and the institutional arrangements to support them. It is proposed that the PIM for CAP-3
                           be also used for the implementation of the PHRD grant. An Implementation Support Plan (ISP) will
                           also be developed. The ISP will aim at making implementation support to the client more flexible
                           and efficient, and will focusing on the principal manageable risks identified and the agreed risk
                           mitigation measures. It will also provide the technical advice necessary to facilitate achieving the
                           PDO. The ISP will also identify the minimum requirements to meet the Bank’s fiduciary obligations
                           and which will apply for the implementation of the PHRD grant.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)
                           Medou Lo (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              Minimal low-intensity pest management
                           BP 4.01                                              activities may be introduced and will be
                                                                                addressed under the Pest Management Plan (see
                                                                                below). Any other input use, that might
                                                                                marginally affect the environment, will be
                                                                                addressed through the Environmental and Social
                                                                                Management Framework (ESMF), developed
                                                                                for the CAP-3 project, which is being updated to
                                                                                cover this operation. It will be consulted upon,
                                                                                approved and disclosed in-country and at the
                                                                                Bank Infoshop.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               Investments will take place in home gardens.
                                                                                Therefore the Natural Habitats policy is unlikely
                                                                                to be triggered.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No                   This operation does not involve any activity that
                                                                                             will affect forest ecosystems.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      Yes                  Low-intensity pest management practices may
                                                                                             be introduced at commune or farm level to
                                                                                             support the beneficiaries in their production
                                                                                             practices. The Pest Management Plan (PMP)
                                                                                             developed under CAP-3 is being updated to
                                                                                             cover this operation. It will be consulted upon,
                                                                                             approved and disclosed in-country and at the
                                                                                             Bank Infoshop.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No                   Project’s activities do not involve excavation
                           BP 4.11                                                           and are not expected to impact physical cultural
                                                                                             resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No                   There is no Indigenous Peoples in the project
                                                                                             area.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               TBD                  Investments will take place in home gardens.
                           4.12                                                              Therefore, the project’s activities are not
                                                                                             expected to lead to land acquisition or
                                                                                             restriction of access to sources of livelihood, but
                                                                                             this will be confirm before appraisal.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   This operation will not support construction or
                                                                                             rehabilitation of dam.
                           Projects on International                    No                   The project will avoid activities involving any
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              water drawn from international rivers or
                                                                                             aquifers.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               This operation will not take place in any
Public Disclosure Copy




                           7.60                                                              disputed areas as defined under OP 7.60, and
                                                                                             will not support any activities that will impact
                                                                                             disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Soulemane Fofana
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 18-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR)                                     Date: 02-Dec-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
