                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA16016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Sep-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kazakhstan                         Project ID:    P152625
                            Project Name:      Social Health Insurance Project: Improving Access, Quality, Efficiency and
                                               Financial Protection (P152625)
                            Task Team          Carlos Marcelo Bortman
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       08-Sep-2015                           Estimated   28-Jan-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GHN03                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        200.00              Total Bank Financing: 180.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      20.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        180.00
                              Total                                                                                        200.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve accessibility, quality, and efficiency of
                           health service delivery, and reduce the financial risk of the population due to serious health problems.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project would support implementation of the National Mandatory Social Health

                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         Insurance System (SHIS) and further adjustments of the Unified National Health System to properly
                         respond to the new population needs and requirements. The SHIS, to be fully operational by 2020,
                         will be introduced under the Concept for Social Development of the Republic of Kazakhstan by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2030, approved by the Government of the Republic of Kazakhstan.

                         The proposed Project will use an Investment Project Financing instrument. All the activities have
                         been organized in the following three components: (1) support implementation of a national
                         mandatory social health insurance system; (2) introduce reforms to improve access, quality, and
                         efficiency of health service delivery alongside the introduction of a national social health insurance
                         system; and (3) project management and monitoring and evaluation. It is expected that the proposed
                         Project would require 5 years (2016–20) to be completed, with most of the investment to be
                         implemented in years 3, 4 and 5.


                         Component 1. Supporting implementation of the National Social Health Insurance System (US$56
                         million). This component will support the design and implementation of the SHI system. Component
                         activities will be divided into two subcomponents:

                         Subcomponent 1.1. Establishing and strengthening the organizational and institutional structure of
                         SHI. The SHI Law is expected to be passed by Parliament in early 2016 paving the way for the roll-
                         out of the National SHI system. The proposed SHI Law will create an entirely new set of institutions
                         including a SHI Fund (SHIF) as well as other bodies such as the United Commission on Health Care
                         Quality to support the implementation of SHI.

                         Subcomponent 1.2. Strengthening purchasing and payment arrangements under SHI. Kazakhstan has
                         already embarked on wide-ranging purchasing reforms, including provider payment reforms which
                         are at different stages of implementation. This sub-component will support the fine-tuning and
                         strengthening of current reforms as well as the introduction of new reforms as needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will finance technical assistance (including twinning contracts), training, goods,
                         services, and operational costs.

                         Component 2. Improving access, quality, and efficiency of health service delivery to support
                         implementation of the new the National Social Health Insurance System (US$132 million). This
                         component will support the strengthening of population services, primary and secondary prevention,
                         and first phase implementation of 16 regional master plans. Component activities will be divided in
                         three subcomponents:


                         Subcomponent 2.1. Optimization of the network of rendering healthcare services. This
                         subcomponent would support implementation of an integrated network for rendering healthcare
                         services meeting the current and strategic needs of the population, ensuring the strengthening of
                         public health and the continuity of health care delivery. The subcomponent would (a) facilitate the
                         processes of strengthening public health and formation of a healthy lifestyle, and (b) support
                         restructuring of the network of health care organizations on the basis of master plans, taking into
                         account the priority development of primary health care (PHC)

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Improving the quality of healthcare services. This subcomponent would support
                         the improvement of the quality of healthcare services and the provision of patient safety. The

                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         subcomponent is aimed at the formation of the continuity of standards and tools of quality from
                         development to introduction in practical health care with involvement of professional associations
                         and patients. This subcomponent will expand of the existing backlog in the accreditation of health
Public Disclosure Copy




                         care organizations, development of clinical guidelines/clinical protocols (CG/CP), conduct of Health
                         Technology Assessments (HTAs), and rational use of medicines.

                         Subcomponent 2.3 - Development of human resources for health care. The purpose of this
                         component is to develop an effective human resources (HR) policy for the sector, which ensures the
                         provision of high-quality health services. This will be achieved by building the key components of
                         the elements of medical education in accordance with the needs of the health system.

                         This component will finance technical assistance (including twinning contracts), training, goods,
                         works, services, and operational costs.

                         Component 3. Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Communications Strategy (US
                         $12 million). This component aims to support a Project Management Unit (PMU) to provide day-to-
                         day project management, including fiduciary and administrative tasks of the Project, as well as
                         monitoring, evaluation, and reporting.

                         This component will finance technical assistance, communications services, goods, non-consulting
                         services, training, auditing, and incremental operating costs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 2 might involve minor civil works at the already established healthcare facilities around
                         the country. The project will also finance the replacement of the equipment and provision of the
                         additional equipment in these facilities.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ekaterina Romanova (GSURR)
                         Rustam Arstanov (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            Regional master plans under the Subcomponent 2.1 will
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     include at least 8 “Hospital Reshaping Scheme” projects
                                                                    which might consist of civil works. These civil works
                                                                    may include demolition/ construction activities leading to
                                                                    the noise/ vibration, generation of construction waste,
                                                                    occupational and community health and safety issues such
                                                                    as asbestos.
                                                                    Since the exact scope and location of civil works is not
                                                                    known, the environmental framework was developed by
                                                                    the borrower to define environmental screening and
                                                                    assessment procedures as well as the implementation
                                                                    arrangements. Once the exact scope and location are
                                                                    identified, the site environmental impact assessment
                                                                    (EIA)/ environmental management plans (EMPs) or
                                                                    checklists (depending on the probability and severity of



                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                                                                       potential risks) will be developed by the borrower. In
                                                                       addition, the project will finance the provision of the
                                                                       medical equipment and a replacement of the outdated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       equipment and a special consideration should be given to
                                                                       the replacement and disposal of medical equipment which
                                                                       uses radioactive materials (e.g. Co 60) for medical
                                                                       examination and treatment. The project might also entail
                                                                       some positive changes in waste management practices in
                                                                       healthcare facilities around the country.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           No             No involvement of cultural buildings where health
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       centers may be located is anticipated.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No             No land acquisition --temporary or permanent -- is
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 anticipated.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project might include minor civil works in an already existing healthcare facilities including
                              removal/ demolition of partition-walls inside the building, roof replacement, windows and doors
                              replacement, and remodeling. Environmental issues associated with the above interventions are
                              minor, short-lived, and primarily limited to the project sites (except for movement of equipment
                              and materials to/from the site). These issues are primarily: dust, noise, disposal of waste material
                              and/or older equipment, some traffic disruption (depending upon specific location), worker safety
                              (e.g. welding operations) etc. In addition, the project will finance the provision of the medical
                              equipment and a replacement of the outdated equipment. In this respect a special consideration
                              should be given to the replacement and disposal of medical equipment which uses radioactive
                              materials (e.g. Co 60) for medical examination and treatment. The project might also entail some
                              positive changes in waste management practices in healthcare facilities around the country.
                              All associalted impacts are addressed with good engineering and construction practices and with
                              mitigation measures specified in the project Environmental Management Framework (EMF) sub-


                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                           project specific Environmental Management Plans to be applied by contractors with close
                           supervision of compliance by the Project Implementation Unit.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           The project is expected to bring long-term positive changes in the medical waste management
                           practices in terms of classification and disposal of the medical waste.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Since the scope and locations of the project interventions are not known before the Appraisal, the
                           Borrower has developed an Environmental Management Framework that describes i) screening
                           procedure and typical environmental mitigation measures for activities that involve civil works ii)
                           step-by-step procedure for classification and disposal of the medical waste based on the
                           international best practices and RoK regulations, and iii) step-by-step procedure for the disposal of
                           radioactive medical equipment and materials based on the RoK Regulations. The PIU has an
                           assigned staff member responsible for environmental management of the project. In addition, in
                           each region the construction engineer responsible for civil works will also share responsibility for
                           environmental management.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project will positively affect a broad range of stakeholders including patients and the
                           employees of the medical facilities. The EMF will be consulted by means of public hearings in the
                           city of Astana where affected groups such as doctors and public employees in healthcare sector
                           will have an opportunity to give their opinion on environmental impacts and proposed mitigation
                           measures. The EMF was disclosed on September 22 at the website of the Ministry of Healthcare
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and Social Protection. Various stakeholders including NGO’s and representatives of the regional
                           medical institutions have provided their comments and proposals via email. These comments were
                           recorded and included to the final EMF which was then re-disclosed on the website. Site specific
                           EMPs will be consulted upon at the sub-project locations once the facility-specific designs become
                           available.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Aug-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   13-Oct-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kazakhstan                                                       22-Sep-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.


                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Carlos Marcelo Bortman
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Enis Baris (PMGR)                              Date: 18-Nov-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 6 of 6
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
