                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA15934
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ethiopia                           Project ID:   P151294
                            Project Name:     Ethiopia - Oromia Forested Landscape Program (P151294)
                            Task Team         Stephen Danyo,Andre Rodrigues de Aquino
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         31-May-2016
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEN07

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (90%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (60%), Environmental policies and institutions (20%), Land
                                              administration and management (15%), Water resource manage ment (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      50.00           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              Carbon Fund                                                                                50.00
                              Total                                                                                      50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Program Development Objective is to improve the enabling environment for sustainable forest
                           management and investment in the regional state of Oromia.
                            3. Project Description
                           OFLP would be Oromia’s strategic programmatic umbrella and coordination platform for multi-

                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         sector, multi-partner intervention on all forested landscapes in Oromia. The 10-year program would
                         contribute to a transformation in how forested landscapes are managed in Oromia to deliver multiple
                         benefits such as poverty reduction and resilient livelihoods, climate change mitigation, biodiversity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         conservation, and water provisioning. OFLP would foster equitable and sustainable low carbon
                         development through a series of: (i) on-the-ground activities that address deforestation, reduce land-
                         use based emissions and enhance forest carbon stocks; and (ii) state-wide and local enhancements to
                         institutions, incentives, information, and safeguards management to upscale investment (enabling
                         environment), including coordinating and leveraging multiple REDD-relevant interventions across
                         the regional state.

                         OFLP would enable GoE to strategically mobilize, coordinate and scale-up funding
                         programmatically from several different sources. The success of OFLP and the achievement of the
                         Government’s broader forest, land-use, and climate ambitions depend on OFLP’s ability to leverage
                         financial resources from existing and future REDD-relevant initiatives such as PSNP, SLMP, AGP,
                         private sector activities, the CRGE Facility, bilateral support, farmers’ own investment, Germany’s
                         intended investment in Bale National Park through EWCA, and government budget. REDD-relevant
                         initiatives also include REDD+ projects that are currently seeking carbon payments, which would be
                         integrated (or ‘nested,’ as per the technical term) into OFLP, such as the Bale Mountains REDD+
                         project.

                         The WBG’s two initial financing instruments for the GoE to implement OFLP currently include: (i)
                         the US$ 18 million mobilization grant; and (ii) the US$ 50 million Emissions Reductions Purchase
                         Agreement (ERPA). These are detailed below:

                         i.       The 5-year mobilization grant would finance the establishment and initial implementation of
                         the state-wide jurisdictional Program. The grant financing would support GoE to strengthen its state-
                         level and local-level enabling environment and implement selected on-the-ground investment
                         activities which would facilitate the achievement of ERs (and resulting ER payments) while also
                         leveraging greater financial resources from multiple sources. The grant would in particular finance:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i) TA among all woredas across the state (such as landscape management coordination, land-use
                         planning support, and safeguards management); and (ii) forest investment and livelihoods support in
                         deforestation hotspots with high carbon content (47 woredas).

                         ii.     Emissions Reductions Payments of US$ 50 million for verified carbon performance paid in a
                         period of up to 10 years (2016-2026). These payments would be available once the Program
                         achieves, verifies and reports on results in terms of reduced emissions in compliance with agreed
                         safeguards due diligence. The ER payments would be distributed according to a Benefit Sharing
                         Mechanism (BSM) and used primarily to ensure the sustainability of the land-use interventions
                         promoted to reduce deforestation (including activities in the agriculture, energy and forestry sectors),
                         as well as to scale up the interventions to other geographical areas within Oromia. This climate
                         financing would be channeled through an Emissions Reductions Purchase Agreement (ERPA) to be
                         signed between GoE and WBG in 2016. The envelope for these payments could grow as OFLP
                         becomes operational and generates results, and as other ER buyers show interest in OFLP.

                         The OFLP geographic boundary would be all forests in Oromia. The Program would monitor and
                         account for positive and negative changes in forest cover and associated GHG emissions reduction
                         within all 277 rural and semi-rural woredas the regional state boundaries of Oromia (i.e., the
                         “accounting area of the Program”). As per the 2013 EMA map and the National REDD+
                         Secretariat’s proposed forest definition, this includes 8.7 million hectares of forest, spread over all of

                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         Oromia’s rural and semi-rural woredas. The stakeholders that would benefit from ER payments
                         would be defined as per the BSM currently under preparation by the GoE.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Monitoring forest cover and forest cover changes would follow methodologies that are being
                         established at the national level, and in line with international best practices. The data generated by
                         OFLP would feed into the national forest cover monitoring system and UNFCCC reporting more
                         broadly.

                         Program Components
                         OFLP would have three components. The US$ 18 million mobilization grant would finance activities
                         under two components over a 5-year period: (1) Enabling investments; and (2) Enabling
                         environment. These funds would be channeled to GoE as a recipient executed (RE) grant. The third
                         component would consist of US$ 50 million of ER Payments for verified emissions reductions as
                         they are delivered over a 10-year period (the components overlap in time).

                         Component 1.Enabling Investments (US$ 11.57 million RE grant, 5-year period)

                         Component 1 would finance investment in participatory forest management (including livelihoods
                         support and selected nature-based community enterprise development) and reforestation in
                         deforestation hotspots in sites to be selected, as well as extension services,and land-use planning
                         state-wide at state and local levels.

                         Component 2. Enabling Environment (US$ 6.42 million RE grant, 5-year period)

                         Component 2 would finance complementary activities to improve the effectiveness and impact of
                         institutions, incentives (i.e., policies, marketing, BSM), information (i.e., strategic communications,
                         MRV) and safeguards management at state and local levels. This component would enhance the
                         enabling environment to help scale up and leverage action on the ground to reduce deforestation and
                         forest degradation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3. Emissions Reductions (ER) Payments (US$ 50 million ERPA, 10-year period)

                         ER payments would be delivered once results are achieved, verified by a third party, complied with
                         safeguards requirements and formally reported to the WB. The ER payments could begin once the
                         ERPA is signed and emissions reductions occur, are verified and reported to the WB. Based on the
                         design of the MRV system, it is expected that reporting and verification of emissions reductions can
                         occur every two years. The ER payments would be managed by the GoE and distributed to the
                         beneficiaries according to the BSM, which would aim to incentivize greater uptake of sustainable
                         land use actions. The BSM will need to be formally adopted by the GoE before any ER payment can
                         be made. In addition, it should be noted that the ER payments will not cover the full cost of
                         implementing changes in landscape management. The ER payments will provide some return that
                         offsets some of the costs of improving the landscape for the wider benefit of all.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The OFLP geographic boundary would be all forests in Oromia. The region is located between 3024′
                         20″-10023′26″ N latitudes and 34007′37″-42058′51″ E longitudes. Oromia is Ethiopia’s largest
                         regional state in terms of land area (around 28.5 million hectares, roughly the size of Italy),
                         population (over 30 million people) and forest cover (approximately 8.7 million ha in total, around


                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         47 percent of the country’s total forested area). The Program would monitor and account for positive
                         and negative changes in forest cover and associated GHG emissions reduction within all 277 rural
                         and semi-rural woredas the regional state boundaries of Oromia (i.e., the “accounting area of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Program”). However, specific sites to be financed by the grant under Component 1 are not yet
                         known.

                         Based on the national forest definition, 274 of Oromia’s 277 rural and semi-rural woredas include
                         some forest. Most of Oromia’s high forest (moist montane forests) is found in the Bale forested
                         landscape in the southeast and the Jimma/Wellega/Ilubabor forested landscape in the west. Bale
                         serves as the water tower for the eastern drylands in the Somali region and the country of Somalia,
                         drylands where mobile pastoralism is the predominant livelihood system and which is highly
                         vulnerable to drought.

                         The forests in Oromia region provide critical ecosystem services to the country and to the region. It
                         harbors globally important biodiversity with endangered endemic species such as the Abyssinian
                         wolf and the mountain Nyla. Oromia’s western forest are home to endemic coffee (Coffee Arabica)
                         that has high potential as a value-added export, and harbor wild varieties of the species. Important
                         rivers also originate in or are affected by Oromia’s forests, including those flowing into the new
                         Renaissance Dam under construction.

                         Forest loss and degradation are increasing in Oromia. Deforestation in Oromia has been particularly
                         intense in western (in the Zones of West Wollega, Qeleme Wollega, Ilu Aba Bora) and eastern parts
                         of the regional state(in the Zones of Bale and Guji). In Oromia as a whole, nearly 157,000 ha of
                         forest was lost between 2000 and 2013, or around 12,000 hectares lost every year. This has resulted
                         in over 46 million tons of CO2 equivalent emitted into the atmosphere over this period, or around 3.5
                         million tons annually (calculated based on Hansen et al, 2013 and DetNorske Veritas, 2015).

                         OFLP would have positive role in reversing deforestation through activities described under
                         Component 1 which include, among others, support to land-use planning; rehabilitation of forests
Public Disclosure Copy




                         through afforestation, reforestation, participatory forest management; and assisted natural
                         regeneration. The state-wide activities under Component 2 would also have beneficial impacts
                         through establishing and implementing the OFLP strategic framework. Sub-component 2.4 would, in
                         particular, finance activities to enhance safeguards management at regional and local levels.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENDR)
                         Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSURR)
                         Dereje Agonafir Habtewold (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            The Program (OFLP) activities are expected to have
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      significant positive impacts on targeted forested areas.
                                                                    However, OP/BP 4.01 is triggered as some of the local-
                                                                    level activities under Component 1 could have limited
                                                                    adverse environmental and social impacts and risks; these
                                                                    activities could potentially include construction and
                                                                    rehabilitation of physical structures for catchment



                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                                                        management such as afforestation/reforestation, area
                                                        closures, check-dams, water harvesting structures,
                                                        agricultural intensification (including small-scale water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        irrigation that may necessitate applying agrochemicals),
                                                        and access roads. Component 3 may have also adverse
                                                        environmental and social impacts, specifically in relation
                                                        to benefit sharing. Since the scope and nature of the
                                                        activities and the specific sites for implementing them are
                                                        not yet known, the specific instrument proposed for
                                                        analyzing potential environmental and social risks is
                                                        Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                        (ESMF), which has addressed the environmental and
                                                        social issues identified in the National REDD+ SESA
                                                        report and the OFLP drivers of deforestation and forest
                                                        degradation study.

                                                        The ESMF would be used to develop a site specific
                                                        Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
                                                        prior to the commencement of activities under Component
                                                        1. The ESMF includes standard methods and procedures,
                                                        along with appropriate institutional arrangements for
                                                        screening and reviewing program activities and
                                                        monitoring the implementation of mitigation measures to
                                                        prevent adverse and cumulative impacts. The effective
                                                        use of the ESMF would be regularly reviewed and
                                                        audited.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Overall, the Program is expected to have significant
                         4.04                           positive impacts on natural habitats, as it will support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        maintenance and rehabilitation of forest areas and their
                                                        function; and local communities will be involved in
                                                        design, implementation and monitoring of program
                                                        activities. Activities that involve the significant
                                                        conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats will
                                                        not be supported. To this effect, program activities will be
                                                        screened and impacts will be avoided on natural habitats
                                                        using appropriate preventive and mitigation measures
                                                        identified in the ESMF of the Program.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   The Program activities are expected to have significant
                                                        positive impacts on targeted forests in Oromia by
                                                        reducing deforestation and forest degradation, while
                                                        contributing to improve the livelihood of forest-dependent
                                                        communities. Generally, potential impact of the Program
                                                        activities on natural forests will be addressed using the
                                                        findings of the ESMF for the OFLP. The ESMF provides
                                                        detail procedures to screen program activities for potential
                                                        adverse environmental and social impacts, and to take
                                                        measures to avoid, minimize and mitigate such impacts.


                                                         Page 5 of 13
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    Pesticides are being used by forest dependent and
                                                        surrounding communities in the forested areas of the
                                                        Program. Therefore, the ESMF includes a guideline for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        preparation of an Integrated Pest Management (IPM) Plan
                                                        to address related environmental and social impacts of
                                                        Program activities.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The Program could finance activities in areas potentially
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           containing physical cultural resources (PCR) such as holy
                                                        sites, sacred groves, sacred forests, etc.). The ESMF has
                                                        included provisions and a set of procedures to screen
                                                        program activities for such impacts and to deal with
                                                        chance finds.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   OP/BP 4.10 is triggered. The Program conducted a Social
                         BP 4.10                        Assessment as part of the SESA study and in depth
                                                        consultation process with the Program beneficiaries and
                                                        the Program affected peoples, including underserved and
                                                        vulnerable groups to seek broad support for the Program
                                                        from these groups. The output of the Social Assessment
                                                        as part of the SESA study summarized the key findings of
                                                        the social assessment including the process used to foster
                                                        free, prior, and informed consultations to garner broad
                                                        community support for the Program, including the
                                                        provision of grievance redress and benefit sharing issues.
                                                        The identified mitigation actions are incorporated in the
                                                        Program as a Social Development Plan.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   OP/BP 4.12 is triggered as the implementation of the
                         OP/BP 4.12                     Program activities may involve acquisition of land and /or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        restriction of access to legally designated parks, protected
                                                        areas, or forest management/reforestation areas.
                                                        Therefore, in addition to the ESMF, Resettlement Policy
                                                        Framework (RPF) and Process Framework (PF) are
                                                        prepared, consulted upon and disclosed to ensure that
                                                        appropriate measures are in place to address any issues
                                                        which might arise from potential land acquisition and/or
                                                        restriction of access to legally designated parks, protected
                                                        areas, or forest management/reforestation areas under the
                                                        Program. OFLP would not finance land acquisition (if
                                                        required), which is the responsibility of GoE.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP     Yes   The Program triggered OP/BP 4.37. There could be
                         4.37                           potential small scale irrigation. No new construction or
                                                        rehabilitation of large dams is anticipated to be financed
                                                        by the Program.
                                                        In cases of small dam construction (less than 4.5 meters)
                                                        as part of small scale irrigation schemes, the Program will
                                                        use the FAO’s ‘Manual on Small Earth Dams, A Guide to
                                                        Siting, Design and Construction’ and the Ministry of



                                                         Page 6 of 13
                                                                       Agriculture’s guidelines on the construction of small
                                                                       dams as well.
                            Projects on International   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              General
                              OFLP is Category B. The Program triggered eight out of the ten safeguard polices: Environmental
                              Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitat (OP/BP 4.04), Forests (OP/BP 4.36), Pest Management
                              (OP/BP 4.09), Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
                              4.12), Indigenous Peoples/Underserved and Vulnerable peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Safety of Dams
                              (OP/BP 4.37). Overall, the Program would have positive environmental and social impacts
                              through its enabling investment activities under Component 1 which includes participatory forest
                              management and reforestation in deforestation hotspots, extension services, and land-use planning
                              state-wide at state and local levels. The enabling environment under Component 2 would have
                              beneficial impacts through complementary activities to improve the effectiveness and impact of
                              institutions, incentives (i.e., policies, marketing, BSM), information (i.e., strategic
                              communications, MRV) and safeguards management at state and local levels. This component
                              would enhance the enabling environment to help scale up and leverage action on the ground to
                              reduce deforestation and forest degradation. Component 3 of the Program would have also
                              beneficial impacts through a robust safeguards system that will be established in the Grant period,
                              and continue to be strengthened during the ERPA period to ensure that the Program’s citizen
Public Disclosure Copy




                              engagement, equitable sharing of program benefits, GRM and safeguards risks management steps
                              are sustained beyond the Grant period; and GoE will allocate adequate resources (human and
                              financial) for safeguards implementation/due diligence.

                             The OFLP area provides a wider range of interrelated co-benefits in biodiversity conservation,
                             adaptation, ecosystem services, social and broader economic benefits. It is clear that the forest
                             dwellers and other forest dependent communities, including downstream users, are highly
                             dependent on the co-benefits of the forest ecosystems and other natural resources for their
                             livelihoods. The presence of these co-benefits could enable the OFLP to have more beneficial
                             impacts than the carbon benefits. It is also useful to note that the carbon benefits should play a
                             catalytic role to ensure the sustainability and multiplier effects of the Program.

                             Environment:

                             Some of the local-level investment activities under Component 1 may have limited adverse
                             environmental risks; these activities could potentially include construction or rehabilitation of
                             physical structures for catchment management such as afforestation/reforestation, area closures,
                             check-dams, water harvesting structures, agricultural intensification (including small-scale
                             irrigation that may necessitate applying agrochemicals), and access roads. Component 3 may have
                             also adverse environmental and social impacts, specifically in relation to benefit sharing. Hence,

                                                                        Page 7 of 13
                         grievance can arise at different administrative levels of the region in relation to benefits and other
                         issues of OFLP. Unless grievances are timely and correctly resolved, it scales up and may reach
                         the level that brings failure in the implementations of OFLP. Therefore, environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         risks from activities under Components 1 and 3 can be avoided or mitigated using the OFLP
                         safeguards instruments, including the ESMF and the Social Assessment (as part of the ongoing
                         SESA).

                         Social:

                         OFLP’s anticipated social impacts have triggered OP/BP.4.12 and OP/BP.4.10, and the program
                         has put in place mitigation measures acceptable to the WBG to mitigate these impacts. On OP/
                         BP.4.12, based on the fact that specific sites are not known, OFLP adopted a framework approach
                         as a precautionary measure to preclude and manage social safeguard risks. Accordingly, RPF and
                         PF are prepared (involving participating communities, PFMs, cooperatives, civil society
                         organizations and community actors), consulted upon and will be disclosed publicly to cover
                         impacts on land acquisition and restriction of access to natural resources. In the Bale Mountains
                         National Park , where a potential resettlement may occur the Government will need to apply the
                         WBG safeguard policies to ensure that global good practice is followed in precluding and
                         managing any potential physical and/or economic displacement.
                         On OP/BP.4.10: the RPF is complemented by a Social Assessment (as part of the SESA) study to
                         assess key socio-economic factors that require consideration, identify vulnerable and underserved
                         groups that meet the OP/BP. 4.10 requirements that may be excluded and mitigate any adverse
                         impacts as well as ensure that these people benefit from the program in a sustainable manner. The
                         findings of the Social Assessment (as part of the SESA) and a detailed summary of the main issues
                         raised by the beneficiaries during the consultation process, used in fostering broad community
                         support, and provision of grievance redress, benefit sharing, monitoring and proposed solutions as
                         related to vulnerable and underserved groups have been included as social risk mitigation
                         measures and outlined in the Social Development Plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Grievance Redress Mechanism: Communities and individuals in OFLP operation sites who believe
                         that they are adversely affected by the program may submit complaints to existing program-level
                         grievance redress mechanisms or the WBG’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS). OFLP Grievance
                         Redress Mechanism builds on the Ethiopian Grievance Redress Mechanisms as part of a robust
                         risk mitigation measure. The program would support citizen’s complaints or grievances in a
                         formalized, transparent, cost-effective, and time-bound manner. All program-affected people
                         would be informed about how to register grievances or complaints, including specific concerns on
                         any OFLP activities. The OFLP GRM ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to
                         address program-related concerns.

                         Gender: The OFLP will mainstream gender equality in sharing program benefits and strengthen
                         grievance redress as part of citizen engagement aimed at listening to stakeholders and seeking their
                         consensus on OFLP-related activities. OFLP activities would be gender sensitive, including such
                         aspects as household energy demand management, household livelihoods support activities,
                         community forest tenure piloting, and the scaling up of PFM structures. The OFLP benefit sharing
                         mechanism design process, safeguards implementation, community participation and citizen
                         engagement issues, would also include efforts to ensure and enhance female involvement. M&E
                         indicators would be disaggregated by gender to inform OFLP’s adaptive management. The gender
                         aspects of OFLP will address the strategic and practical needs of women while ensuring equity in
                         the process. All proposed enabling environment and investment activities will be screened through

                                                                    Page 8 of 13
                           the gender lens to test practical mainstreaming.
                           The ESMF has been publicly disclosed in-country and in the World Bank Group’s Info Shop as
                           per WBG requirements on October 14 and 19, 2015, respectively.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           While individual Program activities/subprojects are not yet identified, there will be support for
                           local-level activities described under Component 1 of the Program. These activities/subprojects
                           are expected to support landscape management through rehabilitation, small civil works,
                           afforestation and reforestation, assisted natural regeneration, and PFM. It is not anticipated that
                           there will be indirect environmental and social impacts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The only alternative is a "no project" alternative. The "no project" alternative would devoid forest
                           dependent communities from improving their livelihoods by boosting improved landscape
                           management, forest ecosystem services, participatory forest management, non-timber forest
                           products market linkage, agricultural productivity, etc. Therefore, this alternative was discarded as
                           it was not a viable option.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The capacity of institutions at federal, regional and woreda levels is generally low to effectively
                           implement safeguards. Therefore, the program allocated over 1.63 USD to build the capacity of
                           relevant institutions at all levels.

                           In addition, to preclude and manage safeguard risk, a robust safeguard system will be established
                           in the Grant period, and continue to be strengthened during the ERPA period to ensure that the
                           program’s citizen engagement, equitable sharing of program benefits, GRM and safeguards risks
                           management steps are sustained beyond the Grant period; and GoE will allocate adequate
Public Disclosure Copy




                           resources (human and financial) for safeguards implementation/due diligence. Further, the
                           capacity building efforts of OFLP will be complemented by CRGE Facility implementation which
                           is in the process of establishing a country-wide system for mainstreaming environmental and
                           social concerns into development. OFLP capacity building efforts will also be complemented by
                           the ongoing Promoting of Basic Services (PBS) Project that has a well-funded component focused
                           on Risk and Safeguard Management Capacity to boost Woreda level ability to manage
                           environmental and social risks. With this component over the next three years (a) development of
                           Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) Operational Manual, including training
                           modules for Woreda level staff, (b) training for about 200 Woreda level staff in the basic sectors,
                           and (c) customizing the ESMS Operational Manual to regions (at least in four regions) will be
                           carried out. A three-year “Enhancing Shared Prosperity through Equitable Services) PforR, which
                           was approved by the World Bank Board on 15 September 2015, will further strengthen this
                           capacity building effort. Lastly, the GoE is expected to allocate US$1.68 million from the ER
                           payment to cover administrative costs during the ERPA period.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include: (i) communities, forest dwellers and users, farmers, herders,
                           cooperatives, and water users who would benefit from OFLP interventions directly or
                           downstream; (ii) federal institutions such as MEF, MoFED, MoA, MoWIE, and EWCA; (iii)
                           Oromia regional state institutions such as the Vice President’s Office, OFWE and bureaus of


                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                           agriculture, water, irrigation and energy, rural land and environmental protection, local
                           governments and other public institutions that would either directly implement OFLP and/or
                           benefit from it; (iv) other regional states that could learn from OFLP as they advance their own
Public Disclosure Copy




                           forest programs and/or REDD+ pilots; (v) community-based organizations and NGOs delivering
                           services to farmers; and (vi) private sector entities involved in providing services such as inputs
                           and extension or in commercial endeavors such as coffee and other forest products. Institutional
                           capacity is slowly strengthening; some of the main challenges include weak multi-sector
                           coordination, overlapping mandates, and inadequate staffing at all levels.

                           During the preparation of the safeguards instruments for the OFLP, all concerned stakeholders
                           have been consulted in a timely, culturally-appropriate and inclusive manner. Moreover, the
                           Executive Summary of the ESMF, Social Assessment (as part of the SESA), RPF, and PF will be
                           translated into Afaan Oromoo and other local languages and disclosed locally in all the offices of
                           the OFWE, and will also be disclosed in country (at the web sites of the OFWE and MEFDCC)
                           and in the Bank's Infoshop.
                           Community Participation and Citizen Engagement During Implementation: OFLP would focus on
                           increasing community engagement and participation in forest management and decision-making. It
                           would do so by seeking to: a) increase capacity of the forest dependent communities and citizens
                           to make their own decisions about the community-led planning process; b) increase the capacity
                           and responsiveness of regional and woreda administrations to respond to citizen demand, and c)
                           support channels where citizens and various levels of government can work together in the context
                           of implementation and monitoring of community-led forest management. Citizen feedback and a
                           series of consultations with community members, government officials, and representatives of
                           CSOs will continue during implementation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         14-Oct-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      16-Oct-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                            14-Oct-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         16-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      19-Oct-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                            16-Oct-2015
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         19-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      19-Oct-2015




                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         16-Oct-2015
                           Comments: SESA (Social Development Plan is included as part of SA )
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Oct-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Ethiopia                                                         14-Oct-2015
                           Comments: Pest management plan is included in ESMF
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement

                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [     ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                   Page 12 of 13
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Stephen Danyo,Andre Rodrigues de Aquino
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 15-Dec-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Timothy H. Brown (PMGR)             Date: 24-Dec-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
