                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA1366
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jan-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jan-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Tanzania                           Project ID:   P125728
                            Project Name:     Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor of Tanzania Investment Project
                                              (P125728)
                            Task Team         Oliver Braedt
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       19-Jan-2016                          Estimated   03-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFA13                                 Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (75%), General agriculture, fishing and
                                              forestry sector (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural markets (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Micro, Small and
                                              Medium Enterprise support (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      75.00           Total Bank Financing:                70.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              70.00
                              Total                                                                                    75.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To support the adoption of new technologies and improved market access by small-holder farmers
                           through expanding and creating partnerships between small-holder farmers and agribusinesses in the
                           Southern Corridor of Tanzania.

                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         3. Project Description
                         The Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor Investment Project (“the Project”) will support specific
                         activities of the Government of Tanzania’s (GoT) larger Southern Agricultural Growth Corridor
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Program (“the Program”). The Project will be implemented over a periodof 5 years and will comprise
                         three components:

                         Component 1: Strengthening of SAGCOT Support Institutions (total USD14.33 million, IDA
                         USD5.95 million). This component will strengthen the capacity of SAGCOT Support Institutions in
                         order to pursue their functions of information and data provision, support of investment planning and
                         guidance, government/private sector intermediation, business enabling environment and investment
                         promotion. The component will support two institutions:

                         (i) SAGCOT Centre (total USD11.83 million, IDA USD3.45 million): The Project will support the
                         SAGCOT Centre, which was established as a public private partnership entity in 2011 to: (a)
                         facilitate agri-business and partnership development; (b) ensure inclusive and sustainable investment
                         and development; and (c) facilitate an improved enabling environment for investors. The Project will
                         support the Centre by providing financing for staff and operational costs, studies and consulting
                         services to be contracted by the Centre.
                         (ii) Tanzania Investment Centre (Government institution) (total USD2.50 million, IDA USD2.50
                         million): The Project will support the TIC which was established as a public sector entity in 1997 and
                         designated as the first point of call and a “one-stop facilitation centre” for all potential investors
                         coming into the country. The Project will support TIC to reform its processes with the aim to: (a)
                         strengthen its capacity to attract high quality, responsible, inclusive and sustainable commercial
                         investments (national and international private sector); (b) provide a competitive framework for
                         tendering; and (c) monitor and evaluate investments. The Project will finance equipment, technical
                         assistance and consultancies.

                         Component 2: Strengthening Smallholder Business Linkages (total USD85.76 million, IDA
Public Disclosure Copy




                         USD55.65 million): The objective of this component will be to link smallholder farmers to
                         agricultural value chains. The component will: (a) expand the number of smallholders linked to
                         agribusinesses in successful commercial partnerships; and (b) improve the benefits derived by
                         smallholders and rural communities from these partnerships in the form of growth in agricultural
                         productivity, income and employment. This component will comprise two sub-components:
                         (i)       Fund Management (total USD7.79 million, IDA USD7.79 million): Under this sub-
                         component the Project will support a management structure responsible for the implementation of the
                         Catalytic Trust Fund (including Board, Secretariat and Fund Manager). Project support will include
                         fees and salaries, goods and equipment, office operational costs, meetings and workshops,
                         communications, and technical assistance.
                         (ii) Matching Grants (total USD77.98 million, IDA USD47.86 million): Matching Grants (MG) of
                         USD250,000 up to USD1.5 million with a matching contribution of 30 percent (national businesses)
                         and 40 percent (international business operators) will be awarded to agribusiness companies with
                         undisputed land rights who apply in partnership with smallholder groups or associations, following a
                         defined process of application, evaluation and competitive selection. The grants can be used for
                         capital and operational costs directly related to expanding smallholder participation in competitive
                         agricultural supply chains.

                         Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (total USD8.41 million of which
                         USD3.80 million were provided by two Project Preparation Advances, IDA USD8.41 million): The


                                                                     Page 2 of 11
                         component will establish project management and M&E systems and provide financing for salaries,
                         office equipment, transportation and technical assistance services. Complementarities will
                         particularly be sought with other IDA funded programs such as the Private Sector Competitiveness
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project and the Agricultural Sector Development Program.

                         The Project’s direct beneficiaries will be smallholder farmers and agribusiness operators in the
                         SAGCOT area. Indirect beneficiaries will be smallholder farmers not directly supported by the
                         Project, and other agribusiness in the value chains (e.g., input suppliers, transporters and traders).
                         These indirect benefits will materialize through rural growth effects and spillover effects from new
                         technologies, investment, employment, incomes and new market opportunities introduced by the
                         Project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Southern Corridor covers approximately one third of mainland Tanzania and is aligned east-west
                         along a backbone of transport and energy infrastructure - the TANZAM highway, the TAZARA
                         railway and transmission lines from various hydropower plants. Within the corridor it is intended that
                         investment will be focused in "clusters" to achieve synergies and economies of scale.

                         The SAGCOT area covers a wide variety of landscapes, agro-ecological zones of exceptional
                         national and global ecological importance with large areas under some form of conservation
                         designation. In addition to sheltering unique plants and wildlife and supporting a major tourism
                         industry, the protected areas provide natural resources critical to the surrounding rural populations
                         (wood, grazing, bushmeat) and ecosystem services essential for downstream agriculture, fisheries,
                         hydropower and urban areas (water, flood regulation).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         George Campos Ledec (GEN01)
                         Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The SAGCOT Investment Project is creating and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      expanding partnerships between smallholder farmers and
                                                                     agribusinesses leading to adoption of new technologies
                                                                     and improved market access by smallholders. While
                                                                     direct impacts of subprojects financed through the
                                                                     Catalytic Fund are expected to be modest and site-
                                                                     specific, the Project is classified as a Category A given
                                                                     the scale of the Project, and its location within an area
                                                                     supporting environmentally sensitive habitats with high
                                                                     biodiversity. However, the categorization stems less from
                                                                     direct impacts, and more from the Project’s linkages with
                                                                     the overall SAGCOT Program, which may entail large-
                                                                     scale, cumulative impacts across the SAGCOT Corridor
                                                                     as a whole, and which includes environmentally sensitive
                                                                     locations including areas of high biodiversity and
                                                                     proximity to Critical Natural Habitats.
                                                                     A Strategic Regional Environmental and Social



                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                                                        Assessment (SRESA), and an Environmental and Social
                                                        Management Framework (ESMF) have been completed,
                                                        disclosed and discussed in a public consultation event.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        The SRESA looks at potential environmental and social
                                                        impacts associated with the broader SAGCOT Program,
                                                        while the ESMF set forth the mandatory procedures to be
                                                        applied to World Bank investments supported through the
                                                        SAGCOT Project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   There are numerous critical natural habitats and natural
                         4.04                           habitats (mainly forests and wetlands) in the SAGCOT
                                                        corridor. However, sub-projects likely to result in the
                                                        conversion of critical natural habitats will not be
                                                        supported by the SAGCOT Investment Project. The
                                                        screening form and E&S guidelines developed as part of
                                                        the ESMF seek to avoid impacts to Critical Natural
                                                        Habitats and provide mitigation measures to identify and
                                                        offset impacts to other non-critical habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   There are numerous natural forests and critical forest
                                                        areas within the corridor. Project-related activities have
                                                        the potential to affect the health and quality of these
                                                        forests and the rights and welfare of local residents
                                                        dependent on forest resources. The screening form and
                                                        E&S guidelines developed as part of the ESMF seek to
                                                        avoid impacts to critical forest areas and provide
                                                        mitigation measures to identify and offset impacts to other
                                                        non-critical forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    Some of the project activities are likely to promote
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        intensive commercial agriculture in tropical and
                                                        subtropical environments with significant pest and disease
                                                        control challenges. The GoT has therefore consulted upon
                                                        and disclosed an Integrated Pest Management Plan
                                                        (IPMP). The PMP sets out the specific pest management
                                                        safeguard measures and advisory support expected to be
                                                        included in Matching Grant sub-projects for: (i) integrated
                                                        pest management (which involves working to control
                                                        pests in ways that minimize the need for pesticides) and
                                                        (ii) when pesticides are still used, the measures to ensure
                                                        their safe use, storage, handling, and disposal.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The corridor covers about one third of Tanzania's land
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           area and therefore likely contains physical cultural
                                                        resources, including culturally significant natural sites.
                                                        However most remain undocumented. Some Project
                                                        activities may involve significant earthworks and land use
                                                        change and therefore have the potential to directly affect
                                                        Physical Cultural Resources. All sub-projects involving
                                                        earthworks must include an approved Chance Finds



                                                         Page 4 of 11
                                                        procedure in the construction contracts, to cover the
                                                        possibility of discovering physical cultural heritage in the
                                                        course of excavation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    A board waiver of this OP will be sought.
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Despite the social and economic benefits expected to
                         OP/BP 4.12                     accrue to the local communities and the country at large,
                                                        as a result of project activities, it is anticipated that the
                                                        various infrastructure development and productive
                                                        investments may entail land acquisition, or affect access
                                                        to common assets/resources and/or livelihoods of the
                                                        surrounding communities. These impacts cannot be fully
                                                        determined until applications are submitted by investors
                                                        to the Catalytic Fund for specific subprojects, and the
                                                        ESMF includes screening criteria for these types of
                                                        impacts. The subproject types that potentially could result
                                                        in resettlement, include:

                                                        •       support to the expansion of contract farming;
                                                        •       resolving small infrastructure bottlenecks in the
                                                        supply chain such as:
                                                        � fixing drainage problems blocking rural feeder roads;
                                                        or
                                                        � the refurbishment of a warehouse facility required for
                                                        product assembly.

                                                        A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                        prepared which includes principles and procedures for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        resettlement and compensation for project affected
                                                        people, and establishes standards for identifying,
                                                        assessing and mitigating negative impacts. The RPF will
                                                        be the basis for the preparation of subproject specific
                                                        Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) which will be prepared
                                                        and included in the proposals for funding if a given sub-
                                                        project will trigger the policy.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes    The Project will not finance any constructions of new
                         4.37                           dams. However, project activities might rely on the
                                                        performance of an existing dam or a dam under
                                                        construction. The ESMF includes specific screening
                                                        criteria to identify whether subprojects will rely on the
                                                        performance of an existing dam or a dam under
                                                        construction. In such cases, the ESMF contains guidelines
                                                        for the assessment and preparation of the Dam Safety
                                                        Measures Report.




                                                         Page 5 of 11
                            Projects on International   No             Project activities will not be located in a river, canal, lake
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       or similar body of water that forms a boundary with
                                                                       another state.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed        No             Project activities will not be located in disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The GoT’s SAGCOT Program as a whole carries the main objective of promoting agribusiness
                              investment which integrates larger numbers of smallholder farmers into internationally
                              competitive supply chains. Much of this effort will concentrate on the commercialization of
                              smallholder production systems. This is to be achieved, in large part, by linking these smallholders
                              with agribusinesses seeking commodity products for trade and processing. These agribusinesses
                              may include traders and agro-processors. The SAGCOT Program design assumes many will have
                              nucleus estates linked with outgrower operations in priority geographic clusters. The expansion of
                              commercial agribusiness operations both by smallholders and by nucleus estates is expected to
                              have significant cumulative (and induced) environmental and social impacts primarily on: (i)
                              water, (ii) land, (iii) biodiversity and (iv) community systems. The challenge is to support the
                              pursuit of income and employment gains linked with the development of commercial agriculture,
                              while protecting, and fairly allocating, environmental services.

                             In contrast, the potential environmental and social impacts of the World Bank-supported SAGCOT
                             Investment Project (“the Project”) are expected to be small-scale and localized, for which
                             mitigation measures can be readily developed. Specifically, a majority (75%) of the World Bank's
                             loan will be directed to support of the SAGCOT Catalytic Fund. While the specific investments
Public Disclosure Copy




                             are unknown at the present time, activities eligible for Matching Grants Fund financing are
                             expected to include investments such as extension support, the provision of agricultural inputs, the
                             provision of new technologies (such as new seed or plant or animal varieties), improved grades
                             and standards, and improved commodity assembly systems. There may also be investments in
                             small-scale infrastructure, such as rural road upgrading or small warehouses to ease bottlenecks in
                             the supply chain. Such investments are expected to be small scale and with limited potential for
                             negative social or environmental impacts. The ESMF includes measures to address these localized
                             negative environmental and social impacts (in relation to, e.g., land acquisition, livelihoods, water
                             and wildlife).

                             Potential impacts of the Project include air, soil and water pollution associated with the
                             construction and operation of facilities, environmental and human health risks associated with
                             increased pesticide use, typical construction impacts (e.g. dust, noise, construction waste
                             management), and possibly, modest resettlement.

                             Most of the remainder of the World Bank's loan (22%) will be directed towards support for two
                             key SAGCOT Program institutions. The project will (i) finance the core functions of the SAGCOT
                             Centre which is tasked with facilitating the entire SAGCOT Program, and (ii) support core
                             functions at the Tanzania Investment Centre, including its ability to attract responsible
                             agribusiness investment. These two organizations are central to the operations of the SAGCOT

                                                                        Page 6 of 11
                           Program, and by building capacity for improved environmental and social management, the
                           Project will contribute to improved management of those issues for the overall SAGCOT Program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           While direct impacts of subprojects financed through the SAGCOT Catalytic Fund (the core
                           aspect of the World Bank-financed Project) are expected to be modest and site-specific, the Project
                           is classified as a Category A operation. The categorization stems less from direct impacts, and
                           more from the Project’s linkages with the overall SAGCOT Program, which may entail large-
                           scale, cumulative impacts across the SAGCOT Corridor as a whole, which includes
                           environmentally sensitive locations including areas of high biodiversity and proximity to Critical
                           Natural Habitats.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           As mentioned, the World Bank-supported SAGCOT Investment Project is not expected to lead to
                           any significant negative indirect or long-term environmental impacts. However, there are
                           important potential negative induced impacts associated with overall SAGCOT Program across the
                           SAGCOT Corridor as a whole, which includes environmentally sensitive locations including areas
                           of high biodiversity and proximity to Critical Natural Habitats. Such issues are not unique to the
                           SAGCOT Program, and in fact are challenges faced by many development initiatives in Tanzania
                           given the rich diversity of sensitive ecosystems across the country.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The World Bank-supported SAGCOT Investment Project focuses on the Matching Grants window
                           of the Catalytic Fund, but complements this with capacity building for the SAGCOT Center and
                           TIC, including support to strengthen monitoring of environmental and social impacts and
                           improvement of associated due diligence systems.

                           Regarding the overall SAGCOT Program design, the SRESA evaluated several development
                           scenarios, including 1) the “no project” alternative, 2) SAGCOT high growth, and 3) SAGCOT
Public Disclosure Copy




                           “green” model including mandatory programs to promote environmental and social sustainability.
                           This assessment highlights that the existing situation (e.g. the “no project” alternative) is likely to
                           have significant negative large-scale environmental and social impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address these challenges and strengthen awareness and understanding of the broader
                           environmental and social risks in the SAGCOT areas, and build capacity to address these risks, the
                           GoT has prepared three documents to address environmental safeguards issues: AStrategic
                           Regional Environmental and Social Assessment (SRESA); an Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (ESMF); and an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP). The SRESA
                           looks at potential environmental and social impacts associated with the broader SAGCOT
                           Program, while the ESMF and IPMP set forth the mandatory procedures to be applied to World
                           Bank investments supported through the SAGCOT Project (focusing on the Matching Grants
                           Facility). To address social safeguards issues GoT has prepared Resettlement Policy Framework
                           (RPF) and a Vulnerable Groups Planning Framework (VGPF), annexed to the ESMF, Rapid
                           Social Assessment (VGRSA), which will be the basises for the preparation of subproject specific
                           Vulnerable Groups Plans. In light of the ongoing discussion with the Government of Tanzania on
                           applying the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP 4.10), the Bank will seek a waiver to the policy at
                           Board. The VGPF sets out a proposed approach for preparing social assessments to analyze needs


                                                                      Page 7 of 11
                           of vulnerable groups, including measures for engagement and participation in project supported
                           sub-projects. This approach ensures that vulnerable groups (e.g., those that may be below the food
                           poverty line, lack access to basic social services―including those that are geographically isolated,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and are not integrated with society at large and its institutions due to physical, or social factors)
                           participate in informed consultations and benefit from sub-projects under the project in appropriate
                           ways. Vulnerable groups in the project area include women-headed households, the elderly,
                           disabled, youth, children, refugees, persons with HIV/AIDs and disadvantaged communities.
                           The mandatory safeguards procedures set forth in the ESMF (including the VGPF), IPMP, and
                           RPF and VGP are applicable to the subprojects of the Matching Grant window of the Catalytic
                           Fund. Such procedures will be overseen by the Fund Manager who will be selected, in part, based
                           on their capacity to ensure adequate environmental and social management.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           While the Project primarily supports the Catalytic Fund, it provides direct support to the Tanzania
                           Investment Centre (TIC), and the SAGCOT Centre in their efforts to encourage agribusiness
                           investment and mitigate environmental and social risks. These, in turn, are expected to interact
                           with several other coordinating and oversight agencies, including the Prime Minister’s Office, the
                           Vice President’s Office and National Environmental Management Council (NEMC) and the
                           Ministry of Lands, Housing and Human Settlement Development (MLHHSD). However, it is
                           important to note that the Catalytic Fund is a new entity and the administrative structures for
                           environmental and social management will require monitoring to ensure that safeguard
                           instruments are properly implemented.

                           Public Consultation and Disclosure: The preparation of the safeguard documents (i.e., ESMF,
                           PMP, RPF and SRSEA) has followed a broad-based and in-depth consultation approach including
                           interviews with relevant stakeholder groups in the public and private sectors and civil society.
                           These included producer organizations, cooperatives and out-growers, key ministries and
                           government agencies, district officials, agriculturalists, fishers, wildlife and tourism stakeholders,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           pastoralists and active development agencies and conservation organizations. In addition, the
                           SAGCOT Centre has led multiple stakeholder meetings to convey the Program objectives and
                           benefits.

                           The ESMF, IPMP, RPF, and SRESA have been disclosed in-country, and were presented in a
                           public consultation event held in Dar es Salaam on October 2, 2013. These documents have also
                           been disclosed in Infoshop. The VGPF, PMP and VGRSA will also be disclosed, the latter as an
                           annex to the ESMF and publically consulted.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          24-Jul-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       26-Aug-2013
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          24-Sep-2015
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tanzania                                                             27-Jul-2012
                           Comments: Redisclosed in Country on August 22, 2013.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process

                                                                      Page 8 of 11
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      22-Nov-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Nov-2013
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Tanzania                                                         11-Nov-2013
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-May-2014
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tanzania                                                         14-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?



                                                                    Page 9 of 11
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 10 of 11
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Oliver Braedt
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                     Date: 19-Jan-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Mark E. Cackler (PMGR)                      Date: 19-Jan-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 11 of 11
