                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC1166

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Mar-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mexico                           Project ID:      P153338
                            Project Name:      MX: Expanding Finance for Productive Purposes (P153338)
                            Task Team          Steen Byskov,Rekha Reddy
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          15-Apr-2015                      Estimated        30-Jul-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFMDR                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%), SME Finance (40%),
                                               Other non-bank financial intermediaries (40%)
                            Theme(s):          Other Financial Sector Development (80%), Other rural development (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    400.00                     Total Bank Financing:        400.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        400.00
                              Total                                                                        400.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The project’s development objective is to expand the availability of finance to the rural economy and
                           to strengthen the institutional capacity of FND and participating financial intermediaries (PFIs).
                           C. Project Description
                           The Government prioritized addressing the lack of productive credit in the Mexican financial system
                           through its system of development finance institutions (DFIs) in Mexico as part of the 2014 financial
                         reform. DFIs in Mexico address access to finance gaps mostly through second tier finance, partial
                         credit guarantees (PCGs), and technical assistance. In 2014, a key pillar of the new Government’s
                         economic reforms was a financial reform law with greater incentives for financial intermediaries to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         lend for productive purposes, including efforts to refocus state development bank operations to
                         address finance gaps and other restrictions related to credit. Mexico has an extensive system of
                         development finance that includes six development banks, six government trusts and four
                         development finance agencies to support key sectors, such as the rural economy. One of these
                         development finance agencies is Financiera Nacional de Desarrollo Agropecuario, Rural, Forestal y
                         Pesquero (FND), the proposed borrower for this operation.

                         The project will have two components supporting the development of productive finance for the rural
                         economy in Mexico:
                         -Component 1: A line of credit through participating intermediaries (PFI) to MSMEs (approximately
                         US$370 million). FND will offer lines of credit to PFIs, which will be either financial intermediaries
                         or producer organizations. The PFIs on-lend to MSMEs enabling them to expand their activities. The
                         loan products will not be restricted by the project and are likely to be mostly working capital, but
                         may also include investment finance and financing for warehouse receipts. In addition to supporting
                         the general objective of improving access to credit, the component will help FND increase its
                         proportion of credit disbursed through intermediaries, which was at 45 percent in 2014. Up to US$10
                         million of this component can be applied to piloting of new MSME financing solutions by FND. Up
                         to US$10 million of this component can be applied to piloting of new MSME financing solutions by
                         FND.

                         -Component 2: Strengthening institutional capacity to provide sustainable finance (approximately
                         US$30 million) . This component will provide assistance to FND to support enhanced internal
                         processes and IT systems will be important to support improved efficiency and risk management
                         capabilities of FND. This component will also support capacity building activities for PFIs with the
                         goal of a vibrant evolution of the financial sector with new institutions entering the market and
                         existing institutions upgrading their activities. This activity will expand the number of PFIs receiving
Public Disclosure Copy




                         technical assistance services, including training on business planning, IT systems, credit
                         underwriting, and administration and risk management processes for borrowers in the rural economy.
                         These funds could also be used to assist potential PFIs meet FND eligibility criteria with the goal of
                         helping strong formal financial intermediaries in evolving from the unsupervised segment, and
                         helping existing institutions expand the services they offer by upgrading their licenses.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The exact project location of sub-project activities will not be known prior to appraisal. However,
                         the final borrowers of the credit line will be agricultural producers and other members of the rural
                         economy of Mexico.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         FND has a prior and a current loan with the Inter-American Development Bank (IDB) and has
                         experience applying their existing safeguards policies. For example, they are currently working with
                         the IDB indigenous people’s policy and screening for involuntary resettlement impacts . FND
                         already has in place an indigenous people’s strategy, which it is in the process of implementing.
                         They are also applying IDB environmental safeguards.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Dora Patricia Andrade (GENDR)
                           Martin Henry Lenihan (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment      Yes        This project is proposed as a Category B as it is
                           OP/BP 4.01                               unlikely to result in significant negative
                                                                    environmental impacts and any adverse impacts are
                                                                    identifiable, mostly temporary and easily mitigated
                                                                    with known management techniques.
                                                                    Since the exact projects will not be known prior to
                                                                    appraisal, although will be relatively small credits for
                                                                    medium, small and micro enterprises to enhance
                                                                    productivity, an ESMF will be prepared. The Project
                                                                    and the ESMF will exclude financing of any
                                                                    Category A subprojects. Cumulative impacts are not
                                                                    foreseen given the wide range of sub-project
                                                                    locations, their relatively small size, and the very low
                                                                    probability of a large number of small project in a
                                                                    limited geographic area ad the nature of the relatively
                                                                    small investments (mostly working capital) in
                                                                    medium, small and micro enterprises to enhance
                                                                    productivity). The ESMF will include a procedure
                                                                    for sub-project screening by FND or the partner
                                                                    financial intermediary (PFI) (i.e., via line of credit
                                                                    from FND to the PFI). The ESMF will also include:
                                                                    (a) requirements for sub-projects and for PFIs which
                                                                    would receive credit lines; (b) potential applicable
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    legal environmental, social and cultural resources
                                                                    protection requirements that may apply to the
                                                                    subprojects; (c) training and capacity building
                                                                    activities; and (d) supervision and reporting
                                                                    requirements. Before appraisal, an assessment will be
                                                                    made on the current SAGAS framework (Sistema de
                                                                    Analisis y Gestión Ambiental y Social) in use by
                                                                    FND for similar activities with IDB financing and if
                                                                    it satisfies Bank requirements, it will be accepted or
                                                                    adapted/modified when necessary.
                                                                    The draft will be disclosed and consulted with key
                                                                    stakeholders.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes        While the exact project types are not known, the
                                                                    policy will be triggered on a precautionary basis and
                                                                    the appropriate measures included in the ESMF.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes        While the exact project types are not known, the
                                                                    policy will be triggered on a precautionary basis and
                                                                    the appropriate measures included in the ESMF.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     Yes                        The Project will not finance the acquisition of
                                                                                                                        significant quantities of pesticides in a subproject.
                                                                                                                        However subprojects may involve the purchase and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        use of pesticides and the ESMF will include
                                                                                                                        applicable measures.
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 TBD                        It is not anticipated that subprojects will involve
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             significant impact on physical cultural resources.
                                                                                                                        However this will be assessed during project
                                                                                                                        preparation.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    Yes                        Indigenous people constitute up to 15% of the
                                 4.10                                                                                   population of Mexico, and indigenous communities,
                                                                                                                        located in the marginalized parts of Mexico,
                                                                                                                        represent a potentially important group of project
                                                                                                                        beneficiaries. The client recognizes the importance
                                                                                                                        of this client group and has a strategy in place to
                                                                                                                        target their inclusion.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                No                         All of the sub-projects to be financed under this
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                operation will be carried out on private land owned
                                                                                                                        or leased by the ultimate beneficiaries. In order to
                                                                                                                        avoid potential impacts on third parties, the
                                                                                                                        environmental management system includes a
                                                                                                                        question on involuntary resettlement that will allow
                                                                                                                        the intermediary financial institutions to exclude
                                                                                                                        activities that may result in resettlement impacts.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project would not support the construction or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of dams, nor would support other
                                                                                                                        investments which rely on the services of existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project would not affect international waterways
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   as defined under this policy.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project would not affect disputed areas as
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                defined under this policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Mar-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared. In practice, the
                                      ESMF would be a screening tool to help key personnel to identify which projects to exclude from
                                      Bank financing. The ESMF will also help manage perceived environmental and/or social risks in
                                      approved projects.
                                      Given the presence of indigenous people in the project area, an indigenous peoples planning
                                      framework will need to be prepared. This framework will be based on the client’s indigenous
                                      people’s strategy currently in place. The strategy will be updated during preparation, and




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             discussed with the relevant indigenous people’s organizations prior to project appraisal. It is
                             expected that the IPPF and the ESMF will be prepared by the end of March or April of 2015.
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Steen Byskov,Rekha Reddy
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                                       Date:
                           Practice Manager/    Name:                                                      Date:
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
