                                  The World Bank
                                  Chad: Mainstreaming the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Oct-2018 | Report No: ISDSC25387




                         Oct 22, 2018                                                                                             Page 1 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Chad: Mainstreaming the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                            Project Name                 Environmental Category   Country
                                                                 Chad: Mainstreaming the
                           P168666                               Extractive Industries        C - Not Required (C)     Chad
                                                                 Transparency Initiative
                           Team Leader(s)                        Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                       Investment Project
                           Silvana Tordo                                                      GEEXI
                                                                                                                       Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                      0.35
                           Total Financing                                                                                                         0.35
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00

                           DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                         0.35
                                  Extractives Global Programmatic Support                                                                         0.35


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project's development objective is to contribute to the implementation of the 2016 EITI standards and the
                           mainstreaming of EITI reporting.

                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will finance the following activities:

                                 1. Develop the procedures and infrastructure for contract and information disclosure (US$50,000).
                                    The project will support the National Secretariat to: (i) implement the Government disclosure policy,
                                    and document deviations in practice including their bases (compile an Excel file, including annexes
                                    and amendments to contracts); (ii) ensure that the EITI Chad website provides documents in
                                    searchable pdf, with easily identifiable connection to license/contract areas.



                         Oct 22, 2018                                                                                                         Page 2 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Chad: Mainstreaming the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative




                                 2. Strengthen the communication and dissemination effectiveness of the EITI national secretariat
                                    (US$90,000). The project will finance: (i) the preparation of stakeholders mapping to identify
                                    constituencies, focusing on civil society; (ii) the identification of effective communication channels
                                    and strategies; (iii) the effective dissemination of the 2016 EITI report; and (iv) the identification and
                                    use of communication effectiveness indicators.
                                 3. Strengthen the national secretariat's administrative processes and internal controls (US$210,000).
                                    The project will finance (i) the implementation, and to the extent possible, the automation of internal
                                    administrative processes and procedures; (ii) the development and implementation of a monitoring
                                    and results framework, to accompany the planned decrease in administrative cost (currently
                                    70 percent of total cost) and increase in activity implementation ratio (currently 47 percent of total
                                    cost).
                                 4. Mainstream the collection and reporting of government extractive revenue for EITI purposes
                                    (US$50,000). The project will finance a scoping study to identify efficient institutional arrangements
Public Disclosure Copy




                                    for the collection and reporting of government revenue under EITI, and the extent of possible
                                    automation in the production of information and supporting documentation. The findings will inform
                                    the design of reporting templates, to be implemented as part of the information systems upgrade
                                    (Customs' ASYCUDA, the Tax Department's SIGTAS, and the national oil company's SIG) supported by
                                    the Domestic Resource Mobilization and Management project.
                                 5. Project management (US$20,000). Financial management and procurement for this grant will be
                                    carried out by ST-PAMFIP an existing and functioning Project Implementation Unit (PIU) on behalf of
                                    the EITI National Permanent Secretariat. The project will cover additional administrative costs to be
                                    incurred by the PIU to undertake these activities, including project audits.

                           Project activities may be adjusted during implementation if necessary to reflect new priorities that
                           might arise from the EITI independent validation process, expected to be completed in October 2018.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project is identified under Safeguards Category C, implying that the environmental and social impacts are
                          not anticipated. The grant will not finance studies or assessments linked to potential mineral extraction, and
                          none of the project activities have direct or indirect impact on the environment. Most project activities are
                          expected to be located in N'Djamena, and are not anticipated to trigger any World Bank safeguard policy.
                          Awareness campaigns may be rolled out across the country.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                         Oct 22, 2018                                                                                                  Page 3 of 5
                                  The World Bank
                                  Chad: Mainstreaming the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative




                          The Ministry of Petroleum and Energy and the Ministry of Environment have a long history of monitoring and
                          enforcing environmental and social performance of operators in the extractive industries. Notwithstanding,
                          high staff turn-over and limited resources mean that capacities at both ministries are moderate. On the other
                          hand, the EITI Permanent National Secretariat has considerable experience in the area of public consultation,
                          social inclusion and outreach developed over the past 11 years of participation in the EITI process.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Bougadare Kone, Environmental Specialist
                          Mahamadou Ahmadou Maiga, Social Specialist
Public Disclosure Copy




                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                     This policy is not triggered because the
                                                                                                     project will finance technical assistance
                                                                                                     focused on strengthening governance and
                                                                                                     transparency processes associated with the
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                No
                                                                                                     implementation of EITI. No physical
                                                                                                     investment, or activity that would result in
                                                                                                     environmental impacts will be financed by
                                                                                                     the project.

                                                                                                     This policy is not triggered as project
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No
                                                                                                     activities are not expected to have any
                                                                                                     impacts on natural habitats.

                                                                                                     This policy is not triggered as project
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 No                      activities are not expected to have any
                                                                                                     impacts on or infringe into designated
                                                                                                     forests.

                                                                                                     This policy is not triggered as the project
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                            No
                                                                                                     will not finance the procurement or use of
                                                                                                     pesticides.
                                                                                                     This policy is not triggered as project
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             No                      activities are not expected to have any
                                                                                                     impact on physical cultural resources.
                                                                                                     This policy is not triggered given that
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      No                      project activities are not expected to cause
                                                                                                     any impacts on indigenous peoples.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                No
                                                                                                     This policy is not triggered given that

                         Oct 22, 2018                                                                                                          Page 4 of 5
                                   The World Bank
                                   Chad: Mainstreaming the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative



                                                                                                                      project activities are not expected to cause
                                                                                                                      any physical or economic displacement, nor
                                                                                                                      any restriction in access to natural
                                                                                                                      resources.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given the project
                                                                                                                      is not financing any dam construction or
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No
                                                                                                                      rehabilitation nor any activities that rely on
                                                                                                                      the operations of existing dams.
                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given the project
                                                                                                                      is not financing any activities in
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                                                                                                                      international waterways as defined by the
                                                                                                                      policy.

                                                                                                                      This policy is not triggered given the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No
                                                                                                                      is not financing any activities in disputed
                                                                                                                      areas as defined by the policy.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Silvana Tordo

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Hanneke Van Tilburg                               24-Sep-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Christopher Gilbert Sheldon                       02-Oct-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Oct 22, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 5 of 5
