                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC16146

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Zimbabwe                       Project ID:       P158475
                            Project Name:        Implementation support to the PICES survey in Zimbabwe
                            Team Leader(s):      Robertus A Swinkels
                            Estimated Date       13-Sep-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GPV07                          Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.9                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Zimbabwe Reconstruction Fund (ZIMREF)                                                        1.9
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project is Recipient Executed (RE) and complements one other World Bank activity (P157466)
                           which is Bank Executed (BE). The project focuses on implementation of the PICES survey with the
                           following objective: enhance the understanding of poverty and its causes by increasing the
                           availability and analysis of high quality data on poverty, other welfare indicators and on household
                           income earning activities through implementation of a high quality PICES survey that meets
                           international standards. The complementary BE activity (P157466) consists of technical assistance to
                           support (i) survey design and data analysis and (ii) development planning and monitoring and
                           evaluation.
                           C. Project Description
                           While data on poverty and other social outcomes have been collected in Zimbabwe, these are
                           currently not consistently used for decision-making by policy makers and planners. Nor are they
                           used much for in-depth analysis by poverty researchers that helps understand characteristics of the
                           poor and extreme poor and assess key causes of poverty. Analysis of collected household survey data
                           has so far been limited due to lack of access to micro-data. In addition, data gaps exist on the links
                           between poverty and the productivity (by gender) of informal income generating activities such as
                           agricultural production or household enterprises. As consequence the understanding of causes of
                           poverty and the binding constraints for addressing these is limited. This makes it difficult to design
                           possible pathways out of poverty and the priority policy, investment and other spending measures
                           actions that should be taken. The government has agreed to draft a PRSP for 2019-2024 which will
                           need to be grounded in sound policy analysis. The World Bank also needs to conduct analytical work
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on poverty and the effectiveness of policy policies and programs as part of the process to obtain new
                           access to concessional lending.

                           The proposed project will finance the implementation of a new Poverty Income Consumption and
                           Expenditure Survey by the Zimbabwe statistical office (ZIMSTAT) in 2016 and 2017. Support will
                           be provided within the context of the PICES technical committee the members of which consist of
                           development partners co-funding the survey, ZIMSTAT staff and representatives of government
                           ministries. Survey costs are estimated at US$ 2.8 million for a sample size of 32,000 households.
                           UNICEF has committed US$ 300,000. The World Bank's contribution to the proposed activity is
                           fixed at US$ 1.9 million. This means that insufficient funding is available for a 32,000 household
                           survey. However, if there is agreement with the client on a smaller survey sample, the costs of the
                           survey will be in line with available funds. Discussions in this area are on-going. The Zimbabwe
                           statistical office currently does not share PICES survey data with researchers and other users outside
                           ZIMSTAT. World Bank funding of the PICES 2016/17 survey will be conditional on (i) a
                           commitment to share the micro-data with users outside ZIMSTAT, (ii) acceptance of the World Bank
                           as a technical partner, and agreement to conduct joint technical work e.g. on the questionnaire,
                           sample size and data analysis so that these can meet World Bank quality standards; ultimately the
                           questionnaire and the sample size will need to be approved by the World Bank. Recently the
                           government has indicated that it is willing to start sharing raw data with users and it has started to put
                           in place mechanisms (including a statutatory instrument) for making that possible.

                           The complementary BE activity (P157466) will consist of technical assistance to (i) survey design
                           and data analysis and to (ii) producing a poverty focused development plan in collaboration with the
                           authorities. Technical assistance to survey design and data analysis will serve to bring the
                           questionnaire in line with international practice for poverty surveys, to ensure the sample size is
                           effective and efficient, to produce data aggregates, anonymize data, conduct data analysis training,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           calculate welfare indicators and produce high quality poverty/welfare analysis.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Robertus A Swinkels
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                    Date: 28-Jun-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Pablo Fajnzylber (PMGR)                                      Date: 28-Jun-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
