INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12387
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Somalia                    Project ID:   P152241
Project Name:   Somali Core Economic Institutions and Opportunities Program (SCORE)
(P152241)
Task Team       Michael Olavi Engman,Suhail Kassim,Thilasoni Benjamin Musuku
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Sep-2015                Estimated     10-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTC01                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General industry and trade sector (75%), General finance sector (25%)
Theme(s):       Other Private Sector Development (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      30.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund                                     30.00
Total                                                           30.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to: (i) improve the enabling environment for private and
financial sector development; and (ii) catalyze private investment and job creation.
C. Project Description
The project will continue the process of building stronger governance and institutional foundations at
some of Somalia's most important economic institutions (the Central Banks, Port Authorities,


﻿Ministry of Commerce and Industry (MoCI)). It would also support economic recovery by
facilitating entrepreneurship, improving access to formal sources of finance, strengthening skills
formation and business development services providers, and by providing fiscal incentives for
inward investment.
0
Component 1 would help strengthen the economic institutions in three critical areas of the economy:
(i) central banking, to allow for the emergence of a formal financial sector, which would improve
access to finance; (ii) the MoCIs, to support the introduction of a basic and more modem legal and
regulatory framework that would reduce transaction costs for entrepreneurs; and (iii) local port and
customs authorities, to leverage private capital, networks and expertise to improve performance of
the port sector.
Component 2 would help expand economic opportunities in Somalia through two support
mechanisms: one linked to (a) skills formation and private sector capacity building (MSME Service
Center); and another one (b) linked to direct financial incentives aimed at crowding in private
investment in innovative and labor-intensive activities (Catalytic Fund).
Component 3 would provide support for Project management.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The geographic coverage would include metropolitan areas in Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland in
the first phase. Security permitting, the project interventions supporting the private sector would then
be rolled out in more urban areas of the country. The project activities with potentially relevant
environmental and social (E&S) impacts would be those of Component 2, where funding for a wide
scope of economic activities would be provided, some of which could have E&S impacts that would
have to be managed and mitigated.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Somalia is a fragile and conflict affected country emerging from a 20 year long conflict and the
recipient's institutional capacity for safeguard policies is low. Also national legislation for
environmental assessment and management is currently not existing, necessitating the adoption of
external policies and standards, such as the WBG's safeguards policies and performance standards.
*       Another aspect of the regulatory and institutional environment is the absence of, or only rudimentary
functioning of the environmental service sector (e.g. water supply, sewage disposal, waste disposal).
Thus the project will need to be conscientious of environmental issues that could arise from the lack
of water supply (e.g. private wells / boreholes outside anyone's knowledge or control), and the
treatment and disposal of gaseous emissions, effluents and solid waste (unregulated emissions,
pollution of air and surface water / groundwater, unregulated / unmanaged waste disposal). To
underscore this issue, none of the territorial capitals has a waste management facility designed to
modern standards and operated to acceptable practice, neither a functioning wastewater treatment
plant, thus a rapid expansion of e.g. manufacturing, processing or small industry could result in
serious bottlenecks for environmental services. A close dialogue with utilities and municipal
authorities will help to identify concrete risks and design measures to avoid, minimize and mitigate.
Also, other Bank-financed projects are addressing some of these issues, e.g. waste management in
Hargeisa by an urban development project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Wolfhart Pohl (GCFDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes          Sub-component 2(a) would fund a wide scope of
OP/BP 4.01                               economic activities, some of which could have
significant E&S impacts that would have to be
managed and mitigated. Some E&S due diligence
mechanism and related instrument (an ESMF is
proposed) will thus be designed and implemented,
which would screen for possible impacts, offer
guidance on assessment, management and mitigation
requirements, and provide boundaries for the scope
of financing (e.g. in form of a negative list of
undesirable entrepreneurial activities).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The project will geographically be located in urban
areas, where no natural habitats / protected areas are
expected to be present.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The project will geographically be located in urban
areas, where no forests are expected to be present.
Hence, the project is not expected to finance
activities that impact on forests or bring about
change in utilization of forests or plantations
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project will not finance economic activities
related to pest management. Such activities will be
included in the project's negative list.
Physical Cultural Resources  No         The project will not contribute to activities that could
OP/BP 4.11                              negatively affect PCR; such activities would be
included in the negative list, and the project
proposals screened for potential impacts, and if they
are deemed significant or management / mitigation
cannot be guaranteed, would not be financed.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No          There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project areas.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No         All activities would be financed on private land, and
BP 4.12                                 no expropriation or other negative impacts on
livelihoods are expected. Activities that might lead to
Involuntary resettlement will be on the project's
negative list. The project will install and operate a
grievance mechanism to ensure that no one suffers an
economic or personal disadvantage from the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No          No dams will be financed; also it is not foreseen to
finance activities directly dependent on the safe
operation of an existing dam.
No


﻿Projects on International                 No project related activities will affect international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project will not finance activities located in
BP 7.60                                   Disputed Areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 23-Feb-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Some E&S due diligence mechanism will be required, which would screen for possible impacts,
offer guidance on assessment, management and mitigation requirements, and provide boundaries
for the scope of financing (e.g. in form of a negative list of undesirable entrepreneurial activities).
The principles, approaches and methods would be outlined in an ESMF, which would also include
clear guidance on the design of activity-specific due diligence instruments, as may be required as a
result of the screening, assessment and classification process.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michael Olavi Engman,Suhail Kassim,Thilasoni Benjamin
Musuku
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                 Date: 17-Jul-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/      Name: Catherine Kadennyeka Masinde (PMGR)       Date: 24-Sep-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


