INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13570
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Dominican Republic         Project ID:  P151752
Project Name:   Dominican Republic. FCPF REDD+ Readiness Preparation Project (P151752)
Task Team       Gerardo Segura Warnholtz
Leader(s):
Estimated       31 -Jul-2020
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN04
Sector(s):      Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      3.80            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                             Amount
Borrower                                                        0.00
Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility        3.80
Total                                                           3.80
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
Proposed Development Objective
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to assist the Dominican Republic in the
implementation key readiness activities to develop a national REDD+ strategy.
Key Results
The main results expected at project closure are presented below:


﻿a) A cross-sectoral government coordination body (Comit6 Directivo) and a multi-stakeholder
participatory platform (Comit6 T6cnico Asesor) for the management of REDD+ have been
established and are under regular operation;
U
b) A broad national consultation and participation strategy that mainstreams gender elements, and
includes a Grievance Redress Mechanism for REDD+ has been designed and is under operation;
c) A National REDD+ Strategy (ENA- REDD+) has been designed with the support of a broad
stakeholder participation;
d) A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) has been carried out, and informed the
preparation of an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), as the country's main
safeguards instrument for REDD+;
e) The capacity and progress to establish a National Forest Reference Emission Level and/or a Forest
Reference Level has been improved;
f) The capacity and progress to develop a National Forest Monitoring System (NFMS) for the
Measurement, Reporting, and Verification (MRV) of Green House Gases (GHG) emissions
reductions and non-carbon impacts from REDD+ activities has been improved.
These results encompass the main elements needed by the DR to develop the country's "Readiness
Package" (R-Package) under the FCPF, and provide the foundation for the country's participation in
any future REDD+ mechanism under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change
(UNFCCC) that the DR may consider.
C. Project Description
The Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) of the DR identifies a broad set of activities aimed at
strengthening the technical and institutional capacities for the Government to participate in a future
payments for results REDD+ mechanism. The financial envelope for these activities is estimated at
US$5.077 million. The activities to be financed by the FCPF Preparation grant were selected jointly
with the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources (MENR), and in coordination with other
donors, considering the following criteria: (i) activities needed to strengthen the immediate
institutional capacity of MENR to conduct participatory and consultation processes for REDD+; (ii)
fundamental readiness activities for which the GoDR had specific financial needs, not covered by
other sources of funding; (iii) a discrete set of activities that would generate a specific outcome (with
no- or minimal parallel-financing that could jeopardize the achievement of the project objective); and
(iv) activities that complemented those of other sources of funding and the government, and that
could serve to strengthen the achievement of the project objective.
The FCPF implementation grant contemplates the following five components (a detailed description
of activities under each component is included in Annex III):
Component 1: REDD+ Readiness Organization and Consultation (US$708,000.00). This component
will assist MENR to: (i) establish and operate a multi-sector multi-stakeholder consultative platform
for climate change and REDD+; (ii) design and operate a national communications and
dissemination strategy for REDD+; and (iii) design and implement a consultation and participation
strategy for REDD+ that includes a citizen feedback mechanism (i.e Grievance Redress Mechanism


﻿GRM).
Component 2: National REDD+ Strategy (ENA- REDD+)(US$1,180,000.00). This component will
assist MENR to: (i) identify and analyze the main direct and indirect causes of deforestation and
O
U       degradation; (ii) identify effective REDD+ strategy options; (iii) design an implementation
framework for REDD+; and (iv) assess possible social and environmental impacts associated to the
REDD+ strategic options (i.e. SESA) and develop risk management instruments (e.g. ESMF).
Component 3: National Forest Reference/Emission Level (US$320,000.00). This component will
assist MENR to identify a national Reference Emissions Level, and/or Reference Level (REL/RL)
for the forest sector.
Component 4: National Forest and Safeguards Monitoring Systems (NFMS) (US$1,150,000.00).
This component will assist MENR and other government agencies in the design and implementation
of: (i) a national forest monitoring systems; and (ii) a national information system for multiple
benefits, other impacts, safeguards and governance.
Component 5. Monitoring and Evaluation Framework and Grant Administration (US$442,000.00).
This component will support MENR in the establishment and operation of a technical/administrative
implementation unit that will be in charge of coordinating and executing the technical and fiduciary
activities of the readiness phase, including a monitoring and evaluation framework for REDD+
readiness institutional efforts
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This grant will, in part, support the DR's activities to identify the potential risks associated with
REDD+ activities and mitigation options. In order to do this, the FCPF is using a Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to integrate key environmental and social
considerations into REDD+ Readiness by combining analytical and participatory approaches. The
SESA allows: (i) social and environmental considerations to be integrated into the REDD+
Readiness process, in particular the ENA-REDD+; (ii) stakeholder participation in identifying and
prioritizing key issues, assessment of policy, institutional and capacity gaps to manage these
priorities and recommendations, and disclosure of findings in the REDD Country's progress reports
on Readiness preparation; and (iii) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to
be put in place to manage environmental and social risks and to mitigate potential adverse impacts.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Regarding the Ministry of Environment and Natural Resources' capacity for safeguard analysis and
management, the Project contemplates, as one of its first actions, to recruit a qualified social and
environmental specialists, with gender mainstreaming expertise. These specialists will oversee the
design and implementation of the overall social and environmental aspects and safeguards, and work
closely with the PIU members on the design and implementation of the SESA process to identify
potential risks and mitigation measures.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Dora Patricia Andrade (GEN04)
Kimberly Vilar (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


﻿Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes          This project's explicit goal is to promote the
OP/BP 4.01                                reduction in rates of deforestation and degradation by
rewarding measures to protect and conserve forests.
The environmental impacts of the REDD+ strategy
are expected to be mostly positive, and it is expected
that benefits associated with forests will improve as
forest cover increases. Not only as a sink for carbon
but also for the many environmental services, forests
provide such as watershed protection, provision of
important habitats, and sustainable source forest
based livelihoods. The REDD+ strategy itself would
not finance the harvesting or conversion of forests so
there is little to no direct adverse impact associated
with activities planned as part of the strategic
options.
The team, however, considers that the principal risk
from REDD+ could arise in the event that the
strategies fail to achieve their objectives thereby
creating unexpected indirect adverse impacts through
the unintended creation of incentives to clear forests
for other purposes. This could occur, for example, if
incentive schemes are insufficient or failed to
provide sufficient incentive to retain areas under
forest cover. Similar risks could occur for example if
lack of land tenure security were to undermine
commitment to maintain land under forest cover for
long time periods. For these reasons, and due to the
critical nature of strategic options and choices being
considered, OP 4.01 is applicable to the REDD+
activities.
The Project is expected to prepare a Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and
an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) through Component 2.
As needed, existing or new participatory and
consultation platforms will be established to ensure
involvement of all forest dependent stakeholders. To
assess whether certain forest dwellers or vulnerable
communities require modifications to the existing
participatory and consultation platforms, the Project
will include, under Component 1.c, an action plan
with the following objectives: (i) documentation and
an assessment of the approach and actions MENR
has been conducting to engage vulnerable groups


﻿thus far (e.g. international legal agreements,
grassroots initiatives with women rural producers,
amongst other actions); (ii) a study to research the
impacts of deforestation and forest degradation on
vulnerable forest dependent communities, and
engagement in climate change policy; and (iii) an
engagement and consultation strategy to ensure the
participation of vulnerable groups as stakeholders in
the development of the national REDD+ strategy.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           This policy is triggered given that the REDD+
strategy will likely involve work both within existing
protected areas as well as other forest habitats of
varying significance.
If the REDD+ strategies are successful, the impacts
on critical forest habitats are expected to be positive,
nevertheless SESA will evaluate the possible risks
associated with strategic options on forest habitats
within protected areas as well as other sensitive
forest habitats under private or communal control.
During the formulation of the REDD+ strategy
consultations will be carried out with key
stakeholders to identify potential issues of concern.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes           This policy is triggered given that Project activities
will be conducted in forest areas, and could involve
the commercial management of forest resources.
REDD+ is an important part of the DR's long term
forest and environmental management programs
because the country continues to face degradation of
its natural resources, especially its natural forests,
soil, and water resources. However, there is
evidence of a significant recovery of secondary
forests and biodiversity. These remaining forests are
of great importance for the livelihoods and wellbeing
of local communities. The Readiness phase Grant
will not finance the harvesting or conversion of
forests. During the preparation phase, these and
other forestry and rural development initiatives will
be evaluated in order to ensure lessons are
incorporated early in the design and key social and
environmental risks and potential impacts associated
with REDD+ are considered in the ESMF or other
appropriate safeguard instrument.
Pest Management OP 4.09       TBD           This policy remains TBD until the full scope of
Project activities are defined. There is still
insufficient information to determine if forest


﻿management practices will involve pesticide use.
At present it is not envisioned that the REDD+
strategy would finance or lead to an increased use of
pesticides or other agricultural chemicals. The SESA
will evaluate the potential for the use of chemicals in
forest management and, if necessary, appropriate
guidelines and analytical approaches would be
defined in the ESMF or other appropriate safeguard
instruments.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD          This policy is TBD given: a) the uncertainty
OP/BP 4.11                                regarding the exact locations of activities under the
Project; and, b) some of the forests or landscapes
involved with the REDD+ strategy might be
considered to have historical or cultural significance.
If triggered, the ESMF or other safeguard instrument
would include specific provisions to assess the
possibility of such impacts prior to any activities
being undertaken on the ground. Under the
preparation grant, funds have been reserved to
conduct studies to identify sacred sites
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           This policy is not be triggered as there are no longer
4.10                                      distinct indigenous peoples according to the four
criteria established under OP 4.10 in the DR.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         This policy is triggered, primarily because there
BP 4.12                                   could be potential restrictions on the use of natural
resources in national protected areas associated with
the REDD+ strategic options and whilst unlikely,
there is still possibility that land acquisition would be
required. Given that this grant will finance
preparation and planning activities for REDD+ and
includes a SESA, the determination of any needed
mitigation measures for future activities, such as the
formulation and consulting of a Process Framework
and possible other needed instruments, would be
determined and carried out during project
implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           This policy is not triggered because the Project will
not support the construction or rehabilitation of dams
or other investments that rely on the services of
existing dams.
Projects on International    No           The policy is not be triggered because the Project
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      will not affect international waterways as defined
under the policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The policy is not be triggered because the proposed


﻿BP 7.60                                     Project will not affect disputed areas as defined
under the policy.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Jun-2018
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Safeguard related studies have been preliminarily identified by the GoDR, and in consultation
with multiple stakeholders (SESA Workshop). Studies will be initiated in the first semester of
project implementation, and will be an important element for the participatory construction of the
SESA and ESMF.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gerardo Segura Warnholtz
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                    Date: 08-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Raul Ivan Alfaro Pelico (PMGR)              Date: 11-Sep-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


