                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA19476
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Jan-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Jan-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mongolia                           Project ID:    P152343
                            Project Name:      Second Energy Sector Project (P152343)
                            Task Team          Peter Johansen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          20-Aug-2015              Estimated     18-Apr-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE09                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        55.40           Total Bank Financing:     42.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           1.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 42.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                                12.40
                              Total                                                                                       55.40
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to improve reliability and sustainability of
                           electricity services in Mongolia.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project is comprised of the following three components as described below:

                           Component A: Rehabilitation of Distribution Networks (estimated cost: US$28.5 million, of which


                                                                       Page 1 of 14
                         IDA financing US$28 million and counterpart financing US$0.5 million): This component will have
                         three sub-components: (1.1) Rehabilitation of distribution grid in BSEDN, (1.2) Rehabilitation of
                         distribution grid in EBEDN; and (1.3) Support to transmission company.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The purpose of sub-components 1.1 and 1.2 is to reduce system losses and improve reliability of and
                         access to electricity services in selected parts of the distribution networks through strengthening of
                         power infrastructure of two regional distribution company networks: BSEDN and EBEDN.
                         Investments at primary substations will help increase the capacity while increasing system reliability.
                         Investments at distribution substations and distribution lines will reduce technical losses and improve
                         system reliability. The investments in technically proven digital meters (AMI or AMR) are aimed at
                         reducing non-technical losses. The subcomponents will target the key investment needs in major
                         areas of new development as well as areas where distribution overloads are already present or will
                         happen in the very short term given continuous demand growth. Sub-component 1.3 will also invest
                         in switchgears in the transmission network which is related to the subprojects in Component 1.1 and
                         1.2, and introduce planning and management software to the transmission company, NPTG. As such,
                         this subcomponent does not address transmission network investments but rather distribution-related
                         investments such as new circuit breakers for the rehabilitated lines in sub-stations that are owned by
                         NPTG.

                         The subprojects are selected based on key parameters, including: (i) technical and economic
                         justification; and (ii) readiness for implementation in terms of environmental and social aspects.
                         Annex 6 includes a list of the subprojects that have already been selected for inclusion in Group I and
                         a list of potential subprojects that have been suggested by BSEDN or EBEDN but have not yet been
                         selected for inclusion under the project.

                         Component B: Solar Power (estimated cost US$24.9 million, of which IDA financing US$12
                         million, SREP grant US$12.4 million and counterpart financing US$0.5 million): The component
                         will support investments to construct grid connected solar PV power generation capacity outside of
                         the Central Energy System (CES). The purpose of the component is to support upscaling of rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         renewable energy by demonstrating the application of solar PV generation in remote areas.

                         Group I includes the investment in a 10 MW-peak grid connected solar photovoltaic power plant in
                         the Western Energy System (WES). The subcomponent will finance detailed design, supply,
                         construction, commissioning and operation & maintenance of the solar plant which will supply
                         electricity directly to the WES transmission network. The solar PV arrays will be installed near the
                         Myanagad substation in Hovd aimag and will be owned by WES. However, for the first 5 years the
                         supplier will be required to operate and maintain the power plant thereby allowing WES to gain
                         experience with solar power before they take over the operation.

                         Any Group II project will be selected from a list of potential solar PV plants outside the CES and
                         will depend on the availability of funds after financing the 10 MW Group I subproject. The location
                         of the projects could be out of CES. The budget for the solar power support is likely to be able to
                         finance around 13-17 MW depending on the cost premium for the remote location and whether it is
                         deemed that battery storage will be advisable in order to avoid curtailment and ensure voltage and
                         frequency stability. Subprojects brought forward for financing will be appraised when feasibility
                         studies and needed safeguard documents have been prepared. The subprojects will be selected based
                         on key parameters, including: (i) remaining funds of the Component and proposed subproject
                         investment cost; (ii) technical and economic justification; and (iii) readiness for implementation in
                         terms of environmental and social aspects. The Group II subprojects will be agreed between the Bank

                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         and the GoM.

                         Component C: Capacity Building (estimated cost US$2 million, all IDA financing): The purpose of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         this component is to strengthen the capacity of the project management office (PMO) under the
                         Ministry of Energy and the implementing units (PIUs) of three regional distribution companies
                         (BNEDN, EBEDN, WES) through provision of technical assistance, training and study tours. The
                         component includes: (i) technical assistance for project implementation and studies to support project
                         management and implementation; (ii) training programs to improve the project management
                         capabilities; and (iii) project management cost.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component A

                         BSEDN distributes and supplies electricity to a total of 46,568 customers in the Baganuur District
                         close to Ulaanbaatar and in 56 soums (villages) of 7 aimags (districts). The vast majority of the
                         customers are residential households with a small portion of SMEs and mines. EBDEN serves 65,400
                         customers spread over 108 soums in 11 aimags. A majority of residential customers live in ger areas,
                         where most residents are poor.

                         Component B

                         One solar PV power plant will be developed with an estimated capacity of 10 Megawatts (MW) and
                         estimated land requirement of 25 hectares. The plant will provide power to the Western Energy
                         System. Three possible sites were identified for this plant; two located in Hovd Aimag and one in
                         Uvs Aimag.
                         A brief description of each site is provided below:

                         Site A (Mayangad, Hovd Aimag)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed site is 1 kilometer from Myanagad soum center, next to an existing substation. The
                         governor➢❨ s office and observations by the international safeguard consultant confirmed that the
                         land is not used formally or informally for agriculture (i.e. nomadic herding), or any industrial
                         activities. There is no one living at or near the proposed project site formally or informally. No
                         winter structures are located at or near the proposed project site. The proposed site is not forested.
                         Har Us Lake national park (includes a Ramsar site) is 12.5 km to the south and includes Important
                         Bird Areas. According to Soum Environment and Land officers, no known physical cultural
                         resources are present. The closest physical cultural resource officially recognized is Sangiin kherem
                         located approximately 45km from the project site. Local soum government stakeholders asserted that
                         groundwater resources were abundant. The nearest road is 0.5km from the site, and the nearest
                         railway is in Erdernet city 895 km east of the site. Near the project site is the Soum old municipal
                         dump. A new properly managed municipal disposal facility nearby has been developed.

                         Site B (Umogovi Soum, Uvs Aimag)
                         The proposed site is located next to the Umnugovi soum centre substation. The Umnugovi Soum
                         Governor confirmed that the site (approximately 15+hectares) is State Land as well as the
                         surrounding area which is also available for the project. The land is not used formally or informally
                         for agriculture (i.e. nomadic herding), or any industrial activities. There is no one living at or near the
                         proposed project site formally or informally. No winter structures are located at or near the proposed
                         project site and the site (including the proposed transmission line route) is not within any officially


                                                                       Page 3 of 14
                         protected area and is not forested. No known physical cultural resources are present. The closest
                         physical cultural resource officially recognized is Tsagaan bulan (rock paintings) located
                         approximately 20km from the project site. Water resources are more restricted than at the Mayangad
Public Disclosure Copy




                         site. The site is on the outskirts of officially recognized important bird areas, known for an
                         abundance of water bird species. Of particular note is Khar Us Lake which is a Ramsar site. The
                         nearest road is 2km from the proposed project site, and the nearest railway is in Edenet city 900 km
                         east of the site.

                         Site C (10 km north of Site A, Mayangad Soum, Hovd Aimag)
                         The proposed site is 10km north of Site A where the existing Mayangad Substation is located. The
                         site (including any associated transmission line) is State land and can be made available for the solar
                         plant. The land is not used formally, however, there is a possibility that the land is informally used
                         for agricultural (i.e. nomadic herding) activities, but no specific data on numbers of nomadic people
                         in the area was available. The proposed site is not forested. Har Us Lake national park (the Ramsar
                         site) is 22.5 km to the south and includes Important Bird Areas. no known physical cultural resources
                         are present. The closest physical cultural resource officially recognized is Sangiin kherem
                         approximately 55km from the project site. The site (including the transmission line route) is not
                         within any officially protected area. Local residents indicated that birds are known to frequent the
                         area near the Hovd river and Khar Us Lake. The nearest road is 0.5km and the nearest rail is at
                         Erdernet 896 km to the west.

                         After careful evaluation of environmental and social factors Site A in Hovd Aimag, next to
                         Mayangad soum centre was selected as the most suitable location for this subproject. At present, no
                         detailed data was obtained verifying stakeholder assertions regarding groundwater resource
                         availability. The World Bank will conduct a due diligence effort to collect this data. If unsuccessful,
                         the World Bank would take necessary measures and undertake a program to collect this data as part
                         of the subproject design effort.

                         In addition, subsequent to loan approval and contingent upon available funds, additional solar PV
Public Disclosure Copy




                         power plants may be financed under this Project. Potential plants will all be located in Western
                         Mongolia to provide power into the Western Energy System.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bernard Baratz (GEEDR)
                         Reisha Anne Jones (GSU02)
                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            Component A
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       Subprojects to be supported under these Components will
                                                                     be either known (Group 1) or unknown (Group 2) prior to
                                                                     Project Board approval. For Group 1 subprojects a series
                                                                     of Environmental Codes of Practice (ECOPs) have been
                                                                     prepared to address management of environmental issues
                                                                     associated with the types of subprojects identified for
                                                                     financing. For Group II subprojects, an ESMF has been
                                                                     prepared to provide guidance on environmental and social
                                                                     safeguard procedures to be followed by the Borrower in
                                                                     evaluating potential subprojects. Group 2 subprojects will
                                                                     be the same types as Group 1 subprojects.


                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                         In addition to traditional construction related impacts
                         associated with the movement of men, machines and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         materials (e.g. dust, noise, engine exhausts etc.), the
                         project will involve rehabilitation and/or replacement of
                         several substation transformers, or other electrical
                         equipment some of which may contain or be
                         contaminated with polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs).
                         PCBs are considered hazardous materials and require
                         specialized analytical equipment to establish their
                         presence as well as special techniques for their
                         management and disposal. The degree to which PCBs are
                         present in various elements of the proposed project will be
                         determined and a detailed management plan for the
                         removal, handling, transport and ultimate disposal will be
                         required as part of the Environmental Code of Practice
                         (ECOP) for each of the subprojects identified by appraisal
                         that involves equipment contaminated with PCBs (e.g.
                         rehabilitation of transformers and replacement of oil filled
                         circuit breakers). For Group 2 subprojects an
                         Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF) was prepared which includes procedures for
                         management of electrical equipment contaminated with
                         PCBs. Both the ECOPs and ESMF include requirements
                         prohibiting all new electrical equipment (transformers,
                         switches, capacitors etc.) from containing PCBs.

                         The project also involves removal and replacement of
                         numerous wooden poles supporting existing power
Public Disclosure Copy




                         distribution lines. In general, wooden poles are treated
                         with creosote as a wood preservative. By its very nature,
                         creosote may be considered hazardous which would make
                         the wooden poles unsuitable for subsequent use as fuel.
                         The ECOP for pole replacement investments and the
                         ESMF include specific guidance on the management of
                         these poles.

                         The project may also involve replacement of numerous
                         electrical meters. Although these meters are not expected
                         to contain hazardous materials, their disposal represents a
                         potentially significant waste management issue that is
                         addressed in the ECOP and the ESMF.

                         Component B
                         One solar photovoltaic plant is to be identified prior to
                         WB Board approval for support under the project.
                         Subsequently, during project implementation additional
                         solar voltaic plants may be supported if resources are


                          Page 5 of 14
                                                        available. For the plant to be identified prior to Board
                                                        approval three possible sites were identified for this plant;
                                                        two located in Hovd Aimag and one in Uvs Aimag. An
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was
                                                        prepared in which the three potential sites were evaluated
                                                        on the basis of several environmental factors. The site. in
                                                        Hovd Aimag, next to Mayangad soum was determined to
                                                        be most suitable and the ESIA includes a discussion of the
                                                        potential environmental issues and a detailed EMP. to
                                                        address these issues.

                                                        For subsequent investments in solar photovoltaic power
                                                        facilities, a separate ESMF was prepared to address any
                                                        environmental and social safeguard issues as well as any
                                                        site-specific issues that may develop.

                                                        Construction issues similar to those discussed under
                                                        Component A above will also be involved in developing
                                                        the solar PV plant site. Additionally, there are potential
                                                        issues associated with land clearance (altered runoff
                                                        patterns, topsoil management, and removal and handling
                                                        of vegetative wastes),

                                                        During operation, solar reflection from the photovoltaic
                                                        panels could affect migratory birds and present a traffic
                                                        hazard to drivers. The Mongolian Ground Jay is a ground
                                                        nesting bird species whose range includes the project site.
                                                        Construction activities and operation of the solar plant
                                                        could affect nesting characteristics of this species. Water
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        requirements for panel washing and wastewater
                                                        management are also of concern. The land requirements
                                                        may affect land based migratory species and the
                                                        connecting transmission line may affect migratory bird
                                                        flight patterns.

                                                        The ESMF prepared for Component A was integrated
                                                        with the ESMF for Component B to produce a single
                                                        Combined ESMF project document.

                                                        Component C➢❨¨This Component is technical assistance,
                                                        training and study tours. There will be safeguard training
                                                        (by WB staff) for the Borrowers➢❨ PIUs and the PMO.
                                                        However, this is strictly part of WB support and not
                                                        associated with this Component. There are no safeguard
                                                        implications involved.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   This project will not support or lead to the conversion of
                         4.04                           natural habitats.



                                                         Page 6 of 14
                         Component A
                         Most anticipated investments will be rehabilitation or
                         replacement of existing equipment (substations, OHL
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support structures-wooden poles etc.).

                         There may be investments in expanding existing
                         substations or constructing new substations. However, as
                         part of due diligence for these investments, distribution
                         companies will be required to receive clearance from the
                         MEGDT
                         Department of Environment and Natural Resources
                         Management who will ensure that: (a) there will be no
                         investments which involve the significant conversion of
                         critical natural habitats; and/or (b) provide acceptable
                         mitigation measures that will be required to receive their
                         approval for those investments likely to affect non-critical
                         natural habitats. The Combined ESMF includes similar
                         due diligence requirements for subprojects identified
                         during project implementation.

                         Component B
                         Site selection criteria for the Hovd Aimag plant excluded
                         locations within or near critical natural habitats.

                         Due diligence for this site will require clearance from the
                         MEGDT
                         Department of Environment and Natural Resources
                         Management who will ensure that: (a) the investment will
                         not involve significant conversion of critical natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         habitats; and (b) acceptable mitigation measures are
                         included for approval of the site to ensure no impacts on
                         non-critical natural habitats.

                         A Local bird expert will be engaged by the project
                         sponsor during project design/prior to construction to:
                         ➢❨¢ survey proposed solar plant site prior to construction
                         and as necessary recommend micro-modifications to site
                         location to avoid/minimize bird nesting areas
                         ➢❨¢      identify nesting period of the Mongolian Ground
                         Jay (MGJ) and assist in designing construction schedule
                         to avoid this period
                         ➢❨¢      assure panel design elevation is sufficient to
                         minimize disturbance to brush areas used for nesting by
                         MGJ
                         ➢❨¢      work with NGOs (e.g. IUCN, BirdLife
                         International, Wildlife Science and Conservation Centre
                         of Mongolia) to prepare an avian monitoring program
                         (AMP) for migratory birds and ground nesters during


                          Page 7 of 14
                                                      construction and operation phases.
                                                      ➢❨¢      determine migratory bird patterns to aid in
                                                      decision regarding placement of transmission line above
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                      ground (with avian diverters) or underground
                                                      ➢❨¢      assure solar panel tilt for maximum solar
                                                      efficiency will be adequate to minimize bird collision risk

                                                      The Combined ESMF includes similar due diligence
                                                      requirements for potential investments in solar
                                                      photovoltaic power facilities.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36     No    This project will not lead to the destruction of forests or
                                                      forest ecosystems.

                                                      Component A
                                                      As mentioned above, most anticipated investments will be
                                                      rehabilitation or replacement of existing equipment
                                                      (substations, OHL support structures-wooden poles etc.).

                                                      There may be some investment in expanding existing
                                                      substations or constructing new substations. The Task
                                                      Team determined that none of the direct or linked
                                                      investments support destruction or conversion of forests
                                                      and forest ecosystems affecting the management of forests
                                                      or the rights and welfare of forest dependent communities,
                                                      as any new land requirements are in urban or peri-urban
                                                      areas. Furthermore, as part of due diligence for these
                                                      investments, distribution companies will be required to
                                                      receive clearance from the MEGDT Department of Forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                      Policy and Coordination, who will insure no direct
                                                      investments will be in areas which contribute to
                                                      destruction or conversion of forests and/or forest
                                                      ecosystems. The Combined ESMF includes similar due
                                                      diligence requirements for power distribution subprojects
                                                      identified during project implementation.

                                                      Component B
                                                      The proposed site is not forested, but approval from the
                                                      Ministry of Environment, Green Development and
                                                      Tourism (MEGDT), Director of Forest Policy and
                                                      Coordination would be required

                                                      The Combined ESMF includes similar approval
                                                      requirements from MEGDT Department of Forest Policy
                                                      and Coordination as part of the siting criteria for potential
                                                      investments in solar photovoltaic power facilities.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No   The project will not finance any activities that would
                                                      result in procurement or use of pesticides.



                                                       Page 8 of 14
                                                        Component A
                                                        There will be no pesticide use in construction or
                                                        maintenance of works. Any land clearing in preparation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        for civil works and/or maintaining rights-of-way will be
                                                        undertaken manually or mechanically.

                                                        Component B
                                                        The ESIA for the proposed site and the Combined ESMF
                                                        for future plant sites include the requirement that all land
                                                        clearance be implemented manually and/or mechanically.
                                                        No pesticides are to be used for land clearance.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   There are no known physical cultural resources involved
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           in any of the Project components.

                                                        Known physical cultural resources will be avoided by
                                                        sub-project design, but there is a chance that these
                                                        resources could be accidently uncovered during the course
                                                        of civil works or land clearing, hence this policy is
                                                        triggered. Chance find procedures are included in the
                                                        ECOPs of Components A and the ESIA of Component B
                                                        as well as the Combined ESMF to cover these
                                                        eventualities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    Component A
                         BP 4.10                        Mongolia has an estimated 24 ethnic groups, which are
                                                        either descendants of Mongolian nomadic tribes, or are
                                                        groups of Turkic origin who have become Mongolised
                                                        over time. The majority are the Khalkh who comprise
                                                        over 90% of the population. Except for the Kazakh
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        minority group residing in western Mongolia, all ethnic
                                                        groups speak Mongolian dialects which are
                                                        comprehensible to speakers of Khalkha and to each other.
                                                        Only the Kazakhs rely upon a distinct spoken language.

                                                        The majority of Mongolia➢❨ s ethnic minority groups
                                                        share similar customs, traditions and systems of
                                                        production as the Khalkh. With the exception of the
                                                        predominantly Muslim and linguistically differentiated
                                                        Kazakhs in western Mongolia, and traditionally nomadic
                                                        reindeer herding Tsaatan peoples in the north,
                                                        Mongolia➢❨ s ethnic groups are not considered to be
                                                        economically, socially or legally marginalized or
                                                        otherwise disadvantaged in a manner which would restrict
                                                        their ability to participate in the project. Components A
                                                        will not include those areas populated by either the
                                                        Kazakh (Bayan Ulgii) or Tsaatan (northern Khovsgul
                                                        province) ethnic minorities, nor will it include areas
                                                        populated by the Uyghurs, Uzbeks, Urianhais and Hotons
                                                        (and Tuvinians), and the Evenk who speak a Tungusic


                                                         Page 9 of 14
                                                              language.

                                                              Component B
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Component B will not be located in areas populated by
                                                              either the Khazakh or Tsaatan groups, nor any of the
                                                              ethnic minority groups residing in the far west or north
                                                              mentioned above and is therefore not expected to trigger
                                                              this policy.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes      Component A
                            OP/BP 4.12                        Improvements to the distribution system will require
                                                              installation of some physical infrastructure. Improvements
                                                              will be within the existing infrastructure footprint, within
                                                              the established right of way, or on government land. This
                                                              OP is triggered in the event that improvements are
                                                              installed on land that is not already within the established
                                                              right of way, existing footprint or government land. As
                                                              sites and any impacts on populations are yet to be
                                                              finalized, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
                                                              been prepared and incorporated into the Combined
                                                              ESMF. The RPF lays out the steps to be taken when any
                                                              land is involuntarily acquired, purchased under negotiated
                                                              settlement or voluntarily donated for project activities.
                                                              The RPF, as part of the ESMF was disclosed to the
                                                              general public on December 8 2016 and through the
                                                              World Banks InfoShop website on December 9.

                                                              Component B
                                                              Three possible sites for component B were on state land.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Due diligence confirmed that no persons were living or
                                                              using the land formally or informally at the selected site at
                                                              Hovd Aimag, next to Mayangad soum centre. The
                                                              Combined ESMF includes similar due diligence
                                                              requirements for potential future investments in solar
                                                              photovoltaic power facilities. Future investments are
                                                              anticipated to be on state land, however as the locations
                                                              are not confirmed an RPF is included in the Combined
                                                              ESMF.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No    The project will not finance or retrofit any dams.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No    Potential investments under the project are not expected
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50              to have any adverse effects on the water quantity or
                                                              quality of international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No    Project activities be will not be undertaken in disputed
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                  areas
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues



                                                               Page 10 of 14
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           Environmental issues are for the most part being of short duration, limited range and reversible.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Extensive borrower analytic data of transformer and circuit breaker fluids reviewed by the Team
                           indicated that the many existing pieces of equipment tested from bothdistribution companies did
                           not contain PCBs at all or in quantities considered insignificant. However, if it is determined that
                           there is a significant presence of polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in some of the older electrical
                           equipment that is to be replaced (e.g. transformers, circuit breakers etc.), management of this
                           material will require special considerations.

                           Improvements to the distribution network will require installation of some physical infrastructure
                           which will require some small land parcels. The Combined ESMF and RPF have detailed
                           procedures for site selection and acquisition; however, all land needs are anticipated to be on
                           government land. The project Resettlement Framework establishes detailed requirements for the
                           preparation of Resettlement Plans where involuntary land acquisition or voluntary land donation is
                           proposed.

                           There may be some minor temporary disturbances for households during the installation of
                           equipment, the ESMF and ECOPs set out specific requirements to notify, manage and mitigate
                           these disturbances.

                           Solar component environmental issues are also for the most part of short duration, limited range
                           and reversible. Siting criteria and due diligence will avoid forested areas and areas of high
                           ecologic value. Water requirements for photovoltaic cell washing is an issue that was given due
                           consideration as part the site selection criteria included in the environmental assessment report.
                           Verification of water resources availability will be established as part of project design. If it is
                           determined there are insufficient water resources the design selected will utilize so-called dry self-
                           cleaning solar cells which have no cleaning water requirement. Construction issues would consist
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of noise, dust, and disposal of waste materials etc. During operation, there may be issues
                           associated with migratory birds at or near overhead transmission lines and nesting patterns of the
                           Mongolian Ground Jay.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           None, other than as described above.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Three potential sites were evaluated with respect to several environmental factors, e.g. land use,
                           proximity to forests, natural habitats, water availability and physical cultural resources. Based
                           upon these factors Site A (see Section 3, ➢❨ Project Description➢❨ ) was selected as most
                           suitable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Project Management Office sitting under the Ministry of Energy is familiar with Bank-funded
                           projects and has developed internal capacity through its most recent implementation of the Energy
                           Sector Project. Also, the PMO will hire environmental and social (E&S) safeguards consultants to
                           assist with conducting E&S assessment, consultation, and preparing safeguards instruments.
                           During implementation, the PMO will continue to use their in-house dedicated Environment and


                                                                     Page 11 of 14
                          Social Specialist. The Team determined that there is limited capacity for management of
                          environmental safeguards within the distribution companies. However, there was a strong
                          willingness among distribution company technical staff currently responsible for issues of safety
Public Disclosure Copy




                          to acquire the necessary capacity for environmental safeguards management. The distribution
                          companies have selected technical staff (one from each company) to receive environmental
                          management training from World Bank safeguard specialists. Similarly, staff resources exist
                          within the distribution companies (research and studies officer) who have expressed a strong
                          willingness to develop technical capacity for managing social safeguards and have therefore been
                          selected to fill this role (one from each company). As such, 4 staff members from the distribution
                          companies will receive safeguard training, along with the additional capacity building for the
                          PMO environment and social specialist who will work in collaboration with the distribution
                          companies on safeguard matters.

                          For solar component B, WES has agreed to appoint two safeguards officers (environment &
                          social) Candidates will be selected, based on existing skills, interest and willingness to learn. They
                          will be trained along with the PIU distribution companies and PMO Safeguard staff. The PMO
                          will also include a safeguards staff member, with existing environmental expertise who will be
                          dedicated to safeguards related matters for the solar investments.

                          Under Component A, ECOPs have been prepared for Group 1 subprojects and an ESMF has been
                          prepared for Group 2 subprojects. During implementation, the Borrowers will use the ESMF to
                          prepare individual ECOPs for future subprojects as they are identified.

                          For Component B, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment report, including a
                          comprehensive EMP was prepared. The EMP addresses the issue for migratory birds by specifying
                          installation of diverters on the cable or if necessary burying the transmission cable underground
                          and a local bird expert will be engaged by the project sponsor during project design to: (a) do a
                          bird survey in the project site and assess project impacts on birds; (b) assist in finalizing plant
                          location, (c) scheduling construction activities, (d) reviewing solar panel design and (d) prepare an
Public Disclosure Copy




                          avian monitoring plan (AMP) to minimize any issues affecting the Mongolian Ground Jay nesting
                          patterns and other ground-nesting avifauna. During implementation, project developers would use
                          the solar ESMF as a guide to prepare EMP documents for any future solar photovoltaic projects

                           Subsequently, the ESMF for Component A was integrated with the ESMF for Component B to
                           produce a Combined ESMF suitable for use by both project components A and B.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           For the distribution components, consultations with institutional stakeholders and communities
                           formed part of the ESMF and RPF preparations. Consultations were also held with affected groups
                           to discuss the ECOPs for investments identified prior to loan approval. The consultative meetings
                           were held with the affected groups to determine their view of potential safeguard issues associated
                           with the project. All relevant comments and suggestions were incorporated into the final drafts of
                           safeguards instruments. Public consultations were advertised through newspapers, posters and
                           local radio and held on the 19th and 23rd of September 2016.

                          Key stakeholder consultation meetings for the solar component (B) were held on the 17th and 18th
                          of November 2016 in Mayangad soum (Hovd Aimag), Umnogovi soum (Uvs Aimag); meetings
                          were also held in Ulaanbaatar with Ministries and environmental NGOs across from the 29th of


                                                                    Page 12 of 14
                           September through 5th of October. The purpose of the consultation was to determine their view of
                           potential safeguard issues associated with the solar component. Subsequently, public consultation
                           on the draft ESIA report and ESMF took place on December 2nd 2016 in Hovd Aimag, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Mayangad Soum Centre, then disclosed to the public on December 8th and through the infoshop
                           on December 9th 2016. The purpose of the second public consultations was to determine if their
                           view of potential safeguard issues were reflected in the ESIA and ESMF instruments. As discussed
                           above, the ESMF for Component A was integrated with the ESMF for Component B to produce a
                           Combined ESMF suitable for use by all project components.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Dec-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Dec-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         08-Dec-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Dec-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Dec-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         08-Dec-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?


                                                                   Page 13 of 14
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Johansen
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                Date: 23-Jan-2017
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Jie Tang (PMGR)                                  Date: 23-Jan-2017
                            Manager:


                                                                        Page 14 of 14
