                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC16639

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Madagascar                      Project ID:      P158889
                            Project Name:        Capacity Building Project for Extractive Industries Policy Implementation
                            Team Leader(s):      Remi Pelon
                            Estimated Date       27-May-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEEX1                           Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Public administration- Energy and mining (20%), Oil and gas (40%), Other
                                                 Mining and Extractive Industries (40%)
                            Theme(s):            Tax policy and administration (25%), Other public sector governance (25%),
                                                 Law reform (25%), State-owned enterprise restructuring and privatization
                                                 (10%), Other environment and natural resources management (15%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.4                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Africa Extractive Industries Trust Fund                                                       1.4
                            Environment          C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve capacity to develop legal, regulatory, fiscal and
                           institutional frameworks for an effective and transparent management of extractive industries.
                           C. Project Description
                           Concept. Since the end of the Transition, the Government has embarked into a significant reform of
                           extractive industries with the aim of both boosting investments and increasing long term benefits.
                           With the Bank-Executed Extractive Industries Technical Assistance (EI-TA) Project (P153564), the
                           World Bank provided assistance during the early stages of the reform. A range of background
                           analysis of legal and fiscal frameworks as well as detailed financing models for both mining and
                           petroleum were delivered to the Government to inform the reform process. As a result, Government
                           decided to take more time to consider the international experience, liaise with local stakeholders and
                           requested further capacity building sessions. At this point in time, both the revised Mining Code and
                           Petroleum Code are much more comprehensive and mature texts expected to be submitted to
                         Parliament in May/June 2016.

                         This project is designed as a follow up in two parts contributing to the same objective: one Bank-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Executed (BE) part which as a continuation of the EI-TA will provide advice in the form of technical
                         notes and on-the-job training for the government team to inform policy decision making, and one
                         Recipient Executed part (RE) which will provide direct support to the Ministry of Mining and
                         Petroleum to build capacity and provide critical pieces to make the reform enforceable. The present
                         Initiation Note concerns the RE part, whereas, the attached Supplemental Task Description describes
                         the BE part.

                         Direct beneficiaries are: Ministry of Mines and Petroleum (MPMP) with related institutions (e.g.
                         OMNIS, BCMM), Ministry of Finances and the EITI Multi-Stakeholder Group (MSG). Indirectly,
                         the project will also benefit companies and civil society by strengthening the frameworks for
                         improved management of extractives.

                         Design. The general structure of this project has been discussed with Government in the course of the
                         previous assistance and organized as follows:

                         Component A. Legal and Technical Advisory Support for Licensing

                         Sub-Component A.1. Mining: Advisory Support to the Mining Cadastre.
                         This activity is expected to include support i) a “clean up” of pending mining titles; ii) improve
                         access to mining titles and geological information (e.g. BCMM and BPRGM websites); and iii) the
                         establishment of transparent procedures for tenders of free-of-rights mining prospects.

                         Sub-Component A.2. Oil: Advisory Support to Draft Standard Tender Packages and Organize a
                         Bidding Round. This activity is expected to include support i) the drafting of standard tender package
                         and procedures (manual), ii) the organization of a bidding round, including the set-up of a data room
                         and a road show; iii) assistance to the evaluation committee.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component B. Capacity Building for Sector Management and State Participation

                         Sub-Component B.1. Mining: Improve Enforcement of Mining Laws and Regulations. This activity
                         is expected to include i) the drafting of regulations, procedures (arretes) and implementation
                         documentation for a sound application of the Mining Code and the Large Scale Mining Law (LGIM);
                         ii) the production of communication materials about sector’s management for key stakeholders like
                         artisanal miners and local government personal.

                         Sub-Component B.2. Mining: Advisory Support on State Participation. As Government is
                         considering to expand the role of the State in the sector and create a State-Owned Company for all
                         minerals on the basis of the existing (Kraoma) which focuses on chromite, this activity is expected to
                         finance a study on management of state participation in mining ventures.

                         Sub-Component B.3. Oil: Advisory Support on State Participation. This activity will finance the
                         drafting of Statutes for the National Oil Company with the associated background research.

                         Component C. Support Extractive Sector Transparency and Stakeholder Engagement
                         This component will support the Extractive Industry Transparency Initiative (EITI) with a program
                         of dissemination and outreach activities in line with the EITI work plan as well as consultation events
                           to improve dialog around the management of extractive industries. This could include awareness
                           raising (university debates, radio shows etc.) and capacity building at the central and/or local levels.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component D. Project Management
                           This component will finance the incremental costs associated with the implementation of the
                           proposed activities. This will include: (i) a full-time technical focal point in the Project
                           Implementation Unit (PIU); ii) training and contribution to the PIU operational costs; and (iii) the
                           consulting services needed to perform the grant audit.

                           The detailed fund allocation will be determined during appraisal.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will provide only TA and there are no physical investments on the ground. Consultations
                           and dissemination activities will take place in both the capital as well as regions affected by
                           extractive industries, with a broad set of stakeholders, including communities and civil society and
                           community-based organizations and oil/gas and mining companies.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           No safeguard policy is triggered.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Paul-Jean Feno (GEN07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No               This is a technical assistance project focused on
                           BP 4.01                                                improving capacities for management of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                  extractive industries. There are no physical
                                                                                  investments being supported under the project
                                                                                  and the grant will not finance technical studies
                                                                                  or assessments linked to specific oil and mining
                                                                                  projects. Since none of the project activities
                                                                                  have any direct impact on the ground and have
                                                                                  zero environmental footprint, the category is
                                                                                  proposed to be C.
                                                                                  Environmental (as well as social) aspects are
                                                                                  taken into account in the technical assistance in
                                                                                  that consultants hired under the project will be
                                                                                  asked to provide legal and/or regulatory advice
                                                                                  based on good international practices including
                                                                                  on environmental and social aspects.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No               This policy is not triggered as project activities
                                                                                  are not expected to have any impacts on natural
                                                                                  habitats (critical or non-critical).
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No               This policy is not triggered as project activities
                                                                                             are not expected to have any impacts on the
                                                                                             management of forest.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No                   This policy is not triggered as the project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             not finance the procurement or use of pesticides.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No                   This policy is not triggered as project activities
                           BP 4.11                                                           are not expected to have any impact on physical
                                                                                             cultural resources.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No                   This policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                             proposed TA is not confined to specific
                                                                                             geographic areas to be able to identify the
                                                                                             presence of IPs and their collective attachment.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No                   This policy is not triggered given that project
                           4.12                                                              activities are not expected to directly cause any
                                                                                             physical or economic displacement nor any
                                                                                             restriction in access to natural resources.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   This policy is not triggered given the project is
                                                                                             not financing any dam construction or
                                                                                             rehabilitation nor any activities that rely on the
                                                                                             operations of existing dams.
                           Projects on International                    No                   This policy is not triggered given the project is
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              not financing any activities in international
                                                                                             waterways as defined by the policy.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               This policy is not triggered given the project is
                           7.60                                                              not financing any activities in disputed areas as
                                                                                             defined by the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Remi Pelon
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 11-Feb-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Paulo De Sa (PMGR)                                           Date: 12-Feb-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
