                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA16547
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Niger                              Project ID:   P153420
                            Project Name:      Climate Smart Agriculture Support Project (P153420)
                            Task Team          Amadou Ba,Vikas Choudhary
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          28-Mar-2016                        Estimated   26-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA01                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (35%), Crops (35%), Animal production (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
                                              support (20%), Rural markets (20%), Climate change (20%) , Rural policies and
                                              institutions (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     111.00           Total Bank Financing:                111.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               111.00
                              Total                                                                                     111.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objectives of the Project are: (i) to enhance adaptation to climate risks, (ii) to improve
                           agricultural productivity among the Targeted Communities and (iii) to improve the Recipient’s
                           capacity to respond promptly and effectively to an Eligible Crisis or Emergency

                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Investments for Scaling up Climate-smart Agriculture (US$68 million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of Component 1 is to provide financing to scale up proven technologies and practices,
                         both at commune and individual level, leading to increased agricultural productivity and income
                         while building resilience to climate change in the project area and reducing/removing carbon
                         emissions. In each commune, the project will support preparation of an Integrated Climate-Smart
                         Agriculture Investment Plans (ICSIP) by a specialized NGO, drawing on the existing PDC developed
                         under the decentralization process by the GoN. They will integrate investments by communes to
                         create business opportunities for farmers’ groups, and Micro Small and Medium Enterprises
                         (MSMEs). This comprises two subcomponents:

                         Subcomponent 1.1 - Financing CSA-integrated subprojects at the commune level (US$53 million)
                         The purpose of this subcomponent is to provide investment grants to communes for supporting CSA-
                         integrated subprojects. Building upon the existing Commune Development Plan (PCD, PASEC will
                         support the preparation of an Integrated Climate Smart Investment Plan (ICSIP) for each commune
                         through a bottom-up, participatory approach. Each ICSIP will comprise a number of integrated
                         subprojects that will support a combination of the following five principal intervention categories: (a)
                         improving soil fertility and water management for rainfed crops; (b) supporting small- and medium-
                         scale irrigation; (c) supporting the consolidation of high potential value chains; (d) improving market
                         access; and (e) improving agroforestry and natural resource management. The subprojects are public
                         investments that are of collective interest, generate public good and business opportunities, benefit
                         vulnerable populations, and are implemented at commune level.

                         Subcomponent 1.2 - Inclusive enterprise development for sustainability of CSA (US$15 million)
                         To sustain and scale up the adoption of CSA-integrated approaches within and beyond the project it
                         is important to stimulate business opportunities and create incentives for women and youth groups ,
                         producers’ groups and MSMEs to undertake activities that strengthen input and outputs markets and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support conditions for successful adoption of improved agricultural practices. Under this
                         subcomponent, the project will support investments in the following three areas:
                         •       Business development services support for matching grant recipients (USD 5 million) to
                         undertake entrepreneurial activities using proven business models and technologies to support
                         rainfed production systems, irrigation schemes, livestock and high value chains. The actors will
                         receive training in technical and business management skills to enable the conversion of innovation
                         into successful business; training in post-harvest loss reduction methods including food processing;
                         •       Establishment of a matching grant facility in the amount of US$10.0 million to promote
                         development of inclusive enterprise in the agriculture sector.

                         Component 2: Innovative practices and improved service delivery for mainstreaming CSA (US$ 33
                         million)
                         To help support the financial investments in Component 1 and adopt innovative practices to achieve
                         the triple outcomes of CSA, farmers’ capacity needs to be strengthened and they will need access to a
                         number of services from private and public institutions. This component will focus on improving
                         service delivery by national and local institutions and farmers adoption of innovative practices . It
                         will also focus on public sector institutions to improve the policy and enabling environment and
                         facilitate delivery of relevant services by national and local public sector institutions. In addition, this
                         component will work directly with the private sector and attempt to develop market mechanisms for
                         sustained service delivery during and after the project.


                                                                        Page 2 of 13
                         Subcomponent 2.1 - Technology transfer (US$9 million)
                         The subcomponent constitutes the second major source of investment leads, the first being the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         proven technologies and practices which could be translated into quick wins delivered from the
                         project inception. It is designed to showcase transformative technologies and innovations that could
                         be adopted and scaled up by value chain operators to improve productivity and product quality,
                         reduce climate change risks and carbon emissions. This subcomponent will focus on technology
                         transfer and will use the demand-based Farmers Field School (FFS) approach developed by FAO as
                         well as the Innovation Platform (IP) approach implemented in Niger under the WAAPP, to establish
                         demonstration schemes and facilitate multi-stakeholder participatory processes for new technologies
                         adoption. Communes’ specific needs will be articulated through ICSIPs and technical packages will
                         be developed and delivered by national institutions (DVTT, DGPIA, DGGR and RECA) in
                         partnership with technical international institutions (FAO and ICRISAT/CCAFS). Through their
                         demand-based, demonstration-focused, and peer-to-peer learning approach, FFSs will help large-
                         scale dissemination and adoption of improved agricultural practices in the project site and
                         complement commune and enterprise investments made in subcomponent 2.1. The project will use
                         the IP to support value chain development and facilitate dialogue between all stakeholders of
                         considered agricultural value chains, including farmers, training institutions, extension workers,
                         traders, processors, private enterprises, policy makers, NGOs, financial service providers and
                         researchers. The IP will be bringing together the various stakeholders and providing them a space to
                         have interactions, facilitate knowledge flows and identify and disseminate best practices. The IP will
                         be therefore able to identify challenges and opportunities for the adoption of agricultural
                         technologies and value chain development solutions. In each commune, the IP will generate site-
                         specific solutions to align production with market requirements, which will in turn ensure better
                         prices for smallholder producers.

                         Subcomponent 2.2 - Improved access to information (US$13 million)
                         Access to improved information for decision making is a critical element of the CSA package. Under
                         this subcomponent, the project will: (a) collaborate with the Directorate of Meteorology, RECA, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         INRAN (Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique du Niger/National Institute for Agronomic
                         Research in Niger) to invest in commune level weather forecast (seasonal and short term) and
                         advisory; (b) strengthening information delivery to farmers through upgrading and expanding
                         RECA’s web platform, supporting RECA to compilation of existing content on good agriculture and
                         livestock practices and preparing dissemination material in local language (Hausa and Zarma);
                         supporting community rural radios, and leveraging rural markets for information dissemination; and
                         (c) delivery of weather forecast and crop price information to farmers in selected communes through
                         cellphones.

                         Subcomponent 2.3 - Support to national institutions for improved service delivery and policy
                         dialogue (US$6 million)
                         To mainstream CSA in Niger’s broader institutional landscape, the project needs to coordinate with a
                         large number of ministries and institutions and to build strong coalitions. In addition, project
                         performance is contingent on active participation and support of a number of institutions directly
                         engaged in service delivery in the agriculture and livestock sectors. The project will finance a
                         number of activities to strengthen national institutions’ capacity, including: (a) organizing
                         workshops, meetings, and field visits and developing and delivering a training program for building
                         awareness and knowledge sharing on CSA; (b) supporting development of policies, projects, and
                         programs for CSA, which might entail undertaking technical studies, organizing workshops and
                         meetings, exposure visits, etc.; (c) supporting national institutions to help implement PASEC; (d)

                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                         supporting national universities to develop curriculum on CSA. e) supporting Investment Fund for
                         Food Security and Nutrition (FISAN) for organizing workshops, undertaking training, financing
                         analytic studies and strategy development, and other support activities; f) Supporting INRAN for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         production of foundation seed for staple grains; provide support for distributing foundation seed to
                         seed breeders; provide support for technical assistance, quality control, and monitoring of seed; and
                         support for maintaining genetic material.

                         Subcomponent 2.4 Supporting Innovations for Agriculture Development (US $5 Million)
                         While the focus of the project is to scale-up proven interventions, at the same time, to keep provide
                         space for new innovations that have potential for scaling-up in future, this sub-component will pilot a
                         number of innovations. These activities are already being implemented, and scaled up in neighboring
                         countries and can play a big role in strengthening resilience and improving productivity. Under this
                         sub-component, the following activities will be supported: a) Piloting of e-vouchers for agricultural
                         input distribution for vulnerable populations in selected communes; and b) Piloting the use of remote
                         sensing, application for monitoring crop performance.

                         Component 3: Contingency Emergency Response (US$0 million)

                         This component will finance emergency works in case of another disaster event by including a “zero-
                         dollar” Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC). This will help reduce damage to
                         infrastructure, ensure business continuity, and enable early rehabilitation. In parallel, following an
                         adverse event that causes a major disaster, the GoN may request the Bank to channel resources from
                         this component into an Immediate Response Mechanism (IRM). The IRM will enable the use of a
                         portion of uncommitted funds from the overall IDA portfolio to respond to emergencies. To mobilize
                         resources from the component, it will use the “Immediate Response Mechanism Operational
                         Manual,” approved by the Bank on March 17, 2015, and the GoN on June 16, 2015.

                         Component 4: Project Coordination and Management (US$10 million)
                         The project will be implemented under the 3N Initiative’s institutional arrangements. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                         component has two subcomponents: (a) Coordination, management, and implementation support;
                         and (b) Monitoring and evaluation (M&E), communication, and knowledge production and sharing.
                         a)      Coordination, management, and implementation support

                         This subcomponent will support: (i) establishment and operation of the National Coordination Unit
                         (NCU) and five Regional Support Units (RSUs) in Dosso, Maradi, Tahoua, Tillaberi, and Zinder; (ii)
                         establishment and operation of the Project Steering Committee (PSC); and (iii) coordinated
                         implementation support and services provided by national technical entities, consultants, research
                         institutions, etc. The subcomponent will particularly include management of staff (including national
                         and international consultants) and equipment, financial management (FM), procurement activities,
                         management of environmental and social safeguards aspects, and organization of work, including
                         joint supervision missions.

                         b)      Monitoring and evaluation (M&E), communication, and knowledge production and sharing
                         A framework for assessing resilience to drought in mixed crop-livestock systems of the Sahel will be
                         defined. Specific metrics will be established for the project areas and monitored during project
                         implementation. Activities will draw on panel data from the LSMS (Living Standards Measurement
                         Study) program.

                         The M&E system will be established to collect and process appropriate information and to verify the

                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         output, effects, and eventually the impacts of project activities over time.

                         Information sharing and stakeholder involvement and participation at all stages of the project cycle
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be a core of the project’s accountability for results. A communication and knowledge-sharing
                         strategy will be designed and implemented to appropriately disseminate all information concerning
                         approaches, processes, results, and lessons learned by the project to key ministerial departments and
                         national agencies, communes, the private sector, farmers’ organizations, farmers, and NGOs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project intervention area covers the regions of Dosso, Maradi, Tahoua, Tillabery and Zinder. The
                         Project’s activities will be concentrated in 60 municipalities located in the bioclimatic zone between
                         400 mm and 600 mm, highly vulnerable to food insecurity due to frequent drought and rainfall
                         variability but with huge potential for increasing agricultural productivity. These communes covers
                         an area of 54,810 km² (4% of the territory) and are hosting 3.9 million inhabitants (23% of the total
                         population of Niger) distributed in 529,789 households (86% rural). The IDA financing will cover 46
                         communes while MCC will provide parallel financing to support investments in 16 other communes.

                         In the project area the climate is characterized by a substantial spatial and temporal rainfall variation.
                         Vegetation consists of degraded savannahs on fragile soils substratum, mostly sandy and exposed to
                         high water and wind erosion. Such phenomena make soil infertility, scarcity of water resources and
                         land degradation the main natural factors of vulnerability. These are increasingly exacerbated by
                         frequent droughts associated with climate change and high human pressure on natural resources. In
                         such conditions, any action related to natural resources exploitation/management must be treated
                         with special attention in order to avoid adverse shocks and ensure sustainability.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Abou Gueye (GSU01)
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Medou Lo (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes             The Project is classified as category B project. The
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       Project has prepared an Environmental and Social
                                                                      Management Framework (ESMF). The ESMF outlines an
                                                                      environmental and social screening process for future sub-
                                                                      projects to ensure that they are environmentally and
                                                                      socially sound, sustainably implementable, and in line
                                                                      with GoN and World Bank operational safeguards
                                                                      policies and guidelines on environmental and social
                                                                      impacts and risks management. A 2-person team of Social
                                                                      and Environmental Safeguards Specialists (SESS) will be
                                                                      established at the PIU level to adequately handle the
                                                                      implementation of social and environmental
                                                                      recommendations.. Nonetheless, provisions are being
                                                                      made in the ESMF to address issues related to Physical
                                                                      Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Natural Habitats (OP/
                                                                      BP 4.04) and Forestry (OP/BP 4.36). Similarly, mitigation


                                                                       Page 5 of 13
                                                        measures to avoid any pressures to project neighboring
                                                        ecosystems (i.e.-activities could affect natural habitats
                                                        and/or pristine forests are ineligible for project financing);
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        the adoption of reforestation actions in compliance with
                                                        OP/BP 4.36 on Forestry will be encouraged.

                                                        The ESMF has been amply consulted upon, validated with
                                                        the National Bureau of Environmental Evaluation and
                                                        Investigation (BEEEI), cleared by the Bank, and disclosed
                                                        both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   In General, the project is not expected to intervene in any
                         4.04                           critically natural habitats. However, details of the exact
                                                        sites of the proposed investments are yet to be known.
                                                        The project is designed to reduce the impacts of severe
                                                        climate conditions both on human and on the natural
                                                        resources. It will have a positive footprint since climate
                                                        smart agriculture presupposes the existence of healthy
                                                        eco-system. The ESMF includes preventive measures for
                                                        avoiding encroachment or negative leakage on natural
                                                        habitats which will guide the preparation of ESIA and
                                                        EMPs for specific investments.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   The project will not support forest exploitation but it will
                                                        support reforestation and sustainable management of
                                                        forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    Although project funds will not be used to purchase and
                                                        distribute agrochemicals, and encourage farmer groups to
                                                        use more inorganic fertilizers and pesticides, the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        will rather encourage farmers to do intensive agriculture
                                                        using climate smart and to control pest populations
                                                        through Integrated Pest Management approaches such as
                                                        biological control, cultural practices and the development
                                                        and use of crop varieties that are resistant or tolerant to
                                                        pests. At this end, the Borrower has prepared an
                                                        Integrated Pests and Pesticides Management Plan
                                                        (IPPMP) which includes: (i) a survey on the local bio
                                                        pesticides and agronomic technical practices to reduce the
                                                        impacts of pests on the agriculture value chains in the
                                                        project areas; (ii) appropriate actions to reduce the
                                                        exposure of farmer groups to pesticides used in
                                                        agricultural production systems; (iii) public sensitization
                                                        program in the targeted communes on Integrated Pest
                                                        Management approaches; (iv) training sessions to
                                                        strengthen the capacity of different actors (farmers, local
                                                        vendors, regional agricultural agents, etc.) on the proper
                                                        use, storage and disposal of agrochemical products; and
                                                        (v) a coherent budget available in the project financing.
                                                        The IPPMP was amply consulted upon and a participatory


                                                         Page 6 of 13
                                                           grievance redress mechanism (GRM) is also embedded
                                                           that guides the steps to be followed to peacefully settle
                                                           grievances. It was validated by the BEEEI, approved by
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           the Bank, and disclosed both in-country and at the
                                                           InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural           Yes   TThe project is not expected to have an impact on
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11              physical cultural resources. However, due to potential
                                                           impacts on Physical Cultural Resources associated with
                                                           civil works, the policy is triggered and the ESMF includes
                                                           provisions of “Chance Finds” approach to ensure that
                                                           these aspects will be taken into account in sub-project
                                                           ESIAs then reflected in the contractors’ TOR .
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No       There are no Indigenous Peoples People in the project
                         BP 4.10                           area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes      This policy is triggered because some proposed project
                         OP/BP 4.12                        activities in component 1 may lead to the acquisition of
                                                           land that could result in the loss of assets and/or means of
                                                           livelihood that could lead to the involuntary resettlement
                                                           of people. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has
                                                           been prepared, amply consulted upon, validated with
                                                           BEEEI, approved by the Bank, and disclosed both in-
                                                           country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes   OP 4.37 is triggered since the project may include
                         4.37                              construction of small earth-dams lesser than 5 meters in
                                                           height. The potential adverse safety and security impacts
                                                           are addressed in the ESMF which includes adequate
                                                           measures to ensure that the conception, the construction
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           and the maintenance of the small dams will be done by
                                                           qualified engineers. In addition, for each small dam to be
                                                           built, specific safety measures, will be included in the
                                                           specific ESIA which will be approved by the Bank before
                                                           constructions start.
                         Projects on International   Yes   OP 7.50 is triggered because of the intended project
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              objective of drawing a certain negligible amount of water
                                                           from the Niger River and/or its adjacent river bodies as
                                                           part of its agriculture sector development objective.
                                                           Consequently, the Government of Niger notified on
                                                           October 5, 2015 the riparian countries of the Niger river
                                                           through the Niger Basin Authority (NBA). It also
                                                           sensitized riparian on the low level risks and impacts of
                                                           the project activities, rather emphasizing on the positive
                                                           outcomes for Nigeriens and neighboring communities. 1.
                                                           No objection from the Niger Basin Authority was
                                                           received on February 3, 2016. In its final design, the
                                                           Project is not considering to intervene in communes
                                                           located in Lake Chad basin (Diffa region). There will be



                                                            Page 7 of 13
                                                                       any water withdrawal from Lake Chad and its tributaries.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             This project will not take place in any disputed areas as
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           defined under OP 7.60, and will not support any activities
                                                                       that will impact disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The environmental and social impacts and risks of the project activities are expected to be
                              moderate to low, mostly site-specific and easily manageable to an acceptable level, typical of
                              Category B projects. The potential negative environmental and social negative impacts and risks
                              of the proposed project are associated with the implementation of Component 1, which is designed
                              to support various activities for Scaling up Climate Smart Agriculture. These include: soil erosion
                              due to agricultural developments; the spread of waterborne disease vectors and health risks
                              associated with pesticide use, risks of increased prevalence of HIV/AIDS and other SCDs due to
                              foreign workers on construction sites, the risk of pollution and environmental degradation by
                              fertilizers and pesticides, reduced vegetation and pasture due to agricultural developments, etc. At
                              the social level, though the project does not anticipate to physically display people, some of its
                              proposed activities may require acquisition of land plots or restriction of access to productive
                              natural resources, and/ or loss of incomes and livelihood resources without proper precautionary
                              measures taken on time, could potentially lead to the involuntary resettlement of project affected
                              persons (PAP).

                             The proposed project triggers OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest
                             Management), OP/BP 4.04 (Natural Habitats), OP/BP 4.36 (Forests), OP/BP 4.11 (Physical
                             Cultural Resources); OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement), OP/BP 4.37 (Safety of Dams) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             OP/BP 7.50 (Projects in International Waterways). In conformity with the World Bank'
                             requirements and the Government's Environmental Impact Assessment legislation, an ESMF was
                             prepared, amply consulted upon, along with a RPF, and a PMP. These were approved by the
                             BEEEI (attached to the Ministry of Environment) through a national validation workshop, cleared
                             by the Bank’s Regional Safeguards Advisor (RSA), and publicly disclosed both in-country and at
                             the InfoShop before appraisal.

                              No large-scale or irreversible adverse impacts and risks haves been identified during the
                              participatory ESMF, IPMP and RPF analysis conducted.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No adverse long term impact and risk haves been identified during the EA process. Instead, the
                              project is expected to deliver significant environmental and social benefits to hundred thousands of
                              Nigeriens’ beneficiaries whose main livelihoods depend largely on agriculture crops and value.
                              The integration of sustainable management practices of land and water as part of the formulation
                              and implementation of CSA integrated projects are expected to increase the productive capital of
                              the land and the net carbon stock; and to increase the resilience of agro-sylvo-pastoral systems to
                              climate risks. However, project activities to increase agricultural productivity could potentially
                              induce indirect, but manageable impacts associated with increased use of agrochemicals, such as


                                                                        Page 8 of 13
                           pesticides. These issues are addressed in the Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP).
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           N/A
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The proposed project will be implemented by an new PIU under the Ministry of Agriculture. The
                           Ministry is already overseeing three others projects funded by IDA (WAAPP -P122065; PRODEX
                           - P095210 and CAP3 - P132306). The PRODEX will be implementing the project until the
                           completion of the recruitment of the new PIU staff. PRODEX (P095210) has some experience in
                           implementing the Bank’s safeguards policies. The Government of Niger (GoN) has financed under
                           ongoing PRODEX the preparation of an ESMF, an IPMP and a RPF to address issues related to
                           the safeguard policies triggered.

                          The ESMF outlines an environmental and social screening process for future sub-projects to
                          ensure that they are environmentally sound and socially equitable, sustainably implementable, and
                          in line with GoN and World Bank operational safeguards policies and guidelines on environmental
                          and social impacts and risks management. Provisions are being made in the ESMF to address
                          issues related to Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11), Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04),
                          Forestry (OP/BP 4.36) and safety and security impacts related to the small dams (OP/BP 4.37).
                          Similarly, mitigation measures to avoid any pressures to project neighboring ecosystems (i.e.-
                          activities could affect natural habitats and/or pristine forests are ineligible for project financing);
                          the adoption of reforestation actions in compliance with OP/BP 4.36 on Forestry will be
                          encouraged. The implementation cost of the ESMF is estimated at FCFA 500 million, is proposed
                          to be included the overall project budget.

                          An Integrated Pests Management Plan (IPMP) has been prepared based on project activities to
                          increase agricultural productivity which is expected to result in increased use of agrochemicals,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          such as pesticides. The IPMP aims to ensure safe pests and pesticides management. It includes: (i)
                          a survey on the local bio pesticides and agronomic technical practices to reduce the impacts of
                          pests on the agriculture value chains in the project areas; (ii) appropriate actions to reduce the
                          exposure of farmer groups to pesticides used in agricultural production systems; (iii) guidelines to
                          be adopted on the possibility of agrochemical application and disposal; (iv) training sessions to
                          strengthen the capacity of different actors (farmers, local vendors, regional agricultural agents,
                          etc.) on the proper use, storage and disposal of agrochemical products; and (v) a coherent budget
                          of FCA 295 million proposed to be included in the overall project budget.

                          The RPF sets forth the basic principles and procedures to be followed once the physical footprints
                          of project activities are known in details to properly mitigate any potential adverse social impacts
                          (i.e. preparation of site specific resettlement action plan-RAP, etc.). The RPF includes specifics
                          such as valuation of assets, public consultation and participation, institutional arrangement,
                          capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, grievance redress mechanism, budget and source of
                          financing. CFA 300 million are proposed to support resettlement (RAP preparation, sensitization
                          and training of key stakeholders), and to be included in the overall project cost. These do not
                          include compensation costs which will be borne by the Government

                          A 2-person team of Social and Environmental Safeguards Specialists (SESS) will be established at
                          the PIU level to adequately handle the implementation of social and environmental

                                                                     Page 9 of 13
                           recommendations. The SESS will work in tandem with the WBG safeguards specialists to ensure
                           due compliance with core safeguards policies requirements. In addition, each project regional unit
                           will have a socio-environmental focal point to follow up on activities at local level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           All bidding documents for civil works will have embedded environmental and social clauses
                           (ESC), in order to enable contractors to follow up on environmental and social due diligence and
                           to mitigate the anticipated negative risks and impacts. Depending of the type, scope/nature and
                           size of construction, a supervising engineer (Bureau de contrôle) will be hired by the project to
                           oversee the construction works (including implementation of environmental and social measures
                           by the constructor) on behalf of the PIU. For small size construction type, the PIU will rely on the
                           deconcentrated technical services like Génie Rural, Regional Directorate for Environmental, as
                           well as local level Socio-environmental Specialist, etc. to ensure due diligence on safeguards as
                           described in the ESC. Regular BEEEI patrols will inspect the construction sites if the construction
                           activities are in compliance with the approved site specific safeguards documents.

                           The Borrower has some experience with the World Bank Safeguards policies’ requirements
                           through several past and ongoing Bank funded projects. The ongoing PRODEX (P095210)
                           achieves excellent results in building the capacity for the PIU, the Regional Focal Points for the
                           project, members of the Regional Technical subprojects’ Selection Committees, and the various
                           Implementing Agencies. The proposed project will build on these initial gains and the 3 standalone
                           safeguards instruments (ESMF, IPMP & RPF) include provisions to further strengthen the
                           capacity of the various stakeholders.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders identified are the Ministry of Agriculture, deconcentrated technical services,
                           local authorities, affected communities and civil society (NGOs, CSOs, etc.). Throughout the
                           entire process of project preparation, transparent and engaging stakeholder participation
                           consultations were organized in the project intervention areas. The key concerns raised by the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           local stakeholders are related to land degradation issues that affect their livelihood, mainly the
                           reduction of arable lands due to water erosion and silting of lowlands, lack of access to finance,
                           and need for capacity building to improve agricultural practices. They have been incorporated in
                           the project design (protection of watersheds from erosion and secure irrigation potential, Farmers
                           Field School program, matching grant facility, etc.). Since stakeholder consultation and
                           participation is an iterative process, it will be pursued and sustained throughout the project
                           lifespan.

                           As part of the ESMF, the IPMP and the RPF, in addition to the series of intensive local
                           stakeholder meetings (open and/or focus groups discussions), a national stakeholders’ workshop
                           was organized by the BEEEI on January 7, 8 and 9, 2016 to share the results of the safeguards
                           instruments, mainstream ownership and seek inputs from the stakeholders. The 3 standalone
                           safeguards instruments, approved by the BEEEI as result of this national stakeholders’ workshop,
                           have been submitted to the Bank for final approval. They have been disclosed both in-country
                           (March 15th, 2016) and at the InfoShop (March 17th, 2016) prior to appraisal. The ESMF
                           describes a comprehensive consultation and participation mechanism and disclosure during sub-
                           projects preparation.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other


                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Mar-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                            15-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                            15-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      02-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Niger                                                            15-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]


                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?



                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amadou Ba,Vikas Choudhary
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                           Date: 25-Apr-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Practice Manager/    Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR)                      Date: 27-Apr-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
