                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA13263
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Albania                            Project ID:    P151972
                            Project Name:      Citizen-centered public services (P151972)
                            Task Team          Jana Kunicova
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          27-May-2015                        Estimated   18-Aug-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GGODR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (50%), General public
                                              administration sector (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Administrative and civil service reform (30%), e-Government (30%), Managing
                                              for development results (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      74.10           Total Bank Financing:                   32.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    42.10
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       32.00
                              Total                                                                                       74.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the project is to improve the efficiency of delivery and access to
                           selected administrative services in Albania.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         The proposed operation will be financed by an Investment Project Financing (IPF) loan of US$32
                         million to the Government of Albania and will use a results-based financing modality with
                         disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) to provide incentives for results. GoA’s focus on results and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         political commitment to the goals of this reform program justifies a results-based modality as
                         opposed to traditional IPF. However, a pure results-based lending instrument (such as P4R) is not
                         advisable at this stage due to the need for technical assistance to address capacity constraints. A DLI-
                         based SIL is ideally suited in this context as a hybrid instrument. The time horizon for this operation
                         is five years.

                         Project Components. The project will have three components:

                         1. Enhancing the back-end systems (business process reengineering of services, building new IT
                         systems, automation of services);

                         2. Enhancing citizen interface with service delivery (reforming front offices in existing agencies,
                         improving citizen convenience with one stop shops, improving online delivery of services,
                         implementing beneficiary feedback, providing information on services);

                         3. Building capacity to deliver (improving strategic planning, performance management, capacity
                         building of the Prime Ministers Delivery Unit and the Ministry of Innovation and other implementing
                         agencies, communications strategy and campaign).

                         The three components each will be supported by three parts of the loan. These are: (i) Project
                         Preparation Facility (PPF; US$2 million); (ii) a Results Based Financing part (RBF, US$ 25
                         million); and (iii) Technical Assistance part (US$5 million) to build capacity of GoA in the areas that
                         are critical for implementing the program. The PPF and TA parts will follow the World Bank
                         procurement guidelines and disburse against eligible expenditures upon submission of IFRs. The
                         RBF will disburse against Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs) upon achievement of Disbursement
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Linked Indicators (DLIs). Project Preparation Facility (US$2 million). This will finance consultants,
                         goods, training, and other inputs required to implement preparatory activities, such as analysis of
                         public services to initiate business process re-engineering, competition for the CSC building design,
                         establishing the citizen feedback mechanism, gathering baseline data for the PDO indicators, as well
                         as building implementation capacity of ADISA by establishing the PMU.

                         Results Based Financing: Disbursement Linked Indicators (US$25 million). The objective of the
                         RBF is to provide incentives for undertaking critical reforms and achieving results along the two
                         result areas: quality and access. Activities supporting the achievement these results include: (i)
                         Component 1: re-engineering of administrative processes to reduce the time and cost to citizens of
                         obtaining approvals; development of online services with level 3 automation; (ii) Component 2:
                         improved provision of information on government services; monitoring of citizen feedback and
                         performance; and (iii) Component 3: institutional prerequisites of the reform process. Table 1
                         explains how these DLIs contribute to each of the three components of the project. Rather than
                         financing inputs and activities, this component disburses against agreed-to Eligible Expenditures
                         Programs (EEPs) upon achievement of key results as measured by the DLIs. Five DLIs have been
                         selected for providing incentives for and recording progress toward creating higher quality and
                         accessibility in delivering administrative services to Albanian citizens. The majority of the loan (US
                         $25 million) will disburse upon achievement of agreed targets of the DLIs.




                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                         Technical assistance (US$ 5 million). This part of the loan will support capacity building and
                         institutional strengthening activities related to the achievement of key results. This is crucial because
                         the authorities do not have staff with the technical skills and experience needed to implement the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reform process. The modality for this component is traditional IPF where the government procures
                         consultants, goods and other agreed inputs according to the World Bank’s procurement rules. Areas
                         for support by component include business process re-engineering, ICT infrastructure,
                         communication mechanisms and campaign, as well as building capacity for performance
                         management at the center of government.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The government is planning to construct a new building in the center of the capital, Tirana, that will
                         house the central one stop shop (Citizen Service Center). CSC will provide over 300 administrative
                         services. The project will not directly finance the building, but will disburse upon fulfilling DLIs
                         linked to the provision of services in the one-stop shop.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
                         Esma Kreso (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The new construction of the one-stop shop Citizen
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      Service Center will involve standard construction
                                                                     environmental impacts, including material supply, dust
                                                                     and noise, machinery, possibly traffic safety on access
                                                                     roads, waste management, etc. All of these have been
                                                                     identified in a site-specific Environmental Management
                                                                     Plan, that was prepared and disclosed with public
                                                                     consultations held on April 27, 2015 - therefore prior to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Project Appraisal.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             The construction of the center is envisaged to be carried
                          4.04                                       out in an urban part of Tirana with very little potential
                                                                     impacts on any natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             There are no potential impacts on forests identified.

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 There are no practices within the project's activities that
                                                                     would involve pest management.
                          Physical Cultural           No             There are no identified physical cultural resources on site
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11                       or in the proximity of the site. A precautionary chance
                                                                     finds measure has been included in the EMP.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/   No                There are no issues related to indigenous peoples.
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement No                The Center will be constructed on public land with no
                          OP/BP 4.12                                 legal or illegal users of this land plot.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP     No                There are no safety of dams issues or concerns.
                          4.37



                                                                       Page 3 of 5
                            Projects on International   No             There are no issues related to international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project is not implemented in an area that would be
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           considered a disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Although the project will not directly finance construction of the Citizen Service Center, due to the
                              close linkages of the Center's development with the Project, an Environmental Management Plan
                              has been prepared to address construction-related environmental impacts. These include land use,
                              dust and noise generation, use of machinery, construction waste management and other impacts
                              that can be readily mitigated through the use of sound construction practices and the
                              implementation of the prepared EMP. There are no large scale, significant or irreversible
                              environmental impacts associated with this activity.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No long term impacts are anticipated.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Implementation Unit has prepared the Environmental Management Plan following guidance
Public Disclosure Copy




                              provided by the World Bank team, complete with disclosure and public consultations. The EMP
                              will be integrated into the bidding and contractual documents for the works and also supervision of
                              works on site. The PIU will designate one of their staff to supervise, or if this option is not
                              feasible, they can hire a part-time external consultant to ensure compliance with the EMP once the
                              works are ongoing.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The key stakeholders include citizens and representatives of local businesses around the proposed
                              future Center, as well as representatives of the local authorities dealing with environment and/or
                              physical planning and representatives of non-governmental organizations. Apart from the targetted
                              invitations sent for the public consultations the client has also ensured public announcement of the
                              consultations to ensure all potentially affected stakeholders are present. The public consultations
                              were held in Tirana on April 27, 2015 - in the proximity of the future Center's site.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                             Date of receipt by the Bank                                          13-May-2015
                             Date of submission to InfoShop                                       18-May-2015




                                                                         Page 4 of 5
                              For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      00000000
                              Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                            "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Albania                                                          13-May-2015
                              Comments: http://www.inovacioni.gov.al/files/news_files/ISDA-PSM_EMP,_April_2015.pdf
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jana Kunicova
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/        Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)                      Date: 24-Jun-2015
                            Manager:


                                                                       Page 5 of 5
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
