INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12298
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Nepal                       Project ID:   P154548
Project Name:    Strengthening Systems for Social Protection Project (P154548)
Task Team        Yasuhiko Matsuda,Jasmine Rajbhandary
Leader(s):
Estimated        02-May-2016                 Estimated     13-Sep-2016
Appraisal Date:                              Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSP06                         Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Other social services (70%), Public administration- Other social services (30%)
Theme(s):        Other social protection and risk management (70%), e-Government (30%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00             Total Bank Financing:     50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                       50.00
Total                                                             50.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve efficiency and coverage in the
delivery of social security allowances and civil registration services by the Government of Nepal.
C. Project Description
The proposed Strengthening Systems for Social Protection (SSSP) Project includes tentative
components: (i) Improving civil registration; (ii) Modernizing social security allowance delivery; and
(iii) Institutional strengthening.


﻿Component 1: Improving Civil Registration
This component aims to improve the civil registration and social protection databases to increase
O
overall efficiency and management capacity of the MOFALD and its nationwide roll-out.
Sub-component 1.1: Development and Roll-out of the Computerized Civil Registration System
The subcomponent will support MOFALD's effort to improve civil registration and social protection
beneficiary databases. The component will finance data collection (field data collection,
digitalization, data entry, etc.) to generate a larger computerized database for civil registration and
social security programs which can be synchronized through unique identifiers to be generated by the
MIS.
Sub-component 1.2: Outreach Information Campaign
This sub-component will involve a well-designed and carefully executed program of outreach
regarding the importance of registering vital events that will also include behavioral change
campaigns for the population as well as the service providers (e.g., VDC officials).
Component 2: Modernizing Social Security Allowance Delivery
This component will modernize and improve the efficiency of the social security allowance delivery
through improving the coverage of beneficiaries and shifting to electronic payments.
Sub-Component 2.1: Improving Beneficiary Coverage
This sub-component will build on the establishment of a comprehensive civil registry database
(Component 1) to properly identify and reach out to eligible beneficiaries.
0
In addition, this sub-component may also support efforts to enhance the impact of the disability grant
and the child grant, two components of the social security allowances that are explicitly targeted to
vulnerable segments of the population. The eligibility setting and identification of disability falls
a      under the mandate of the Ministry of Women, Children and Social Welfare (MoWCSW), and as
such, if inclusion of this item is confirmed, the sub-component would work with MoWSCW to
improve coverage.
Sub-Component 2.2: Shifting to Electronic Payments
This sub-component will support phased roll-out of the electronic payment systems through private
payment service providers (PSPs), already piloted in three districts during the implementation of the
recently closed Social Safety Nets Project (SSNP). Besides, the Government has decided to use
payments through the banking system as the primary means to deliver the emergency cash grants to
support reconstruction of private homes damaged by the recent earthquakes.
The electronic payments will likely cover up to one-third of the country (15 to 25 districts), using a
phased approach over the project period. For the remaining areas, the challenging geographic and
infrastructure conditions would mean that they may not be serviceable by PSPs which require use of
modern technology such as point-of-sale (POS) machines or mobile banking methods and may


﻿therefore need to continue relying on the traditional method of payment distribution through VDCs.
Therefore, the sub-component will also support process improvement in non-electronic payments of
social security allowances (e.g., integration of the use of the MIS in the benefit payment process by
VDCs).
o
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening
MOFALD is responsible for overseeing the nationwide network of local bodies composed of 75
District Development Committees (DDCs), 191 municipalities, and 3,246 Village Development
Committees (VDCs). Until the recent creation of the Department of Civil Registration (DOCR), both
civil registration and social security functions were handled by relatively small units in MOFALD.
The creation of DOCR signifies the government's commitment to strengthen its capacity to manage
both civil registration and social security. The component will support institutional strengthening of
the entire chain of service delivery from the Ministry and the Department to selected local bodies.
Sub-component 3.1: Organizational Development of DOCR
The sub-component will provide comprehensive support to strengthen DOCR as an organization.
Specifically, it will support DOCR's efforts to review guidelines and procedures for its core business
processes, strengthening of monitoring and evaluation capacity, and necessary investments in
equipment. The component may also support construction or repair of DOCR's office building, if an
appropriate site is identified before appraisal and no major safeguard issue is raised.
Sub-component 3.2: Capacity Development of Local Bodies
Each local body is headed by an official appointed by MOFALD, though some are also staffed with
personnel that the local body hires with its own resources. This sub-component will support required
investments in terms of both physical set-up and human capacity development to make the new
institutional arrangement for civil registration and social security operate effectively at the local
level.
Sub-component 3.3: Service Centers
An institutional option MOFALD is considering, given the practical challenge of equipping all the
VDCs with the necessary physical assets (e.g., computer-based MIS) and human resources (e.g., staff
capable of managing a large database), is to designate some of the existing local bodies as "service
centers" nationwide to serve clusters of VDCs. The component will support set-up of roughly around
one thousand of these centers, at least on a pilot basis.
Sub-component 3.4: Management Information System
The management information system (MIS) as the backbone of an integrated civil and beneficiary
registries has already been developed under recently-closed Bank projects and is being used by
MOFALD on a pilot basis in a total of 14 districts. Roll-out in an additional 10 districts, under an
ADB funded project, is also under way. The component will support DOCR's effort to refine and roll
out this MIS to the other districts and also support further development/refinement of the MIS and
capacity building for its ongoing use and maintenance by DOCR/MOFALD staff.
Sub-component 3.5: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation


﻿The sub-component will support standard project management requirements such as procurement
and financial management as well as support to strengthen DOCR's own M&E capacity.
O
U       DOCR will be the primary implementing agency. DOCR is a new organization but some of its key
staff have experience working with projects supported by WB and/or other development partners.
However, the capacity of DOCR to manage a large-scale reform project such as this proposed
operation is thin and will pose a major source of implementation risks. Each component will be
headed by a designated mid-level manager (i.e., Undersecretary) with a dedicated team of DOCR
officials.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Although the project does not directly support major infrastructure works to meet its objectives, the
possible support under sub-component 3.1 to construct or repair DOCR's office building, may
involve land acquisition and support to civil works related activities. Further, the project seeks to
strengthen the efficiency of the MOFALD/Local Bodies through support and investments in physical
set-up and human capacity development.
While increasing coverage of the civil registration and social security systems is a major objective of
this operation, there is a risk that some of the hitherto marginalized groups, possibly including some
IPs, may continue to be left out.
As of now, some of the project related activities including the expansion of the civil registration
coverage will potentially be carried out across all the 75 districts of Nepal. The project triggers OP
4.01, OP 4.10 and OP 4.12 and is a category "B" project. Considering that whether IDA will indeed
finance civil works, let alone the exact location for the physical investments/activities of the
interventions, is not yet identified and assessed, an Environmental Social Management Framework
(ESMF) is required. But if IDA financing of civil works is confirmed and if the site is identified for
construction of DOCR building before the appraisal, an Environmental Assessment (EA) needs to be
carried out.
To address the issue of Indigenous People and other vulnerable communities, a Vulnerable
Community Development Framework (which complies with the requirements of OP 4.10 and is
commensurate with a Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework) needs to be prepared as part of the
ESMF. However, if the project districts are identified prior to appraisal then a Vulnerable
Community Development Plan (that is consistent with the requirements of an Indigenous Peoples
Plan) will have to be prepared. The ESMF will also include a Resettlement Policy Framework as a
precautionary measure, and if the site for the construction of DOCR building is identified and
involves land acquisition then a specific Resettlement Action Plan will be required. This ESMF will
also need to ensure due diligence in the implementation of safeguard documents and operational
manual of National Housing and Reconstruction of Project (NHRP) as there is a link between this
project and NHRP under sub-component 2.2.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
MOFALD which is the primary implementing agency has a dedicated Environmental Management
Section headed by an Under Secretary. This unit was established about a decade and half ago with
the objective of streamlining environmental consideration in local level government projects. This
department consists of two section officers and an environmental specialist (ES) technical assistance


﻿for whom has been supported by the multi-donor funded Local Governance and Community
Development Programme. The main mandate of the ES is to review the IEE/EIA reports, assist in
budgeting funds for the environmental and social measures, monitoring, developing policy/manual/
guidelines, coordinating with development partners and designing/delivering training/awareness
)       program related to environment/social issues at the central and local level.
Although, the current set up of the Environmental Management Section has the requisite capacity to
oversee/monitor issues regarding safeguards, the project, nevertheless needs to further focus on
strengthening the capacity (human resource/ logistics) to reduce the associated risk and ensure
accountability.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Annu Rajbhandari (GENDR)
Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)
Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
Jun Zeng (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Efficiency of the MOFALD/Local Bodies will be
OP/BP 4.01                               strengthened through support and investments in
hardware and software aspects of delivery of social
security assistance. In addition, as part of sub-
component 3.1, the project may possibly support
construction or repair of DOCR's office building, if
an appropriate site is identified before appraisal. The
project triggers OP 4.01 and is a category "B"
project. But an EA has to be carried out if the site is
identified before the appraisal.
Considering that whether the project will indeed
finance civil works, let alone the exact location/
activities of the interventions, is not yet determined,
an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to enhance
project benefits and mitigate any potential
environmental and social risks.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No         No natural habitats will be impacted
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          Forest will not be impacted.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          The project will not finance the purchase of
pesticides nor promote the use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  No         There is no foreseeable impact on Physical Cultural
OP/BP 4.11                              Resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         This policy has been triggered mainly to ensure


﻿4.10                                         outreach, inclusion, effective targeting, and
monitoring of hitherto marginalized groups,
including IPs, during the implementation of various
sub-components designed to strengthen social
protection programs and civil registration. The
ESMF will include a Vulnerable Community
Development Framework that will detail the steps
that will be taken to mitigate against any risks of
exclusion, and also provide measures for enhancing
project benefits. The VCDF will be consistent with
the Bank's policy on indigenous peoples and the
specific guidelines for Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF). However, if prior to appraisal,
the project districts are identified then a Vulnerable
Community Development Plan (that is consistent
with the requirements for Indigenous Peoples Plan)
will be prepared.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes           This policy has been triggered as a precautionary
BP 4.12                                      measure. Presently, the precise nature of activities
that would be supported to enhance the effectiveness
of social protection programs and civil registration,
and to construct DOCR's office building, is not yet
known. Also, it is not clear what the land
requirements would be for the construction/repair of
DOCR's building. The EA, if applicable, will help
identify land requirements and its impacts, and the
RFP which will be prepared as part of the ESMF will
detail the steps that will be taken to ensure minimal
risks associated with land acquisition, and also to
mitigate against them. However, if the site for the
office building is known prior to appraisal then a
site-specific Resettlement Action Plan will be
prepared.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No            The project will not finance dams.
Projects on International      No            The project is not situated in international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No            No disputed areas are involved.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 08-Apr-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The required safeguards documents - Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
including Vulnerable Community Development Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework
will be prepared by January 2016. If the site of DOCR's office building is identified before the
appraisal and the Bank considers financing it, an EA has to be carried out upon the site
identification, and a Resettlement Action Plan will be prepared accordingly.
2   IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yasuhiko Matsuda,Jasmine Rajbhandary
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)               Date: 29-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Pablo Gottret (PMGR)                   Date: 29-Oct-2015
Manager:


