                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC21241

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Feb-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Africa                          Project ID:      P163187
                            Project Name:         Regional Program of Cancer Registries
                            Team Leader(s):       Menno Mulder-Sibanda
                            Estimated Date
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GHN01                           Lending          IPF
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.49998                         Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                0.49998
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen capacity for collecting, analyzing and
                           sharing data on cancers in the five East Africa member states.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project will generate important evidence on how cancer registries can play a key role in tracking
                           the emergence of a major public health problem in sub-Saharan Africa, and contribute to
                           strengthening the capacity of Ministries of Health to produce reliable cancer statistics based on
                           population based registries. While the focus of this initiative is on cancers, the project will generate
                           valuable information for monitoring and tracking other NCDs. With support of the statistical trust
                           fund, the EAC member states have an opportunity to serve as a model for other countries in sub-
                           Saharan Africa that are facing similar challenges. Working together, in collaboration with key
                           technical partners (i.e., AFCRN, CDC) under the leadership of ECSA-HC that has a sound track
                           record of coordinating regional initiatives, will foster economies of scale and catalyze adoption of
                           best practices.

                           Building linkages between statistical work and cancer registration

                           In order to develop strategies to effectively manage, control and reduce the rapidly growing cancer
                         burden in the five EAC member states, collection of high-quality data is of paramount importance.
                         This project proposes a three stage process for building statistical capacity for the collection, analysis
                         and use of cancer statistics, namely: (i) data collection ➢❨ cancer registries play a pivotal role in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         collecting statistics on new cases, and case fatality rates, broken down by gender, age and geographic
                         location from hospitals, clinics, laboratories, radiology departments, pathology centres, and vital
                         statistics departments through direct reporting by these sites or through active case finding by
                         registry staff; strengthening the capacity of the five countries to generate high quality, complete and
                         accurate statistics on cancer will be critical as the majority do not have well established population
                         cancer registries; (ii) data analysis and statistical capacity building ➢❨ once the data is collected and
                         compiled it will be important to conduct analyses to better under risk factors, disease staging, and
                         other parameters; to this end, it will be important to strengthen the statistical capacity of the cancer
                         registries to enable them to produce high quality cancer statistics; the proposal proposes to build
                         capacity by providing critical equipment (hardware and software) and by conducting training of
                         registrars, enumerators and statistical experts; and (iii) utilization of statistics - information generated
                         through the statistical analysis of cancer data will inform policymaking by providing data on the
                         disease burden, epidemiology, types of cancer and other important information. The figure below
                         depicts the linkage between cancer registries as the data generation sources, the statistical aspects and
                         use of statistics for decision making.

                         In order to build statistical capacity and generate quality cancer data, the project will support four
                         key activities (Figure 1):

                         ➯❪§      Conducting country assessments to identify strategic locations for establishing additional
                         cancer registries.
                         ➯❪§      Establishing core capacity at new sites, by procuring basic equipment (i.e. computers,
                         printers, and office furniture)
                         ➯❪§      Providing training, capacity building and mentorship for cancer registrars, statisticians and
                         other key personnel.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ➯❪§      Disseminating findings from cancer registration pilots, documenting the value added of this
                         approach to strengthen national statistical capacity, providing a platform for data sharing for use by
                         researchers and exploring ways to consolidate and scale up results.

                         A. Country Assessments: ECSA-HC will coordinate the country assessments, with support of ANCR
                         and CDC, and in collaboration with respective Ministries of Health, National Statistical Offices and
                         other local actors. The goal of the assessments would be to build on existing initiatives supported by
                         other partners (as described in Annex II) by identifying prioritylocations for additional cancer
                         registries in Kenya, Rwanda, Tanzania and Uganda, and for setting up the first cancer registry in
                         Burundi. The assessment team would use standardized internationally recognized questionnaires and
                         would organize focus group discussions and/or interviews with key stakeholders. ECSA-HC has
                         successfully coordinated similar country assessments and is well placed to lead this effort.

                         B. Core Capacity: The governments will agree on the pilot sites, provide appropriate office space,
                         and deploy personnel to the cancer registers. The trust fund will support the following
                         complementary activities: (i) procurement of essential information and communications technology
                         (ICT) and office equipment, including computers (i.e. desktops, laptops, i-pads), printers and
                         scanners, not to exceed 20 percent of the total grant; and (ii) operating costs, including installation of
                         an open source cancer registration software (CANREG); provision of internet services, where not
                         available; and other key inputs (e.g. office supplies, logistical support). The trust fund will also
                         support recruitment of local consultants, on a selective basis and as strictly needed, to get the
                         initiative underway more quickly.
                         C. Training, Capacity Building and Mentorship: Given that the quality of cancer registry data is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         highly dependent on the skills, and qualifications of staff this component is critical to the overall
                         success of this initiative. To this end, the project will fund: (i) adoption of standardized instruction
                         manuals for cancer registrars and data collection forms; (ii) technical training on basic and advanced
                         cancer registration (e.g. abstracting and coding practices, statistical analysis, interpretation and
                         presentation of cancer data/information, and preparation of reports) and on CANREG; (iii)
                         mentorship visits by regional and international experts; (iv) sensitization on cancer registration and
                         the role of staff in the registry operations to ensure uptake; (v) peer visits to facilitate cross country
                         learning. The trust fund will support: (i) training and workshop costs; (ii) consulting services
                         (including travel); and (iii) operating costs (including travel).

                         D. Dissemination and Advocacy: In order to improve awareness and understanding of the importance
                         of cancer registries, country specific case studies will be prepared, documenting achievements, and
                         proposing future directions. The case studies will play a key role in building broad-based ownership
                         and in exploring ways to institutionalize cancer registries in collaboration with National Statistical
                         Offices. The dissemination activities will involve providers, medical records personnel, community
                         leaders and patient groups, to generate broad based support. In order to understand the spatial
                         patterns of cancer and to generate information on risk factors, a geographic information system (GIS)
                         will be piloted. The fund will support: (i) consultancy services to write up the case studies and
                         develop the GIS; and (ii) workshops with stakeholders to disseminate findings and generate support
                         for scaling up.

                         Figure 1: Strengthening Cancer Registration in East Africa

                         B.      Implementing Agency Information
                         ECSA-HC will be coordinating the implementation of the project in collaboration with technical
                         partners (e.g. CDC, AFCRN). ECSA-HC brings more than 40 years of experience within the region,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         working with member states and other stakeholders to further the goal of better health outcomes.
                         ECSA-HC has a solid track record of coordinating simi lar initiatives, collaborating with
                         governments to build capacity, mobilize regional and international expertise, share best practices,
                         and advocate for improved policies. The organization has developed a unique set of competencies
                         relevant to this project, as described in Annex III.

                         Project Stakeholder Information

                         Cooperating Organizations
                         In each country, ECSA-HC will bring together experts from existing cancer registries, ministries of
                         health, statistical offices and technical partners and institutions (e.g. ACRN, CDC, United States
                         National Cancer Institute, NCI/NIH, and the College of Pathologists of East Central and Southern
                         Africa, COPECSA).

                         ➯❪§    In Kenya, the two established population based registries, (i.e. Eldoret Registry located at the
                         Moi Teaching and Referral Hospital and the Nairobi Cancer Registry located at the Kenya Medical
                         Research Institute, KEMRI) are important partners to support capacity building based on the
                         knowledge and experience gained to date.
                           ➯❪§      In Rwanda, ECSA-HC will work with the University Hospital of Butare, which manages a
                           hospital based cancer registry, and with the Butaro Cancer Center of Excellence, which provides a
                           full spectrum of cancer care and treatment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ➯❪§    In Tanzania, ECSA-HC will partner with the Ocean Road Cancer Institute (ORCI), an
                           independent autonomous institute directly under the Ministry of Health; and with the Muhimbili
                           University of Health and Allied Sciences which have pulled forces to roll out a cancer/pathology
                           program at the University.

                           ➯❪§     In Uganda, the team will work with the Uganda Cancer Institute that manages one of the
                           strongest population based cancer register programs on the continent, Makerere University that hosts
                           the Kampala cancer registry, and St. Mary➢❨ s Hospital Lacor that hosts the Gulu cancer registry.

                           ➯❪§     Finally, in Burundi, that has no established cancer registry, ECSA-HC will be guided by the
                           discussions initiated between the Ministry of Health, and the Centre Hospitalaire Universitaire de
                           Kamenge (CHUK).

                           Annex IV includes responses to the TFSCB Specific Questions.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
                           Projects on International           No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Menno Mulder-Sibanda
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name:                                                              Date:
                           Practice Manager/                Name:                                                              Date:
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
