INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12699
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Malawi                      Project ID:  P154803
Project Name: Malawi Flood Emergency Recovery (P 154803)
Task Team       Ayaz Parvez,Francis Samson Nkoka
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Mar-2015                 Estimated    07-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Irrigation and drainage (20%), General education sector (20%), Rural and Inter-
Urban Roads and Highways (20%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry
sector (20%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (20%), Natural disaster management (50%), Social
Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (20% ), Climate change
(10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP Yes
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:      80.00             Total Bank Financing:    80.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  80.00
Total                                                                        80.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to "sustainably restore agricultural livelihoods, reconstruct
critical public infrastructure to improved standards in the flood-affected districts, and improve the
Page 1 of 12


﻿Government of Malawi's disaster response and recovery capacities".
3. Project Description
Component 1: Livelihoods Restoration and Food Security (US$24.5 million)
o
Sub-component 1.1: Labor-Intensive Community Infrastructure Repair - US$14 million: This sub-
component will provide immediate assistance for livelihood-supporting and income-generating
activities. It will enable beneficiaries to meet their basic requirements by providing farm inputs for
a        the next season and possibly other in-kind assistance in return for their participation in labor-
intensive community infrastructure repair schemes. It will also provide a cash for work option for
non-farmers following the MASAF modalities. These interventions will create jobs while
simultaneously repair and restore community infrastructure as well as indirectly regenerate farmers'
agricultural production. The cash for work option will also allow beneficiaries to utilize their
earnings for food and basic household needs.
Sub-component 1.2: Restocking of the Strategic Grain Reserve (SGR) - US$10.5 million: An
estimated 150,000 to 200,000 households could be in need of food assistance for part or all of next
year. It is therefore anticipated that an additional 20,000 to 25,000 tons of maize should be released
from the SGR for food assistance. To maintain the SGR at its optimal level, the project will
contribute to its replenishment for an estimated amount of 40,000MT. This quantity is however
adjustable depending on prices during the periods of procurement. Purchase of maize will be done
through the existing national mechanisms in compliance with the Bank's guidelines for procurement
of goods. Release of maize for food assistance will follow existing procedures based on the PDNA
and Malawi Vulnerability Assessment Committee (MVAC) estimates. Distribution will be done
through the existing modalities using World Food Programme (WFP) under the supervision of the
Department of Disaster Management Affairs (DoDMA).
Component 2: Infrastructure Rehabilitation and Reconstruction (US$47.5 million)
Sub-component 2.1: Repair and Reconstruction of Roads and Bridges - US$26.5 million: This sub-
Q        component will support the rehabilitation and reconstruction of selected critical access infrastructure,
including secondary roads, bridges and other drainage structures.
Sub-Component 2.2: Irrigation and Rural Water Supply and Sanitation - US$5 million: This sub-
component will fund the operational restoration of selected and prioritized irrigation and water
supply schemes that have been destroyed or damaged by the floods. This will entail the repair and
rehabilitation of: (i) Critical irrigation schemes and infrastructure, and, (ii) Water Supply and
Sanitation Schemes and infrastructure.
Sub-Component 2.3: Water Resource Management - US$8 million: This sub-component will finance
flood mitigation works, including: (a) river training works; (b) river bank protection, afforestation of
river banks and localized embankment repair works in critical flooding rivers; (c) creation and
restoration of storm-water drainage; (d) restoration of riparian forests; and (e) flood protection bunds
around critical infrastructure - designed to reduce risk levels and in line with the Flood Risk
Management Action Plan for the Shire Basin.
Sub-Component 2.4: Rehabilitation and Reconstruction of Education and Health Facilities - US$8
million: This sub-component will primarily include the rehabilitation and in-situ reconstruction of a
proportion of the schools and health facilities damaged or destroyed by the floods. In line with
Page 2 of 12


﻿PDNA results, the sub-component will seek to reconstruct and restore the functionality of damaged
schools and health facilities (including their upgrading) as well as finance the replacement of school
learning materials and furniture, medical equipment and medical supplies.
O
U         Component 3: Promoting Disaster Resilience (US$4 million)
Sub-Component 3.1: Institutional Strengthening of DoDMA - US$2 million: This sub-component
will provide technical assistance to strengthen the institutional set-up and operational capacities of
DoDMA for post-disaster response and recovery. This will include: (a) improving data preparedness
and capacity development for post-disaster needs assessment; (b) strengthening recovery planning
and implementation; and (c) enhancing disaster response systems.
Sub-Component 3.2: Multi-sector Design of Disaster Resilient Infrastructure - US$2 million: This
sub-component will provide technical assistance to different departments and ministries for the
development and institutionalization of disaster and climate-resilient design standards for
infrastructure construction in the future. This could include the design of roads and drainage
infrastructure and public buildings, such as schools, health centers and government offices.
Component 4: Program Management (US$4 million)
This component will finance the following activities: (a) incremental operating costs of the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU); (b) technical designs for the reconstruction and rehabilitation of
infrastructure included under various Project components; (c) supervision quality control and
contract management of reconstruction and rehabilitation subprojects; (d) audit, studies and
assessments required under various Project components.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Malawi Floods Emergency Recovery Project (MFERP) will be implemented nation-wide
precisely in selected flood affected and flood prone areas located in various poor geographic regions
and districts in the country. The selection of priority geographic areas of intervention is awaiting
outcomes of the post-disaster needs assessment (PDNA), which is still underway, and will likely
occur during project implementation given the emergency nature of the project. Nonetheless, current
available data indicate that some of the foreseen sub-projects activities will cover a range of still
unknown physical locations but likely to be rehabilitation of basic social infrastructures and viable
socioeconomic infrastructures such as rivers crossing and/bridges, rural trading centers, irrigations
schemes, etc.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Hastings Solomon Mumba (GWADR)
Kisa Mfalila (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The policy is triggered because the project will involve,
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                under its components 1 and 2, some small to medium size
civil works (rehabilitation and reconstruction of sections
of roads, bridges, railway lines, school blocks, health
Page 3 of 12


﻿centers, canals and head works of irrigation schemes) of
public infrastructure, and livelihood restoration and food
security in flood affected areas. Civil works may generate
potential negative site specific externalities such as: soil
erosion and siltation, loss of trees, pollution to surface and
ground water resources, soil erosion, dust emissions, solid
and wastes on these selected flood affected areas. Given
the nature and magnitude of foreseen project impacts, the
project has been categorized as B. Likewise, since at this
very juncture the exact location, scope and scale of
specific sub-project investments are not known, the
recipient country will, using the existing ESMFs from the
Shire River Basin Management Project (SRBMP),
Agriculture Sector-Wide Support Project (ASWAp-SP)
and IRLAD, prepare an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) that will provide the
basic criteria and procedures for screening sub-project
investments, and guide the preparation of site-specific
environmental and social management plans (ESMP). As
prescribed in the policy, the ESMF will also assess the
institutional capacity of the implementing agency and
provide measures for capacity building, and an estimate of
the budget needed for the implementation of the ESMF.
The ESMF will be consulted upon, reviewed and cleared
by the Bank and ultimately disclosed both in-country and
at the InfoShop prior to project implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes           The Policy is triggered because of the sensitivity of the
4.04                                   Lower Shire area (being within the proximity of natural
reserves, its flood prone area, etc.) near which most of
small to medium size civil works (rehabilitation and or
reconstruction of bridges, roads, railway, basic social
services, etc.) in this flood-affected area might occur and
thus likely affect the ecological balance of the area
including the natural reserves. Restoration of some
livelihoods and food security activities such as bee
keeping and natural based enterprises may affect some
protected wildlife reserves in rural communities.
Rehabilitation of services and access roads to flood
affected wildlife reserve may affect conditions natural
habitats e.g. in Mwabvi Game Reserve/Lengwe National
Park, etc. Although these are expected to be site specific
and easily manageable, provision will be made in the
ESMF and sub-project ESMPs, through community
consultation, sensitization and participation, to ensure
adequate mitigation and management of these natural
habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes           The project is expected to involve clearing of trees. The
Page 4 of 12


﻿ESMF will include measures to manage the clearance,
including possible reforestation in some areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          Some of the proposed activities in components (1) and (2)
0
suggest the triggering of OP 4.09 due to the likely usage
of Pesticides during project implementation; precisely
some investments in the agriculture sector that will
enhance production and might likely increase the use of
pesticides. However, the project will not finance
procurement of pesticides. More likely, irrigation schemes
may use pesticides to control pests on schemes. In cases
where pesticides are used within existing production
systems, the project will promote the use of integrated
pest management and the safe use, storage, and disposal
of agro-chemicals. Though details of the nature, scope
and physical footprint of the proposed project activities
are unknown at this very juncture, the Borrower will,
using the existing PMPs from Shire River Basin
Management Project (SRBMP), Agriculture Sector-Wide
Support Project (ASWAp-SP) and IRLADP, prepare,
consult upon and disclose an Integrated Pest Management
Plan (IPMP) to guide the safe and secure usage of
pesticides during project implementation; with the view to
reduce, minimize and adequately mitigate its adverse
potential impacts while maximizing its potential positive
impacts on beneficiary communities. The IPMP will be
fully consulted upon, reviewed and cleared by the Bank
prior to its public disclosure both in-country and at the
InfoShop prior to project implementation.
Physical Cultural       Yes          The policy is triggered because the proposed project
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 activities may be implemented in areas that contain
archaeological sites, historical sites, or other physical
cultural resources. The ESMF will include chance finds
procedures to guide private contractors on the proper
management of physical cultural resources once
discovered during project implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The Involuntary Resettlement policy is triggered due to
OP/BP 4.12                           foreseen low to medium civil works activities (i.e.
Rehabilitation and reconstruction of roads, bridges, basic
social services such as health facilities and schools, and
irrigation schemes, etc.) may require land for temporary
or permanent usage. The land acquired for this purpose
may lead to loss of asset, sources of income or means of
livelihoods for some poor households, especially in rural
communities whether or not project affected people (PAP)
Page 5 of 12


﻿must move to another location. To ensure proper
mitigation measures are set forth, especially at this very
juncture where details of project footprint are still
unknown, the Borrower will, using the existing RPFs
from the Shire River Basin Management Project
(SRBMP), Agriculture Sector-Wide Support Project
(ASWAp-SP) and IRLADP, prepare a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of site
specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) once such
details are known. Just as the ESMF and IPMP, the RPF
will be consulted upon, reviewed and cleared by the Bank
and publicly disclosed both in-country and InfoShop prior
to project implementation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not involve dams.
4.37
Projects on International  Yes       Malawi, Tanzania and Mozambique are co-riparian
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 countries of the Shire River. Namibia, Angola,
Zimbabwe, Botswana and Zambia are co-riparian
countries above the confluence of the Shire and Zambezi
Rivers in the greater Zambezi Basin. However, the project
will only be financing rehabilitation of existing
infrastructure and therefore an exception under paragraph
7(a) OP 7.50 has been requested from the regional Vice
President.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project is not being implemented in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
O
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This project is designed to benefit the communities affected by the disaster and who are further
exposed to such risks. Through strengthening of disaster risk management systems and
institutions, the project has the potential to benefit the entire 15 affected districts of Malawi. The
implementation of the proposed components (1) and (2) of the Project may result in adverse
impacts on people and land, if not mitigated appropriately. Considering the environmental and
social vulnerability of the affected regions of Malawi the proposed investments on the
rehabilitation or reconstruction of existing infrastructure, and building under component (3)
disaster management capacity of the state government, needs to be planned carefully to avoid
significant and/or irreversible impacts. Some of the key environmental impacts that may arise due
to the proposed project could be (i) loss of trees, pollution of surface and ground water resources,
dust emissions, soil erosion, solid wastes; (ii) loss of customary land, loss of crops, loss of trees,
loss of access to natural resources, blockage of footpaths/roads/walkways, loss of trees, loss of
social cohesion; (iii) water logging and salinization, increase in waterborne diseases and pests in
sites, conflicts in use of water between irrigation farmers and upstream and downstream water
users, and spread of weeds; and (iv) potential impact on physical cultural resources during
Page 6 of 12


﻿rehabilitation and re-construction within some parts of flood affected areas. Moreover, these
potential impacts have been fully summarized in the below safeguards section, hence the
triggering of key safeguards policies and related safeguards instruments.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The proposed rural road connectivity activities of the project could have long-term impacts on the
flora and fauna and the local natural ecosystem. However, most of these will involve rehabilitating
or reconstructing previously existing facilities. The required safeguards instruments namely
ESMF, IPMP and RPF will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed by the borrower using the
existing safeguards instruments from the Shire River Basin Management Project (SRBMP),
Agriculture Sector-Wide Support Project (ASWAp-SP) and IRLADP. These safeguards
instruments will be consulted upon, reviewed and cleared by the Bank and ultimately disclosed
both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to project implementation. This will ensure that any
adverse impacts are identified early enough in the project planning stage and suitably addressed
through mitigation measures as prescribed in these instruments.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project support investments in the rehabilitation or reconstruction of the existing infrastructure
network, including basic social services; thus minimizing potential negative social and
environmental impacts and increasing efficiency of the investments. In addition, during the design
and preparation of specific project sub-components related to re-construction of housing, public
buildings, roads and bridges, alternatives to minimize adverse impacts will be further explored.
These could include minimum adjustments in the existing alignments, and/or use of alternative
materials to enhance the sustainability of infrastructure created.
The implementation of project components (1) and (2) will include several construction activities,
which have a potential to create adverse social and/or environment impacts, particularly if such
activities are not properly structured and managed. Although the general thrust and broad project
interventions seem to be known at the time of project appraisal, the specific details pertaining to
planning and designing of multiple sub-projects that the project envisages to support, will be
known only at a later stage. In such a situation, where multiple sub-projects will be located across
the targeted fifteen (15) districts; an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), an
Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) approach
have been adopted, using the existing safeguards instruments from Shire River Basin Management
Project (SRBMP), Agriculture Sector-Wide Support Project (ASWAp-SP) and IRLADP, to
adequately guide the project during implementation stage. While the project itself is designed to
benefit the disaster hit communities, especially the poorest ones, the management of unwarranted/
adverse impacts is proposed to be managed through the application and implementation of the
above mentioned safeguards instruments (ESMF, RPF and IPMP) principles, prerogatives and
applicable site specific Environmental and Social Impacts Assessments/Environmental and Social
Management Plans, and Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) for the sub-projects.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project is being implemented under OP 10.00, paragraph 12, and thus the safeguards
instruments will be prepared after appraisal but prior to project implementation.
The institutional and implementation arrangements are as follows:
Page 7 of 12


﻿*      Requirements of Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01: Government of Malawi will
prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) which will provide the
criteria and procedures for screening sub-project investments and guide the preparation of site-
specific environmental and social management plans. The ESMF including its ESMP will also
O
assess the institutional capacity of the implementing agency and provide measures for capacity
building, and an estimate of the budget needed for the implementation of the ESMF. The ESMF
will also provide a list of activities that could be financed by the project and screen out activities
that correspond to Category A projects.
*      Requirement of Involuntary Resettlement Policy OP/BP 4.12: Government will prepare a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide on resettlement planning and possible
compensation issues if they occur during project implementation.
Requirement of Natural Habitats OP 4.04: Rehabilitation of services and access roads to flood
affected wildlife reserve may affect conditions natural habitats e.g. in Mwabvi Game Reserve/
Lengwe National Park, etc. Although these are expected to be site specific and easily manageable,
provision will be made in the ESMF and sub-project ESMPs, through community consultation,
sensitization and participation, to ensure adequate mitigation and management of these natural
habitats.*    Requirement of Pest Management OP 4.09: Government of Malawi will prepare,
consult upon and disclose an Integrated Pest Management Plan (IPMP) to guide on the
procurement, distribution, use storage of pesticides on irrigation schemes to be rehabilitated under
this project. The plan will also contain guidelines to promote Integrated Pest Management in
irrigation schemes.
*      Requirement of Physical Cultural Resources OP 4.11: The proposed project activities may
be implemented in areas that contain archaeological sites, historical sites, or other physical cultural
resources. The ESMF will include chance finds procedures to guide private contractors on the
proper management of physical cultural resources once discovered during project implementation.
* Requirement of Forests OP/BP 4.36: The ESMF will include measures to manage the
clearance of trees, including possible reforestation in some areas.
Capacity for implementation of safeguards.
Recently Government of Malawi through IDA funded IRLAD Project established an effective
safeguard Implementation unit which spearheads the implementation of environmental and social
safeguards in the projects activities. The Government of Malawi intends to use the same systems
in order to maximize the best practices from the systems. Furthermore, the Environmental Affairs
a           Department (District Environmental officers) has technical capacity to prepare detailed
environmental and social management plans for sub-projects. Environmental District officers will
be supported by senior Staff from IRLAD Project Implementation Unit. The Government has
Environmental Districts Officers and Environmental District Inspectors and district environmental
sub-committee throughout flood affected districts. These staff and structures will provide technical
advisory services on implementation of environmental and social measures to be outlined in the
site specific environmental and soci al impact assessment (ESIA)/environmental and social
management plans (ESMP). These various key stakeholders will be technically supported by the
project social and environmental safeguards specialist and materially by the project to ensure
proper handling of social and environmental aspects of the project, as well as material support
from the project to undertake their respective tasks and enhance monitoring implementation of
safeguard measures in the field.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Social and environment safeguards management related impacts and risks are as follows: (i) lack
Page 8 of 12


﻿of coordination between the key implementing government agencies may lead to a delay in the
preparation of required project documentation; (ii) insufficient attention/delays in effective
implementation of site specific Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIAs)/
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) and
O
the IPMP; (iii) Obstacles and delays in obtaining statutory clearance; (vi) improper monitoring and
irregular reporting of compliance by line agencies, and (iii) potential non-compliance with Bank
environment and social safeguard policies/guidelines due to lack of proper social and/or
environmental safeguards focal points and technical capacity.
Key stakeholders of the project include the state government, local governments, and citizens
living in the disaster affected/prone districts in the 15 districts. However, given the high profile of
the project and the number of stakeholder groups, potentially there are certain groups that could
feel negatively affected. All stakeholders have a strong interest in the rehabilitation or
reconstruction of infrastructure that will lead to increased opportunities. To achieve this goal, the
project emphasizes the need for synergies among state level sectors and local stakeholders to
maximize the impact of investments in housing, transportation and disaster management. The
project's physical investments are aimed at improving disaster preparedness at the local level.
Technical reviews will be undertaken to ensure that critical works and activities related to flood
management and rehabilitation or reconstruction of the transport network and key basic social
services do not have a negative impact on local residents. Prior to/Once the implementation
begins, environmental and social safeguards experts will disseminate relevant information to local
communities living in flood prone areas to further increase awareness raising of the project.
The new PIU (ex-IRLAD PIU) will coordinate project components among state level departments
and the implementation of the components at the local level. It will address governance,
transparency, and accountability issues among the stakeholders throughout the process and
institute necessary arrangements mechanisms to address grievances. This approach will help
stakeholders manage expectations, while keeping various implementation agencies accountable for
their work. Community meetings will be held in each affected village of the project and also to
inform the local population of their rights to compensation and options available in accordance
with the set-forth safeguards policies guidelines. The ESMF, RPF and IPMP will have specific
guidance on carrying this out in the context of the experience of ongoing projects in Malawi.
These instruments and their subsequent implementation plans, as well as studies for investments,
a           will be publicly disclosed on the government websites and other public places accessible to the
local people and NGOs in English and local language. In case of a potential dispute on
compensation, after exhausting all the available local grievance redress mechanisms including
third-party involvement, the claimant, as a last resort, could reach out to the Sub Divisional
Magistrate (SDM) in the local tribunal shall hear and resolve the case in presence of (a) the project
affected party, (b) the in charge of line department who is acquiring the land/ in-charge of the sub-
project activity, and (c) the local representative/chief of the village where the sub-project is being
implemented. However, in case of non-satisfactory solution, the matter will be brought to the
notice of the District Collector and he/she is the final authority to decide the case.
In addition a well thought communication strategy will create more awareness raising to properly
inform communities about the various project components, and incorporate a comprehensive
grievance redress mechanism (GRM). The Decision Support System (DSS) will integrate and
analyze information from multiple sources and will display it in user-friendly ways for i) tracking
and reporting financial and physical progress towards achievement of the targets set, and ii)
communities in the recovery, rehabilitation and reconstruction program. A Monitoring Information
System (MIS) will assist the monitoring of safeguards, procurement, financial and public
Page 9 of 12


﻿disclosure performance and outcomes of PIU on a regular basis and facilitate proper handling of
grievance redress mechanisms a t the PIU Level.
B. Disclosure Requirements
O
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop                            ///
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                               //
Date of submission to InfoShop                            //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?            NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                               //
Date of submission to InfoShop                            //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
The project is being processed under OP 10.00. The preparation of all safeguard instruments is being
deferred. However, they will be prepared, consulted, finalized, approved and disclosed prior to
project implementation.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Page 10 of 12


﻿OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [  ]  No [  ]   NA [ X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [    ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [  ] No [X]     NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Page 11 of 12


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ayaz Parvez,Francis Samson Nkoka
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Maria Angelica Sotomayor Araujo      Date: 06-Apr-2015
Manager:                      (PMGR)
Page 12 of 12


