INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 15422
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Oct-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Moldova                    Project ID:   P148537
Project Name:    Modernization of Government Services in the Republic of Moldova (P148537)
Task Team        Maya V. Gusarova,Sandra Sargent
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-May-2016                Estimated     30-Sep-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGO15                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Central government administration (50%), General public administration sector
(25%), General information and communications sector ( 25%)
Theme(s):        Administrative and civil service reform (50%), e-Government (30%),
Participation and civic engagement (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      20.00             Total Bank Financing:    20.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
o          International Development Association (IDA)                     20.00
Total                                                            20.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective is to improve the access to, efficiency of delivery, and
quality of selected government administrative services.
C. Project Description
The project will support the Government of Moldova administrative services modernization reform


﻿in 2016-2021 through US$ 20 million IDA operation. The Government has expressed interest in
using an Investment Project Financing instrument while also agreeing to explore the possibility of
using result-based financing (RBF) for a component of the operation, covering business process
reengineering of selected administrative services. The use of RBF will be confirmed during project
O
Q)      preparation. The project will build on results of the World Bank-administered Central Public
Administration Reform Multi-Donor Trust Fund (completed in 2014), the ongoing Government e-
Transformation Project (ending in December 2016) and lessons from the implementation of the
Government Public Services Modernization Program 2014-2016. The project aims to achieve
improvements in access, efficiency and quality of delivery of selected administrative services
through five components:
Component I - Public service modernization
a) Business process re-engineering
b) Reform management and coordination
c) Expanding access points for central government services
Component II - E-Government
a) Digitization of revised services
b) Strengthening e-services infrastructure
c) Standardization of IT Management
d) Cyber security and privacy
Component III - Aligning HR to new service delivery models
a) Staffing review
b) Capacity building/training - for process re-designing and innovation
c) Strategic staff planning and job descriptions for new service delivery
Component IV - Citizen/CSO Engagement
a) Cooperation for improved services delivery
b) Citizen outreach for modernized services
Component V - Project Management - PIU staffing, monitoring & evaluation
a       The project will focus on reengineering and digitization of central level government administrative
services, comprising over 70 percent of total government services. The Project will aim to better
align service delivery with citizen needs, making them faster and better quality.
Service modernization will be accomplished in three inter-related phases. Phase I will encompass in-
depth process re-engineering of selected public services by the line ministries and agencies
responsible for the selected services and under the supervision of the State Chancellery and the
Government Public Administration Reform Commission. Phase II will consist of digitization,
automation and delivery of online service platforms for as many of the re-engineered services as
possible. Phase III will address change management, encompassing alignment of organizational
structure and human resources to automated services delivery within line ministries and agencies
followed by training.
The project will finance a horizontal review of services, process re-engineering activities, service
digitization and automation, change management and capacity development, including IT training.
During project preparation, supported by a project preparation grant, the approach to rationalization


﻿and reengineering of services will be developed to guide the selection of services that will be
modernized under the project. It is anticipated that a number of services will be eliminated due to
duplication and redundancy, merger with other services and introduction of shared service delivery
platform enabling data re-use. During project preparation selection criteria will be developed and
O
applied to the remaining services to identify those that will be modernized under the project.
Ministries responsible for the selected services will agree to commit human and financial resources
to re-engineering, optimization, digitization and automation of their internal processes and services
as well as ensure integration with the existing e-services delivery infrastructure. This commitment
will require strong and clear leadership from the State Chancellery and the Public Administration
Reform Commission.
The project will also support the alignment of civil service staff with the new modality of services
delivery. Staffing reviews are planned for the selected services as part of the reengineering process.
Staffing plans for services after modernization will be prepared, competencies identified and job
descriptions developed. Strategies will be identified for re-staffing the modernized services and staff
training plans will be developed. It is expected that modernized services will allow to the
Government to consolidate the number of staff and promote changes in civil service skills in areas
such use of IT technology, data analysis and customer service. This may necessitate the development
of human resources policy and guidelines for early retirement, retrenchment, transfer, re-training and
recruitment.
Under the project, the Government will establish a mechanism for the reform implementation.
Achieving the objectives of this reform program will require strong and ongoing political will,
management and coordination. The Council on Public Administration Reform, led by the Prime-
Minister and comprised of five ministers and two parliamentarians, defines the reform agenda and
oversees its implementation. This Council is well placed to provide oversight and leadership for the
reform process. However, implementation of the Government Public Services Reform Program
2014-2016 demonstrates that there is a need for a dedicated Public Services Unit to ensure day-to-
day reform management and coordination. This Unit should be placed in the State Chancellery and
should be staffed with appropriately qualified civil servants. The Unit can benefit from technical
assistance supported by the project preparation grant and during project implementation. The reform
implementation mechanism will provide guidance to line ministries and agencies as well as focal
points for the reform implementation from each line ministry and agency.
The project will enhance customers access to e-services at the local level. The project will fund
equipment for access points to government e-services in rayon-level municipalities and training of
rayon administration staff in facilitating use of the e-services portal. This access can be located in
municipal government premises, some of which were reformed under the USAID Local Self-
Government Support Project and which operate as one-stop shops for municipal government
services. One-stop-shop facilities may also be established in local post offices and libraries. The
approach used to expand local access will be elaborated during project preparation.
The project will support dialogue of between the Government and civil society on the modernization
of government services. A process for mainstreaming citizen engagement in services reengineering
may be based on the design thinking approach, piloted by MiLab, a unit established in the
Government and operated with support of UNDP to promote innovations in public administration
and citizen-centered approaches. The project will fund relevant training and capacity building for line
ministries and agencies on government-citizen cooperation techniques. These techniques will
include citizen consultations, engagement in the process of re-engineering and service quality


﻿monitoring, use of feedback on perceptions of service quality. Finally, under the project, a customer
support service will be established and operated through a centrally located call-center.
Project design and implementation will be closely coordinated with other development partners.
O
U       Specifically, the project will coordinate with EU technical assistance for central public
administration reform which includes policy advice on public services, development of public
administration framework legislation and the modernization of four government services. The project
will also coordinate with USAID, supporting Local Self-Governance Support Project, which has
established one-stop shop model for municipal services in three (out of 32) rayons and developed a
methodology for roll-out this model. The USAID project ends in February 2016, its further plans
have not been finalized yet and will be confirmed during the project preparation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented country wide while the new IT equipment will be installed in the
existing government offices.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The country has in place well designed and functioning EA system. As the project doesn't trigger any
safeguards policies the institutional capacity of the main implementing Agency which is E-
Government under the State Chancellery has not been assessed, although this body has overall
understanding on the WB requirements as currently is implementing another WB project which is
specified as Category C.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
Sophia V. Georgieva (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    No          This policy is not triggered. Based on the discussion
OP/BP 4.01                              with the client it was decided no any civil works
would be supported under the project. All new
equipment to be purchased will be installed within
the existing government offices at the national and
local levels. Thus the project will not generate any
direct and indirect environmental and social impacts.
There is possibility of social risk from project
activities - specifically consolidation of services
under Component I and staffing review under
Component III ? that in addition to staff
redeployment may lead to staff redundancies and
retrenchment. The scale of such retrenchment cannot
be estimated at this stage. It is dependent on the
outcome of the business process re-engineering of
selected services, decisions on services to be
consolidated and outcomes of staffing reviews. In the


﻿event that retrenchment is pursued the Project team
will: (i) document the process of staffing review and
justification for retrenchment; (ii) ensure that client
has prepared a social mitigation plan acceptable to
the World Bank, and monitor its implementation;
(iii) ensure that sufficient budget is available to
implement any consultation, compensation, and
outreach activities detailed in the social mitigation
plan.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36           No
Pest Management OP 4.09      No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
o
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Safeguard-related studies, if needed, will be undertaken between January - May 2016.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Maya V. Gusarova,Sandra Sargent
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Brandon Enrique Carter (SA)               Date: 28-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)                     Date: 02-Nov-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


