                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                         Report No.:ISDSC18895
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Sep-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed 09-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                        Burundi                      Project ID:               P155060
    Project Name:                   Local Development for Jobs (P155060)
    Task Team Leader(s):            Megha Mukim,Brahim Ould Abdelwedoud
    Estimated Appraisal             22-May-2017                  Estimated Board           14-Jul-2017
    Date:                                                        Date:
    Managing Unit:                  GTC01                        Financing                 Investment Project
                                                                 Instrument:               Financing
    Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:         50.00                          Total Bank Financing: 50.00
    Financing Gap:              0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
      BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                         0.00
      International Development Association (IDA)                                                               50.00
      Total                                                                                                     50.00
    Environmental Category:         B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project? No

    B. Project Objectives
    The project development objective is to create income generating opportunities and improve access to basic
    services, with a geographical focus on Bujumbura, and selected regions in Burundi, with special emphasis
    on reaching vulnerable groups, through support to SMEs and public works activities.
    C. Project Description
    The overall objective of the project is to help the people of Burundi by assisting the public and private sector
    to mitigate the negative economic and social effects of the crisis, in particular the increase in unemployment
    and the deterioration of basic services, all of which pose significant risks for social cohesion. The project
    aims to do so by addressing the need for immediate and medium term job creation (in particular for youth
    and women) and growing needs for provision of services. This will be carried out through a targeted
    approach including (a) priority infrastructure projects using labor-intensive works, (b) strategic interventions
    to help the private sector weather the crisis and (c) support for key institutions in sustaining delivery capacity
    through the crisis period (including local governments, chambers of commerce and business associations).



                                                 Page 1 of 8
The project has an especially strong focus on women in all elements of the design, but with particular
emphasis on the targeting of female beneficiaries for public works programs and with dedicated approaches
to ensure inclusion of women and female headed households in decision making processes in the project,
including identification of investments and selection of neighborhoods. At the same time, given that 53.7
percent of informal firms in Bujumbura (42.9 percent in other urban areas) and 17.8 percent of formal firms
are headed by women, the project will ensure correspondingly high percentages of gender-balanced support
for SMEs.

The project will apply a short and long term strategy with a flexible approach in view of the fragile country
context. The strategy will be adapted depending on changes in the country context and needs, and project
interventions and activities will be aligned accordingly. Phase I (envisaged to last 2-3 years) will target
fragility: the project will be supporting the delivery of infrastructure in key provinces (including largely in
Bujumbura) using high intensity labor approach, and will target the critical needs of the private sector to
weather the crisis. This will be combined with capacity building to strengthen institutions (including local
governments and the private sector) for durable impact. Phase II will target durability: the project will seek
to gradually move towards more systemic reforms and institutional consolidation (both with regards to
support for efficient and sustainable delivery of infrastructure in local areas and in addressing the structural
issues faced by the private sector).


1. Description

Component 1: Investments in Local Public Infrastructure (US$ 32.5 Million)

Sub component 1.1 Infrastructure Support (US$ 29.5 Million)

The objectives of this component are to improve the stock of local public infrastructure in vulnerable areas
in Burundi in the context of the current crisis, and by doing so to improve access to services and to create
temporary income generating opportunities for vulnerable and poor populations. The initial focus during the
first stage of the project, will be on relative simple sub-projects that have already been identified and
prioritized by the Government, which would allow for rapid execution and impacts – an indicative amount of
US$15.5m will be allocated for this response. At the second stage of the project – after 2-3 years, and if the
social and economic country situation improves - a greater focus on public infrastructure that would improve
the performance of the private sector development will be considered (indicative envelope approximately
US14$m) in addition to the labor intensive public works approach.

Investments in public infrastructure (or subprojects) to be implemented during the first stage of the project
will be selected among the targeted local governments (LGs’) priorities already included in their investments
plan (Plan Communal de Développement Communautaire, PCDC) – for a total amount up to US$ 15.5
million. In addition, the sub-projects to be financed should check a set of criteria that have been defined to
mitigate the effects of the current crisis, particularly rising unemployment and the worsening social cohesion
in vulnerable areas. This will allow for the highest impacts, in terms of temporary jobs created, particularly
for youth and women, improved access to services and infrastructure for youth and women in fragile and
vulnerable neighborhoods, and opportunities for private sector development. The types of sub-projects
include, but are not limited to (i) the construction and rehabilitation of economic infrastructure (including
markets), (ii) the rehabilitation and improvement of roads and other small scale mobility infrastructure, and
(iii) the rehabilitation and construction of social infrastructure (health centers, primary and secondary
schools). Works contracts with the private sector will stipulate that a percentage of the contract amount
(varying according to the type of infrastructure) will be allocated to salaries and with that labor-intensive
works approach will be applied. The selection of low skilled laborers to execute infrastructure works will be


                                             Page 2 of 8
based on specific targeting criteria to allow for a focus on socially excluded and vulnerable populations (e.g.
youth, women and internally displaced populations).

Identification and Selection of Sub-projects

Local governments, with the support of the now closed Public Works and Urban Management project, have
already identified 96 sub-projects that were not executed for lack of funds from the Government. These sub-
projects are a priority for the country and many of the total 96 sub-projects have already collected financial
contributions from beneficiary communities. The total 96 sub-projects are spread over five provinces and
include primarily investments in markets, pavement of roads, and social infrastructure. However, the
majority of the sub-projects are located in Bujumbura and Giitega.

The 96 sub-projects will be screened against two sets of criteria on the basis of existing national data,
including location, poverty dimension, vulnerability, level of existing infrastructure, and potential economic
benefits. In addition to the initial stock of sub-projects already identified by communities, and after their
screening against agreed criteria, some additional sub-projects could be identified to benefit socially
excluded and fragile neighborhoods in Bujumbura and Gitega. All sub-projects to be funded under the
component will need to be reflected in the Local Government Community Development Plan (Plan
Communal de Développement Communautaire, PCDC).

A community-based targeting mechanism will be used to reach out to and identify local low skilled laborers
who will benefit from job opportunities created by the execution of contract works. The local oversight
committees will oversee community-based selection of beneficiaries under close guidance from the
independent agency. The component will be implemented by one or several Delegated Contract
Management Agencies (Maîtres d’Ouvrage Délégué, MODs) that will be supervised by technical and
fiduciary experts in the Project Implementation Unit (PIU). Local governments will play an important role in
the identification and oversight of sub-projects; Local oversight committees will be the interface between
contractors and MODs, LGs and local communities. An independent agency (most likely an NGO with
experience in community work) will be recruited by the PIU to support LGs and LOCs during
implementation of activities.

Sub component 1.2: Institutional and capacity support (US$ 3 Million)

This subcomponent will provide support to strengthen the capacity of targeted LGs to undertake their
mandated functions and deliver local services for development. It will also help Government to develop and
strengthen its capacity to provide oversight and support to Local Governments in a sustainable manner. It
will be implemented by the PIU with very close collaboration with the MDC and the targeted LGs. The
support to LGs will aim at strengthening the capacity of some targeted LGs, to improve investments
planning, revenue mobilization, municipal asset and infrastructure management. The support to the
Government will aim at improving the institutional framework for decentralization and making it fully
operational.

Component 2: Support to SMEs (US$ 13.5 Million)

The objective of this component is to support the resilience and the development of SMEs in order to help
them preserve and create long term income generating activities. This will be achieved through a two-
pronged approach – a) supporting private sector resilience to weather the crisis, while b) helping to tackle
structural problems to enable firms to ramp up employment as the situation stabilizes and improves.

Sub-Component 2.1 – Direct financial support to SMEs (US$ 10.5 Million)


                                            Page 3 of 8
A. SME support for improved short-term liquidity:
The Project will set up a SME Fund managed by the National Development Bank (BNDE) to address SME’s
short term liquidity needs created by the crisis.
i) Short term liquidity needs during the crisis
Owing to the prolonged period of fragility experienced in Burundi, local SMEs are faced with decreasing
domestic demand for their goods and services, as well as payment delays from their clients (notably from
State-owned enterprises and from the Government). This in turns creates short term liquidity stress upon
SMEs, which has notably led to an increase in loan defaults from SMEs and which is preventing them from
retaining staff and from financing the working capital needed to operate their business. To mitigate these
short term liquidity issues, the Project will propose solutions to help commercially viable SMEs.
ii) Capacity support for sustainability
To manage the Fund and ensure its sustainability after the Project, a team of SME Loan Analysts and Loan
Officers within BNDE will be trained. Given the need for a severely-needed, immediate cash-injection to
SMEs, some of these capacity building activities will be kick-started during project preparation. The project
will also train Loan Analysts and Loan Officers from other financial institutions on SME lending.

B. Matching grant program for mid to long-term productive investments:

Beyond the short term liquidity crisis, small and medium firms are also limited in their growth prospects by
their inability to acquire the right technology, know-how, equipment and infrastructure. The Project will
support SMEs in making productive investments in these fields through a matching grant program, which
will finance the following: (i) Business Development Services, (ii) Acquisition of specialized equipment,
and (iii) Shared infrastructure investment.

Sub-Component 2.2 Institutional Support for SME Development and Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) (US$ 2
Million)

A. Support to SME development through the creation of an SME support team

A team of SME Support Specialists will be created (and their operating costs supported using a project
preparation advance) under an existing and well-functioning public institution – the Investment Promotion
Agency (API), which sits under the Ministry of Finance and Economic Development Planning. The SME
Support Specialists will be in charge of engaging SMEs and other key stakeholders within selected sectors
and sub-sectors of the economy (including, construction and agribusiness) so that they can work together on
identifying constraints and solutions to improve competitiveness, generate investment and better connect to
local and export markets.

B. Support to Chambers of Commerce

The Project will provide capacity building and technical assistance to the Federal Chamber of Commerce,
the Agribusiness Chamber of Commerce and the Chamber of Commerce for Construction and Public Works
so that they are in a position to play an active role in: (i) Organizing their respective sector, through
professional colleges and interprofessions, (ii) Disseminating relevant information, and (iii) Advocating for
each sector in the context of relevant PPD platforms.

C. Support to Sector Specific Public-Private Dialogue

The Project will help create and facilitate the operation of two sector specific public-private dialogue
platforms, one for agribusiness and one for construction. These platforms will help improve the


                                            Page 4 of 8
communication among key stakeholders of these two sectors, and will enable them to identify regulatory
bottlenecks that could potentially be resolved under the project (see sub-component 2.3).

Sub-Component 2.3 Improvement of the Business Climate for SMEs, Investments and Exports (US$ 1
Million)

The Project will work on identifying the gaps in the regulatory frameworks for SMEs’ investment and export
development, notably by building on the work done by the Burundi Investment Climate project and by
leveraging the inputs provided by the two PPD platforms mentioned in sub-component 2.2.C. The Project
will then support the Government in addressing these challenges through technical assistance for targeted
reforms. A special focus will be made on the business climate as it specifically applies to the construction
and agribusiness sectors.

Component 3: Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (standardized, $0)

This is a contingency component that can be triggered by a joint Government and Bank agreement in case of
an emergency. This component was considered necessary due to the uncertainty inherent in Burundi’s
current socio-economic climate: unexpected flooding or erosion, an aggravation of the state of fragility or
the return of large groups of displaced people could potentially shift priorities.

Component 4: Project Implementation Arrangements (USD 4 Million)

This component will support the costs of a Project Implementation Unit and will be comprised of a team,
supplemented through external consultants, to manage the following activities, among others: overall project
management, Financial Management, Social and Environmental Safeguards, Procurement, social
development specialist, private sector specialist, and Monitoring & Evaluation. The PIU will be staffed well
to ensure adequate oversight for the different activities under the project, including the oversight of the
Labor Intensive Works approach in Component 1 as well as the targeted interventions for private sector in
Component 2.
D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project has a country-wide perspective although it would primarily be implemented in selected areas.
The project will be supporting the delivery of infrastructure in key provinces (including largely in
Bujumbura) using high intensity labor approach, and will target the critical needs of the private sector to
weather the crisis. The proposed project will support sub-projects in the urban and rural centers of the main
provinces including Bujumbura, Gitega and others.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Borrower's safeguards capacity is basic. While the technical knowledge and skills of regulatory and
licensing authorities are often adequate, the capacities, resources and processes for oversight and
enforcement are weak and often dysfunctional. There is very limited strategic environmental and social input
into urban planning, and little experience with applying environmental and social sustainability criteria to
project design.
However, there is a track record of WBG financed urban infrastructure and private sector development
projects, which has generated a stock of experienced environmental and social specialists, who are able to
follow up on environmental and social due diligence processes on project level, and have experience with
the planning and oversight arrangements required by WBG safeguards policies. Therefore capacity building
measures for this project will include co-opting the experienced staff into the project for purposes of
knowledge and skills transfer to those that are not as experienced as well as training and using short term


                                            Page 5 of 8
consultants as and when required.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the               Team
 Mary C.K. Bitekerezo( GSU07 )
 Paul-Jean Feno( GEN07 )
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes              The proposed project is classified as Category B.
                                                     The policy is triggered because of the proposed
                                                     infrastructure and agribusiness investments. The
                                                     project proposed activities in component 1
                                                     (construction/rehabilitation of social infrastructure
                                                     including classrooms, Health centers, Market place,
                                                     urban road, city road, etc.) may lead to some social
                                                     and environmental impacts that would require the
                                                     establishment of appropriate mitigation measures.
                                                     to set up the way forward. Given that at this stage
                                                     the exact locations and scope of civil works of these
                                                     infrastructure investments and activities cannot be
                                                     determined prior to project appraisal, the Borrower
                                                     will prepare an Environmental and Social
                                                     Management Framework (ESMF) including a
                                                     Medical waste management plan for all health
                                                     centers rehabilitation and construction financed by
                                                     the project. The ESMF report will be publicly
                                                     disclosed both in the country and the World Bank
                                                     Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No             There is no natural habitat site located in the
                                                     potential subproject sites location. The current land
                                                     occupation picture shows human settlements and
                                                     degraded land in the surrounding areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    No             N/A. There is no vegetation coverage in the
                                                     potential project site location. The current land
                                                     occupation picture shows human settlements and
                                                     degraded land in the surrounding areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09               Yes            Extension of agribusiness services may lead to the
                                                     extensive use of pesticides to boost agriculture
                                                     productivity. To ensure safe pest management, the
                                                     project will prepare a Pest Management Plan for
                                                     Sub-projects, building on recent experience. The
                                                     PMP will be prepared as a separate instrument and
                                                     publicly disclosed both in the country and to the
                                                     World Bank Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes           Component 1 may lead to the discovery of new
                                                     physical cultural resources that would require
                                                     adequate mitigation measures. in fact, Concerning
                                                     infrastructure subprojects, no archaeological

                                       Page 6 of 8
                                                           vestiges will be impacted.
                                                           For more assurance, the ESMF will make
                                                           provisions for cultural resources management if it
                                                           happens this policy is triggered during the
                                                           implementation phase and include “chance finds”
                                                           procedures for inclusion in the contractors’ EMP.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10           No             There is no presence of Indigenous Peoples in the
                                                           project area given that this is in the Urban and Peri-
                                                           Urban areas. The policy is therefore not triggered.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12     Yes            The policy is triggered because of the proposed
                                                           Infrastructure and Agribusiness investments under
                                                           the proposed project that may require land. Since
                                                           the physical locations of the proposed activities and
                                                           scope of civil works and other details are unknown
                                                           at this stage, the Borrower will prepare a
                                                           Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF
                                                           would set forth the basic principles and
                                                           procedures/directives to be followed by the
                                                           Borrower for the preparation of a Resettlement
                                                           Action Plan (RAP) if land acquisition is implied
                                                           during project implementation. The RPF will be
                                                           disclosed both in-country and at the Infoshop prior
                                                           to Project Appraisal .
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37               No             The Project is not financing any activities related to
                                                           dams. This policy is not triggered.
    Projects on International Waterways     No             This policy is not triggered as no international
    OP/BP 7.50                                             waterways are impacted.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60   No             This policy is not triggered as as there are no
                                                           known areas under dispute in the project area.
.




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




    A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS:
       31-Jan-2017
    B. Time frame for launching and completing the         safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
       The specific      studies and their timing should be specified in the PAD-stage       ISDS.
       The relevant safeguards instruments – ESMF, PMP and RPF will be prepared and disclosed prior to
    Appraisal by March 2017.


V. Approval
    Task Team Leader(s):            Name: Megha Mukim,Brahim Ould Abdelwedoud
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:             Name:                                    Date:
    Practice Manager/Manager:       Name:                                    Date:


                                             Page 7 of 8
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.




                                                     Page 8 of 8
