INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC15213
Country:         China                      Project ID:   P153604
Project Name:    Poyang Lake Basin Town Water Environment Management Project (P153604)
Task Team        Ximing Zhang,Solvita Klapare
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Sep-2016                Estimated     3 1-Mar-2017
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWA2                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Solle Nae:    Pangeae Bsction and Tesportation (40%), Solid waste management
(20%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (20%), Animal production (20%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (30%), Pollution management and
environmental health (30%), Water resource management (30%), Parti cipation
and civic engagement (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
6       Total Project Cost:     263.80             Total Bank Financing:   150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        113.80
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           150.00
Total                                                           263.80
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to reduce the pollutant discharge into key selected waterways in
the Poyang Lake basin and to improve management of water environment.
C. Project Description


﻿a.     Overview.
The Jiangxi Provincial Government proposes to utilize the World Bank loan in managing the water
environment in the key towns of Poyang Lake Basin. Seven counties - Duchang, Poyang, Yugan,
Jishui, Fengxin, Jingan, Shangli, have been selected for project planning and implementation; total
population of the seven counties are about 5 million. These seven counties represent a mixed pattern
of geographic distribution across the basin: three sites are in close proximity to the main Lake, one
site along the mid-stream of a main river draining into the Lake, two sites adjacent to the tributary
streams of a main river, and one site at the remotest distance from the Lake. The water quality of
Poyang Lake is closely associated with the quality and environment of the water and land bodies in
these contributing catchments, and vice versa.
The project is designed to integrate different ways of environmental protection to improve the water
quality of Poyang Lake basin, including by means of wastewater treatment and solid waste
management, as well non-structural measures. As such, the project will focus not only on
engineering aspects but also on enhancing institutional mechanisms, improving operation and
maintenance (O&M) and monitoring systems to help the selected counties in Jiangxi Province to
enhance water environmental services, including wastewater collection and treatment systems, urban
storm water management, river and lake environment restoration, solid waste collection and
transportation system, and participatory integrated environment management system.
b.     Proposed Project components.
The proposed project activities consist of four main components as below:
Component 1: Strengthening Institutional Capacity for Managing Water Environment in Poyang
Lake Basin (US$15 million): This component will finance capacity building and awareness raising
activities to improve participatory wastewater and solid waste management, enforcement of
environmental regulations and creating pre-conditions for sustainability of project results. The
O
Q)      component will be structured in two key sub-components: (a) institutional capacity building and
enforcement and (b) sustainable Poyang Lake basin management.
Sub-component 1.1: Institutional Capacity Building and Enforcement (USD11 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to: (a) strengthening of the current integrated Poyang Lake
Basin management institutional architecture (River manager as leader of the party - River
implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation and
guidance, and Poyang Lake water/environment financial and investment mechanism study; (b)
strengthen Basin-wide water/environment management planning: (i) support an integrated
vulnerability and sensitivity assessment of Poyang Lake (water quality improvement and protection-
water quantity control - land uses change -biodiversity conservation- urbanization and demographic
changes- tourism impact and industrialization-basin pollution, and providing comments on integrated
action plan leading to series of projects with implementation sequencing and synergies in line with
the long-term commitment) along with resilience and adaptation measures; (ii) promotion of
integrated basin plans for the five tributaries of the Poyang Lake; (c) strengthening knowledge
sharing of integrated lake management and establish Lake management advisory platform - with the
continuous pressure on water resources, the lakes under environmental stress are evidenced across
China; and (d) strengthening the water/environment monitoring system through upgrade/newly
installation of water/environment monitoring facilities, enhancement of the integrated monitoring


﻿information system, early warning system, real-time data disclosure etc.
Sub-component 1.2: Sustainable Poyang Lake Basin Management (USD4 million): This sub-
component will finance activities related to enhancing conditions for lake basin environmental
O
Q)      management sustainability, including: (a) enhancement of citizen participation and information
disclosure - translating the high level ownership of the Poyang protection to grassroots level could
contribute to the rapid and broader success of the Poyang Lake conservation. Building on the
institutional structure and ecological compensation mechanism, the citizen participation could
involve labor corporations (fishermen, farmers, factory workers and industries etc.) in having a voice
in Poyang Lake protection; and (b) ensuring soundness of infrastructure design and its O&M
sustainability?? the project will aim to increment the quality of innovation and appropriate
technology with the economics of their financing for sustainable operation and maintenance
implementation; and strengthening of incentive mechanisms, i.e., the compensation scheme for
ecological protection of the Poyang Lake that could be further strengthened building on proven
incentive mechanisms;
Component 2: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration and Enhancement of
Domestic Wastewater Management System (US$ 140 million). This component will finance
activities related to protection and restoration of the water environment of selected rural and urban
water environments in Poyang Lake basin through collection and treatment of urban and rural
wastewater; collection and safe disposal of stormwater from both rural and urban watersheds; and
implementation of integrated engineering and biological as well as Low Impact Development (LID)
interventions in selected rural and urban waterways. The aim of the component is to demonstrate an
integrated watershed management approach by focusing on key areas for protection, improving water
quality and environmental protection caused by the municipal wastewater and aquaculture sources,
and establishing ecological pollution-control zones along the course of pollutant movement.
Sub-component 2.1: Improvement of Lake and River Environmental Restoration (USD66 million):
This sub-component will finance implementation of integrated engineering and biological mitigation
measures and Low Impact Development (LID) in selected small lakes, rivers, and catchments in
Poyang Lake basin. This will include restoration of water environment in Zhuhu Lake in Poyang
county, Pipa Lake (river) in Yugan county, and ecological restoration of stream corridor of Zoujiazui
River in Duchang county. Key activities will include construction of stormwater collection and
a       diversion systems from upland watersheds, rural wastewater treatment facilities, distributed
wastewater collection along lake banks, introduction of good aquaculture practices (for fishing
farming and pearl culture) and water environment monitoring system.
Sub-component 2.2: Enhancement of Domestic Wastewater Management System (USD74 million):
This sub-component will finance rehabilitation and expansion of urban wastewater collection and
treatment systems to improve capacity of wastewater collection and treatment of selected counties.
Main project activities include: construction of wastewater collection networks (including household
connections); and construction and/or rehabilitation of wastewater treatment plants in Duchang,
Jiang'an, and Jishui counties.
Component 3: Construction of solid waste collection and transportation system (USD75 million):
This component is to improve solid waste collection and transportation system in rural and urban
areas to reduce solid waste disposal to river system of Poyang Lak Basin. This component will
finance setting up solid waste separation system, construction of solid waste collection stations and
transportation stations, and establishment of sustainable solid waste collection and transportation


﻿system, and establishment of monitoring and management systems in Shangli, Duchang, Poyang,
Yugan, and Jing'an Counties.
Component 4: Project Implementation Support (USD15 million). This component is to support the
O
effective and efficient implementation of the project activities. This component will finance project
management, project implementation supervision, project social, resettlement and environmental
monitoring, domestic and international training and study tours, and relevant project management
equipment and facilities. Main project activities will include procurement of office equipment,
domestic and international training and study tours, procurement of project implementation
supervisors, procurement of social and resettlement and environmental monitoring services, etc.
d.     Gender.
There is strong evidence that gender inequalities contribute to poverty and reduce human well-being,
and that gender issues are an important dimension of the fight against poverty. In water supply
operations specifically, there has long been an understanding of importance of incorporating a gender
perspective, because women and girls are most often the primary users, providers and managers of
water in their households and are the guardians of household hygiene. Limited access to water and
poor water quality have direct impact on household welfare and health. If a water system falls into
disrepair, women are the ones forced to travel long distances over many hours to meet their families'
water needs. Therefore, women and girls benefit most when services are improved. Given women's
household roles and responsibilities, they are also more likely to impact decisions related to ways to
collect and dispose the domestic waste. Finally, women can greatly contribute to oversight of a well-
functioning community enforcement of environmental reg ulations and also such aspects as
decisions related to water and solid waste collection fee levels.
Worldwide good performance on gender mainstreaming in projects requires: (a) carrying out a
gender analysis as part of the project's social assessment; (b) introducing relevant design elements;
and (c) tracking project performance through the inclusion of gender disaggregated indicators. The
project will conduct a standalone social assessment, in which a close attention to gender aspects will
be paid. This will include investigating on and consulting with female beneficiaries in the project
areas in order to clearly identify their needs and concerns, as well as possible project impacts, and
explore both mitigation measures of such impacts and opportunities for women targeted activities to
o       achieve project objectives. The project design will particularly emphasize female participation in
project activities, capacity building and M&E activities. Specific indicator(s) related to women's
participation will be included in the Results Framework and will be closely monitored during project
implementation.
e.     Lessons learned from Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Economic Zone Small
Town Project
There are valuable lessons of Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological Zone Small Town Project
implementation that will be taken into account during further design of the proposed project. The on-
going project faces challenges in terms of institutional capacity and inter-departmental coordination,
issue that is also observed in other provinces in China. Collaboration in controlling and reducing
substances at their source is the most effective way of keeping pollutants out of the lake. This
requires clarity of responsibilities of each authority, as well as full collaboration to meet the joint
objective. While industrial pollution control is under the responsibility of provincial Environmental
Protection Department (EPD), agricultural land and aquaculture pollution control is managed by the


﻿provincial Agriculture Department (AD).
To address these problems, it is critical that county Government maintains ownership of the proposed
sub-projects, even with the change of the county leadership to ensure continued focus on initially
agreed project activities and development objectives. Similarly, continuity and retention of project
staff at the county level (including PMOs, PLGs and Expert Groups) is important to ensure good
capacity developed under the project is maintained. Finally, the project will also raise awareness
among communities and farmers.
Equally important is to considerably strengthen institutional coordination mechanisms, not just for
project purposes, but also for future management of the Lake. It would be important to assign a
function of responsibility to review development proposals in the basin with a view on their
implications on the Lake water quality to one of the institutions that is currently managing Poyang
Lake, or to establish a Poyang Lake Management Commission. The institution would also be
responsible to spearhead the improvement/ restoration of the Lake water quality over the long run.
This entity could include representatives of relevant provincial and county governments, as well as
concerned citizens and academic or research agencies.
f.     Global Lessons Learned and World Bank's Value Added
World Bank participation has the added benefit of introducing and replicating, where possible,
international best practices in the management of water body pollution control and environmental/
ecological improvement. Lessons learned from World Bank-financed pollution control and
ecological restoration projects (such as Danube Water Program; Iran Northern Cities Water Supply
and Sanitation Project to reduce pollutant loads to the Caspian Sea; Lake Victoria Environmental
Protection Project; Aral Sea Restoration Project; Integrated Water Management in Metropolitan Sao
Paulo Project) as well as lessons from other countries' experiences (such as the Great Lakes and
Chesapeake Bay restoration programs in the US) are being used to inform the key concept of the
project, and include: (a) investments in infrastructure upgrading needs to be matched consistently
with required institutional support for appropriate maintenance and management competencies, to
ensure sustainability of investment; (b) the needs within the basin exceed the current scale of
investments and therefore (i) investments need to be modelled, targeted and monitored to establish
the most cost-effective interventions to improve basin health and green resilient growth that supports
a       livelihood and maintains the sustainability of economic development; (ii) capacity and investments
need to be leveraged from a variety of public and private partners; (c) problems related to water
quality management, pollution control and urban upgrading are complex and require multi-sectoral
and integrated approaches; (d) both the institutional and environmental objectives associated with
addressing such complex issues should be treated as long-term program goals rather than short-to
medium-term project objectives; (e) integrated approaches to water quality management can enhance
additional benefits and contribute to poverty alleviation; (f) participatory approach, though time-
consuming, is essential for sustainability of project results as it ensures consensus building between
all stakeholders in reaching agreement on project design and achieving institutional and policy
reform and public support; and (g) ex-post monitoring of activities to collect evidence of costs and
benefits help to enhance chances for successful replication.
Specific best practices that will be examined for application of proposed project activities include: (a)
strengthening of the current institutional architecture - River manager as leader of the party - River
implementer as the mayor of the county - high level leading group for strategic orientation and
guidance (the Great Lakes National Program Office (GLNPO in the USA); the Office of the Prime


﻿Minister Program for the Lake Balaton (Hungary); and the creation of the Commission and
Secretariat of the Lake Balaton from above mentioned office); (b) strengthening of incentive
mechanisms (direct and indirect payment fee mechanism in Biwa Lake (Japan); environmental fee on
net revenue from chemical factories around Lake Toba (Indonesia); fee grid for water consumption
O
U       in Lake Constance (Germany-Switzerland and Austria) and; the revolving polluter-payer fee/subsidy
mechanism of the Seine Normandy River Basin Agency (France)); (c) citizen participation and
information disclosure - (Women Association for the Lake Balaton which pioneered the lake's
protection in earlier 1990; the Lake Naivasha (home of Kenya??s flowers export) Riparian
Association (LNRA) and Lake Naivasha Growers Group (LNGG)); (d) ensuring soundness of
infrastructure design and its O&M sustainability (the Chesapeake Bay restoration program (USA);
Lake Champlain basin program (USA/Canada); the Lake Balaton water quality and tourism program;
and Danube Water Program); (e) integrated action plan to maximize impact of interventions (the
Great Lakes restoration program; the lake Ponchartrain restoration plan (Louisiana); the Lake
Balaton program).
Note: Proposed project activities have been selected based on the following criteria: (a) cost
effectiveness - each sub-project should have economic/financial return; (b) sub-projects should not
cause any negative social and environmental impacts that cannot be mitigated through proper design
and contract execution; (c) sub-projects must be in compliance with government development plans;
(d) all land used for construction purposes shall conform to general land utilization plans of the cities
and / or townships and their annual land use plans; (e) proposed interventions should solve existing
problems systematically rather than only solve part of the problem; and (f) sub-projects should have
demonstration value.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Jiangxi consists of 100 counties (county level cities and districts), and over 97% of them are located
in the Poyang Lake Basin. After discussions with Jiangxi PDRC, PFB, PPMO and relevant county
governments, it was agreed that the project county should locate in the Poyang Lake core area,
middle reaches and source area. The project includes 7 counties, Located in the subtropical monsoon
climate zone, the project area features moderate climate, sufficient sunshine and rainfall, distinctive
seasons and a long frost-free period. The average annual rainfall is about 1,700 mm, about 60% of
the rainfall is in April-June.
o      E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Project preparation and implementation have been delegated to the Project Management Office
which is housed in the Foreign Investment Management Office of Jiangxi Provincial Development
and Reform Commission. This Office has been managing several World Bank- and ADB-financed
projects in the past 20 years, and accumulated rich experiences in project management. This Office is
also the provincial PMO of ongoing Bank financed Jiangxi Poyang Lake Basin and Ecological
Economic Zone Small Town Development Project. It is fully resourced and staffed (project
coordinator, full-time translator and technical specialists for finance, procurement and water
resources and safeguards).
At the county level, all seven project counties have established the Project Leading Groups (PLGs)
and PMOs. The PLGs are headed by county Mayor or standing vice Mayor, and formed by various
government line agencies. PMOs are established in county Development and Reform Commission,
Foreign Investment Management Office, or Poyang Lake Basin Management Office. Poyang and
Yugan Counties have experience of managing World Bank-financed projects. The rest of other five


﻿counties have no such experience. The Bank will provide training to county PMOs on safeguards
policies. Experienced safeguards consultants will be hired to assist with the preparation and
implementation of safeguards instruments.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Q
Feng Ji (GENO2)
Songling Yao (GSU02)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is proposed as a Category A project, and
OP/BP 4.01                              triggers OP4.0 1 Environmental Assessment. The
project is expected to bring overall environmental
benefits, leading to the reduction of pollution loads
discharged into Poyang Lake and contributing to the
improvement of public health and living environment
in the selected seven counties. The project itself is a
set of mitigation measures to address the existing
environmental problems in Poyang Lake Basin area.
But the project would also bring some adverse
impacts: (a) general construction impacts, (b)
potential dredging in lake/pond (i.e. Pipa in Yugan
County, and Zhoujiazui in Duchang County), and the
disposal of dredged sediments; and (c) adverse
impacts (e.g., odor, waste, increased traffic volume)
associated with the operation of solid waste
collection and transfer facilities and sewage
treatment facilities.
0
Wastewater and solid waste to be collected under the
project would be disposed of at the existing County
WWTP/sanitary landfills or facilities under
construction. Dredging is one potential proposal, for
which further study would be conducted during
project preparation and in the project implementation
given that monitoring and evaluation for this kind of
activity takes time. The project will not directly
address the industrial waste/pollution, but rely on
non-structural measures such as capacity building for
monitoring and regulatory enforcement.
Risks include leakage of sewer networks, impacts of
potential dredging on the selected lakes/ponds, and
inadequate maintenance of the sanitary facilities to
be financed under the project. Adverse impacts
identified will be managed with good construction
management practices, project design and mitigation


﻿measures to be specified in the Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs).
EA instrument will include:
?      An EA Executive Summary for the project;
?      Environmental Assessment (EA) and EMP
will be prepared for each county. As part of the EA,
a due diligence for existing disposal facilities (e.g.
WWTP, waste treatment facilities) or facilities under
construction will be conducted to check if they are in
compliance with relevant national EA regulations.
A stand-alone Environmental and Social
Management Plan (EMP) for each county will
includes: (a) Environmental Code of Practices
(ECOPs) for civil work contractors to be included
into the bidding documents and civil work contracts;
(b) mitigation measures for specific environmental
issues identified in the EA. Mitigation measures for
social impacts identified from a separate SA will be
integrated into the EMP particularly social impacts
outside OP 4.12.
Given that details of some activities are not
determined during project preparation (e.g. potential
dredging in lake/pond), an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to
set out the principles, rules, guidelines and
procedures to assess the environmental and social
impacts of these activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          Poyang Lake is an important natural habitat for
migratory birds. It is not expected that the project
would have the potential to cause significant
conversion or degradation of natural habitats. Given
that the project would reduce pollution loads
discharged into Poyang Lake, the largest freshwater
lake in China and benefit this natural habitat, Natural
Habitats (OP4.04) is triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The project will not have impacts on the health and
quality of forests, nor affect the rights and welfare of
people and their level of dependence upon or
interaction with forests, nor aim to bring about
changes in the management, protection, or utilization
of natural forest or plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project will not include any procurement of
pesticides or pesticide application equipment; nor
introduce any new pest management practices, or
expand/alter existing pest management practices; nor


﻿lead to substantially increased pesticide use and
subsequent environmental and health risks.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          Given that project activities such as provision of
OP/BP 4.11                                 sewers and storm water pipeline will be in urban area
of the selected seven counties, PCRs may be affected
by the project. A field survey will be undertaken by
experienced PCR consultants together with the EA
consulting team. Whether OP4.11 is triggered or not
is subject to the subsequent survey and
Environmental Assessment.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           Screening on ethnic minority was conducted by the
4.10                                       TT in the pre-identification mission and
identification mission. The screening, including
consultation with the seven project counties and the
Provincial Minority Department, concluded that
there is no minority village/community in or
collectively attached to project areas. Other ongoing
World Bank financed projects in the same area in the
province verified that no minority is found around
the Poyang Lake. So the project will not trigger the
OP 4.10, Indigenous People.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The project will permanently and temporarily acquire
BP 4.12                                    some land for construction of infrastructure and
facilities related to storm water disposal, wastewater
collection and treatment, and solid waste collection
and treatment, ecological restoration of some small
lakes and river sections, etc., the OP 4.12, therefore,
will be triggered. A Resettlement Plan (RP) will be
prepared for all the activities including ancillary
facilities to be identified in each county, which will
be integrated into a comprehensive RP. At the same
time, some resettlement related impacts on
installation of sewer and rainwater pipes,
construction of pump stations, solid waste collection
points, etc., could be not clearly identified at
preparation stages, so a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will be developed also.
A full social assessment, especially on social waste
and wastewater collection, will be conducted around
the project areas to: i) investigate social economic
baselines of the project areas; ii) understand
participation willingness of targeted beneficiaries;
iii) investigate gender issues and identify appropriate
actions to address such issues; and iv) identify most
appropriate implementation arrangements and
specific mechanism where needed for proposed


﻿project activities. Results of the SA should be fully
incorporated into project design, as well as EMPs,
ESMF and RPs.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            The project will not finance construction or
rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
policy, and there are no dams impact on the safety
and operation of the project financed facilities.
Projects on International     No            There are no international waterways in the project
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        area.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           The project area is not in disputed area.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Preparation follow up mission is scheduled in late March, 2016, and Appraisal is planned in
September, 2016.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ximing Zhang,Solvita Klapare
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                          Date: 21-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/       Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                        Date: 22-Jan-2016
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


