INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSCIO64
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         SriLanka                   Project ID:   P132833
Project Name:    Transport Connectivity and Asset Management Project (P132833)
Task Team        Amali Rajapaksa
Leader(s):
Estimated        08-Feb-2016                Estimated     28-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT106                        Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), General transportation
sector (10%)
Theme(s):        Other rural development (50%), Other urban development (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     125.00             Total Bank Financing:   125.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           125.00
.          Total                                                           125.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve connectivity in target corridor(s) through
the life cycle approach to asset management.
C. Project Description
Based on the strategy laid out by the Government of Sri Lanka (GOSL) for poverty reduction, 1000
Grama Sevaka Niladhari Divisions (GND's) that are currently under served have been identified


﻿within a program to improve connectivity to these GND's by rehabilitating 800km of national roads,
1500km of provincial roads and 4,000 km of rural roads.
The Road Development Authority (RDA) intends to manage its high mobility corridors on an asset
O
U       management basis and aims to pilot a couple of corridors on an output and performance based
contract format over a 8-10 year period to also address the issues that are currently experienced
through input contracts.
This project is proposed to support the concept and the program of the GOSL of providing
connectivity and has two components. (i) Design, rehabilitation and maintenance of Northern and
Ruwanpura corridors and (ii) Institutional capacity enhancement of the RDA.
Component 1 - Design, Rehabilitation and maintenance of the Northern and Ruwanpura corridors
(284 km): This entails two corridors to be developed in two phases:
Phasel: Northern Corridor - Ja-ela-Puttalama section of the A003 (126 km) connects the North
western and North central provinces providing easy access to the Northern Province. In addition to
connecting villages within these provinces to address pockets of poverty it will also better position
the Kalpitiya area for high end tourism providing quick access to the Bandaranaike International
Airport as well as the cultural city of Anuradhapura.
Phase 2: Ruwanpura Corridor - Awissawella-Pelmadulla-Padalangala section of the A004 and A0 18
(158 km) provides access to the Sabaragamuwa province which has limited access and high level of
poverty.
This component will include the cost of design, rehabilitation, maintenance as well as costs of
consultants for carrying out the Monitoring, technical and financial audits.
Component 2 - Institutional Capacity enhancement of the RDA:
0
The team proposes to continue the support extended to the RDA in (i) adopting asset management
principles through enhancing the capacity of the RDA in data collection, monitoring and evaluation
of performance, adoption of specific standards ; (ii) modernization of the RDA through adopting
a efficient processors and laboratory facilities that would also be necessary in view of the increase in
work load also managing a part of the provincial and rural roads on behalf of the owners; (iii) Assist
in the research and adaptation low cost construction methodologies which would impact the entire
economy and (iv) Incremental operating cost of the project management unit and the Road
Maintenance Trust Fund.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Phase I- (Ja Ela to Puttalam Road) section is basically composed of about 90 km of urban/semi urban
and about 36 km of rural national roads, transitioning between Colombo and Northern part of the
Country. The road section is located partially within the wet zone and intermediate zone running
parallel and close to the sea on the west side of the country. The land is overall consists of flat
terrain. The road section traverse over number of rivers including Uruwal Oya, Maha Oya, Gin Oya,
Deduru Oya and Kalagamu Oya. Within the initially identified impacts area, a number of
environmentally important and sensitive sites are found including Anawilundawa Wetland, which is
a Ramsar Site; two tanks named Mahawewa, Muthurajawela (wetland), Negambo Lagoon, Mundal


﻿Lagoon and Puttlam Lagoon. The three lagoons are important fishery areas. Towards the rural
section of the road side agriculture/fishery activities such as paddy cultivation, coconut plantations
and few prawn farms are present. In addition, as Christianity dominated area, there are many
churches particularly on the road side of the urban/semi urban section.
0
Awissawela to Pelmadulla Road section of Colombo Ratnapura Wellawaya Betticaloa road (A04)
(CRWB) is two lane road on a rolling terrain. The CRWB road is the trunk road which provides
connection to Colombo the capital city from Sabaragamuwa, Uva and Eastern provinces. The road is
very important in terms of food security as it provide transport of vegetable grown in Uva province
and paddy grown in Eastern province. And also road leads to several tourist destinations such as
Ratnapura gem city, Bandarawela hill country, Batticaloa beautiful beaches and sea for wind
surfacing. The length of the road section is about 63 km and has lane width of 3m. The road crosses
over one of the major rivers in Sri Lanka, named Kalu Ganga. There are few tea and rubber
plantations and paddy areas found in the vicinity of the road section. There are no significant
environmentally sensitive areas that are found in the initially defined impacts area of the project.
Palmadulla-Padanangala Road section, which is part of Al 8 road partially runs through a hilly terrain
(Pelmadulla end) and emerge through the flat terrain in the last part of the section (Padanagala end)
running through wet, intermediate and dry zones. This trunk road connects to the fast developing
Hambantota Distcrict. The road runs parallel to Chandrika Lake and crosses 2 irrigation canals that
connect the Chandrika Lake in 3 places. There are some tea and rubber plantations, as well as paddy
and highland farming areas closer to the road section. Similar to the Awissawela and Pelmadulla
Road section, there are no significant environmentally sensitive areas that are found in the initially
defined impacts area of the project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Borrower's key road agency, RDA has been engaged with the World Bank for about 10 years
and developed capacity to assess, implement and monitor environmental and social safeguards.
In keeping with the World Bank's Safeguard Policies, the Road Development Authority (RDA) has
updated the existing Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) for the proposed
long-term engagement in maintaining roads. This framework provides the necessary background for
environmental and social considerations to be built into the design of the project so that
environmentally and socially sustainable implementation can take place. The Framework will be
used as a guide and template by the RDA to undertake environmental and social analysis and ensure
compliance with the World Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies and the relevant
provisions under the National Environmental Act (NEA) and associated regulations.
The RDA also has already commissioned the environmental assessments (EAs) and social impact
assessments (SIAs) of the two road sections identified above which will result in site-specific
assessments, environmental and social management plans, environmental and social standards for the
Output and Performance Based Road Contract (OPRC) and resettlement action plan. This is carried
out parallel to the conceptual design that is being prepared. In the absence of a detailed design during
the preparation stage, it is expected that the EAs and SIAs and respective plans will be updated as
part of the detailed design to be carried out by the OPRC contractor. The contractor will be expected
to implement site-specific mitigation measures and ensure standards identified are maintained
throughout the contract period. In addition, the contractor is required to obtain and abide by relevant
GOSL licenses/approvals for extraction of material from quarries and borrow sites, extraction of
sand, as well as licenses for the use of disposal sites etc. and use of sites to establish contract-specific
off-site activities. The assessments are expected to review the potential long-term impacts


﻿particularly on the hydrology, which plays a significant role in Ja-Ela-Puttalm Road, as well as future
developments that would bring about long-term environmental and social impacts.
The RDA has established an Environmental and Social Division at RDA to integrate environmental
O
U       and social issues into the planning process as well as undertake environmental and social monitoring.
In support of this, the project will continue to provide training for appropriate RDA staff.
The EA process in Sri Lanka is well established with the environmental regulatory agency, Central
Environmental Authority (CEA), having EIA review experience of over two decades. However, the
weak link in the EA process is in the area of post approval monitoring. Therefore, the project shall
continue its initiatives to address this weakness.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Darshani De Silva (GENDR)
Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (GSU06)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will mainly consists of road
OP/BP 4.01                              improvement/maintenance activities including
rehabilitation, upgrading town sections from 2 lanes
to 4 lanes and improving the capacity of some of the
bridges. While all these activities will be carried out
within the RDA ROW, some of the widening
activities may require land acquisition. Therefore, the
project will require environmental and social due
diligence to be in place and changes to be in line
with long-term disaster risk management, especially
flood risk planning to be integrated. Within this
context, an Environmental and
Social Management Framework of RDA has been
updated and sites-specific environmental and social
assessments and management/action plans will be
prepared prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         One of the road sections goes through and located
near number of sensitive natural habitats which
requires additional due diligence when designing and
implementation of the project. Likely impacts to
these natural habitats will be assessed as part of the
environment assessment and mitigation measures to
avoid the impacts will be identified and included in
the project design and implementation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          Not applicable.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          Not applicable.


﻿Physical Cultural Resources  Yes           Since there are PCRs in the vicinity of one of the
OP/BP 4.11                                road sections, to ensure the design and
implementation takes potential impact to these sites,
this policy has been triggered. Similar to natural
habitats, the environment assessment will review the
potential impacts to each of the sites and will
propose mitigation measures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/l3P    No           Not applicable.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          Some of the rehabilitation work will involve
BP 4.12                                   improvements such as widening lanes and shoulders,
adding extra lanes in steep inclines, etc., and may
have possible impacts on people where the existing
roads are running through or closer to settlements,
business premises, etc. There may also be social
impacts in terms of loss of land and other assets/
infrastructure /livelihood located on the land,
particularly if the Right Of Way (ROW) is
insufficient to meet the design needs. The social
assessment will provide the information on social
impacts and will form the basis for the preparation of
a resettlement action plan.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           Not applicable.
Projects on International    No           Not applicable.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Not applicable.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Feb-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF for the project is already in place and site-specific environment and social assessments
have already commenced.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amali Rajapaksa
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                  Date: 15-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)            Date: 20-Jul-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


