INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12877
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Senegal                    Project ID:  P150351
Project Name: Senegal Urban Water and Sanitation Project (P150351)
Task Team       Matar Fall
Leader(s):
Estimated       15-Apr-2015                Estimated    15-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Water supply (75%), Sanitation (25%)
Theme(s):       Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      70.00            Total Bank Financing:   70.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                70.00
Total                                                                      70.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve access to water and sanitation
services in selected urban areas in a financially sustainable manner.
3. Project Description
The proposed project would consist of three components, which are summarized below.
Component 1. Water Supply (US$48.9 million). This component aims at improving water services
Page 1 of 8


﻿and expanding access through the following sub-components:
1.1    Development of groundwater resources to increase water availability and quality, in selected
areas through, inter alia, expanding (a) water production capacity by drilling and equipping new
boreholes with connection pipes to collect ground water; (b) water transmission by providing and
O
Q)       installing feeder pipes, booster pumping stations and constructing a ground storage tank; (c) water
storage by constructing elevated storage tanks; and (d) provision of goods related for the purpose.
This sub-component would: (i) through the development of groundwater resources in the Tassette
area, improve the quantity of water available to existing customers in Dakar until the commissioning
of the KMS3 water system and would afterwards supply the urban centers of Petite C6te; and (ii)
through the development of groundwater resources in Mbour, improve the quantity of water available
to existing customers in Petite C6te.
1.2    Rehabilitating water infrastructure in the urban center of Nguekhokh to improve water
production, storage capacity and distribution through, inter alia, (a) drilling and equipping boreholes;
(b) constructing a water storage tank and distribution pipes; (c) rehabilitating stand-posts; and (d)
provision of goods related for the purpose.
This sub-component would rehabilitate and improve water infrastructure in this urban center, before
incorporating the system in SONES perimeter.
1.3    Increasing access to safe water in selected urban centers through the provision and
installation of water distribution pipes and installation of household water service connections.
This sub-component would: (i) enable the water services to reach currently unserved neighborhoods;
(ii) help connect mostly poor households under affordable conditions.
1.4    Support to the Recipient for technical studies related to the expansion of transmission and
distribution networks in selected areas.
Component 2. Sanitation (US$16.8 million). This component aims at increasing access to
improved sanitation outside of Dakar through the following sub-components:
2.1    Provision of sanitation facilities in the urban center of Joal-Fadiouth, including, (a) provision
and installation of sewers, sewage pumping stations and household sewerage service connections;
(b) construction of a wastewater treatment plant and a sludge treatment plant; and (c) installation of
in-site household sanitation facilities and public toilets.
This sub-component would provide a full range of options of sanitation services, including adequate
excreta and wastewater disposal.
2.2    Increasing access to sewerage services in selected urban centers where sewerage networks
o        already exist through the expansion of sewers and installation of household sewerage service
connections.
This sub-component would: (i) enable the sanitation services to reach currently unserved
neighborhoods; and (ii) help connect mostly poor households under affordable conditions.
2.3    Support to the Recipient in the areas of: (a) supervision; (b) communication, information and
education, related to the activities under Components 2.1 and 2.2.
Component 3. Institutional Strengthening and Project Management (US$4.3 million). This
component aims at supporting sector institutions and the sector reforms, and enabling the PCU to
deliver its responsibilities through the following sub-components:
3.1    Strengthening the Recipient's capacity in groundwater monitoring and knowledge of
groundwater resources through (a) construction of piezometers; (b) provision and installation of
remote monitoring equipment; and (c) carrying out hydrogeological studies for the region of Ndiass
Horst groundwater aquifer.
3.2    Support to the Recipient in the reforms of the water and sanitation sector.
3.3    Support to the Recipient in the areas of Project coordination, supervision, financial
Page 2 of 8


﻿management, communication and outreach, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, supervision of
implementation of the Safeguards Instruments, including through the provision of technical
assistance, Training, Operating Costs, goods and services for the required purpose.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
For urban water supply, the project will focus on the regions of Dakar and Thibs, and particularly the
areas of Tasset, Mbour, Nguekokh, and Mdodiane. As regard to sanitation, the project will mainly
focus on the city of Joal-Fadiouth located in the coastal area. However, specific areas of intervention
in the said cities will be determined by technical studies. The social connections programs (for water
and sanitation) which have no significant safeguard impact will be implemented in all urban areas
covered by SONES and ONAS.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
Yacouba Konate (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project is classified B because of the expected
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               moderate magnitude of the negative impacts that would
result from or risks from its activities. Instead, and apart
from risks during exploitation, the overall impact of the
project is substantially positive due to improvement of
sanitation and living conditions in the intervention areas.
The potential sites of the civil works in Joal are known
but those of the investments in the other cities; then, to
comply with the Bank policies and the Senegalese
environmental regulation, the following documents have
been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in-country
Q)                                            and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal: (i) an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) of the whole project; (ii) a resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) of the project; and (iii) an
Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of component 2
that support the implementation of the commune of Joal-
Fadiouth Sanitation Master Plan (SMP) through the
construction of sanitation infrastructures. Further, it will
be agreed with the Borrower at Negotiations that the
preparation of sub-projects specific EAs/RAPs will be set
as condition of disbursement for each sub-project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         The outlet of the wastewater treatment plan will pass
4.04                                through a marine protected area (MPA) but no project
activities would directly induce the conversion or
degradation of this habitat. The project design will include
the extension of the depolluted water rejection point
beyond the MPA in the nearby sea.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project will not finance activities related to forest
exploitation, harvesting, direct or indirect forest
Page 3 of 8


﻿degradation, and increase access to forest.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not finance acquisition transport,
distribution, storage or use of pesticides or similar
chemicals that could threaten environmental and human
health.
Physical Cultural       Yes          This policy is triggered because of the nature of civil
a         Resources OP/BP 4.11                 works that will be financed under the first two
components. The project intervention areas have been
inhabited for centuries therefore likely to host
underground artifacts. To prevent the destruction during
implementation, a chance find procedure has been
included in the ESMF and detailed in subsequent EIA/
ESMP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project
BP 4.10                              intervention areas.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project will include rights of way for the water
OP/BP 4.12                           distribution networks, and minimal land grab for water
production, storage and distribution and sanitation
facilities. Therefore, the Borrower has prepared, consulted
upon and disclosed a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) that will guide the project team when any
displacement issue arises during the implementation. In
the course of implementation, the screening process will
determine whether displacement will occur and a sub-
project specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) is
required.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance dam works or activities
4.37                                 associated to existing dam.
Projects on International  No        The project will not finance activities that will interfere
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 with international watercourses; either in terms of water
withdraw or discharge of pollutants.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project intervention areas are not under dispute.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is categorized B because of the potential negative environmental and social impacts of
the civil works under components A and B would be moderate to minor. The source of impacts
will be related to the construction of the water distribution networks in urban areas, the
exploitation of borrow pit during the construction phase of the overall project, and the risks of
dysfunction of the sanitation infrastructures in Joal-Fadouth (the sewage pumping stations, the
wastewater treatment plant and the sludge treatment plant) during operation. No potential
significant and irreversible adverse impact, direct or indirect, is expected to occur from project
Page 4 of 8


﻿activities either during the construction or operation phase. To prevent the negative impacts and
maximize the positive ones during the project lifetime, four safeguard policies have been
triggered: Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01); Natural Habitat (OP/BP 4.04); Physical
Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OB/BP 4.12). The World Bank
Group EHS guidelines for water and sanitation also apply, especially when it comes to finalize and
incorporate the environmental clauses in the enterprises and plant operators' contracts. The overall
project environment and social impact was assessed significantly positive on the quality of life and
reduction of sanitation related diseases.
No RAP was prepared at this stage, as it is expected that only a limited number of temporary
displacement will occurred during the construction phase of the Joal-Fadiouth sanitation
infrastructure which shall be managed through the RPF.
The impacts and risks that the borrower will prevent and monitor in the course of the project
implementation, including the operation phase, are as follow: (i) minor to moderate biophysical
and social impacts (noise, increased dust in the local atmosphere, increased risk of accident,
increased risk of communicable diseases, loss of vegetation at the borrow pit sites, etc.) during the
construction; (ii) foul odors incommoding the surrounding communities, the risk of waterborne
disease exacerbation, and biological pollution discharge (BOD surge, trace chemicals, etc.) into
the humid ecosystems in case the treatment plan dysfunctions.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No potential indirect or long term or cumulative impacts are foreseen during project
implementation. However, the receiving environment will be polluted in case the wastewater
treatment plant dysfunctions.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The ESIA of the Joal-Fadiouth sanitation infrastructures concluded that, the best alternative on the
economic and environmental sides has been selected so that to increase the positive benefit of the
investments and minimize the risks of discharge of polluted effluents in the receiving environment
including the marine protected area and the Mama Gueth.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
o           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), the Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) and the Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) of the waste water treatment
plant in Joal have been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in country on March 27, 2015 and
at the Bank Infoshop on April 13, 2015.
The ESMF provides a screening mechanism for the mainstreaming of environmental and social
sustainability aspects from the identification of the subprojects/activities to their implementation
phase. Prior to its commencement, as soon as the implementation site is identified, any eligible
investment subproject/activity will be processed through the environmental and social screening
procedure and then if eligible, be subject to the preparation and approval of an ESIA/ESMP and/or
RAP prior its implementation. The screening is executed by Project coordination unit's
environmental and social safeguard specialist. This process will result in the environmental
classification of the subprojects in category B or C; category A subproject will not be eligible to
financing. The results of the screening are processed according to the national regulations under
Page 5 of 8


﻿the control of the "Direction de l'Environnement et des Etablissements Classes".
The RPF outlines the principles and procedures to be followed in the event of land acquisition,
impact on assets and/or loss of livelihoods. Any specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
O
Q)          prepared in accordance to the screening result will be negotiated, approved on with all the
stakeholders then fully executed before the concerned activity starts.
An amount of US$ 0.34 Million is earmarked in the project budget to ensure the implementation
of the safeguard measures.
The Borrower is successfully implementing the Environmental and Social Management Plan
(EMP) and Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) of the ongoing IDA funded Water and Sanitation
Millennium Project (WSMP), including similar activities than the proposed project. Recent
supervision missions of the WSMP concluded that the implementation of the EMP was
appropriate and the Safeguard rating was "Satisfactory". While the same institutional framework
used for the WSMP will be adopted for the proposed project (the PCU monitoring the overall
implementation of the EMP, while implementing agencies would be responsible for implementing
their applicable portions of the EMP) any capacity strengthening measure deemed necessary to
improve the safeguard function in this operation will be taken as mentioned in component 3.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the Ministries (and their relevant agencies/departments) in charge of
urban development, habitat, hydraulics, drainage and sanitation; environment and protection of
nature; and local development and decentralization; the participating municipalities and
communes (communes of Dakar, Thibs, Joal-Fadiouth), participating communities, NGOs and
other relevant institutions.
All the relevant bodies have been adequately informed of the Project. Concerns of the
communities and some details of consultations have been provided as Annexes in the ESIA,
ESMF and RPF. The key concerns raised during the consultation process included: (i) the Mama
Gueth oyster farming area should not be threatened; (ii) stormwater drainage should be integrated
O
in the design of the infrastructures; (iii) preference recruitment of local population as employee on
jobs they qualify for; (iv) the municipality must have the responsibility of operating the public
*           sanitation facilities. All these concerns have been addressed in the alternatives proposed through
the environmental and social management plan (ESMP).
One of the key principles of this project from the outset was to foster participation of all relevant
stakeholders. This approach will be sustained throughout project implementation. The
environmental and social assessment studies, namely the ESMF and RPF, were also carried out
according to the same principle, using broad-based public consultation approach, involving the
above stakeholder groups. The objective was to raise awareness of project activities and impacts
and foster ownership on their part.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Apr-2015
Page 6 of 8


﻿For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Senegal                                                   27-Mar-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                22-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             13-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Senegal                                                   27-Mar-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[    No[X]     NA
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes      No        NA    X
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 7 of 8


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Matar Fall
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)           Date: 15-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)         Date: 16-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


