                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.:

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Ethiopia                       Project ID:      P161769
                            Project Name:        Ethiopia 2017 Population and Housing Census Support
                            Team Leader(s):      Anne Margreth Bakilana
                            Estimated Date
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GHN07                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.5                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                 0.5
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the requested Grant is to support Ethiopia in the successful
                           implementation of the Population and Housing Census (PHC) planned for 2017. The Grant will
                           support the Central Statistical Agency (CSA) and tUNFPA Population Fund (UNFPA) to implement
                           a newly developed census enumeration methodology that will ensure complete and accurate
                           enumeration of the entire population. The 2017 PHC will collect information on all persons present
                           within the borders of Ethiopia on the census reference date. Unlike the previous census (es) the 2017
                           PHC will be based on one reference date countrywide.
                           C. Project Description
                           The Grant would support key activities that must be implemented in preparation of the census. These
                           will include improvements in technology for census cartography and Geography Information
                           Systems (GIS) development which are an essential preparatory activity for the census exercise as the
                           success of any census is critically dependent on the accuracy of the cartographic maps.
                           Accompanying the mapping activities will be training of CSA and other staff in cartographic and
                           GIS methodology.

                           Data capture under the previous censuses had been done using paper based questionnaires. In
                           planning ahead to the Ethiopia 2017 Census, a mix of technology has been put in place to assure
                         quality and timely results. For the Ethiopia 2017 Census, hand-held devices will be used for data
                         capture with at least 160,000 devices being required for enumeration alone. These devices will also
                         be used in other downstream census activities, or in other large scale data generation activities at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         CSA ➢❨ and beyond ➢❨ upon completion of the census program. Furthermore, technologies will
                         be introduced to support the elaborate process involved in delineating an estimated 150,000 to
                         160,000 census enumeration areas (EAs) countrywide.

                         The cartographic process will be modeled on the use of mobile GIS technology to ensure complete
                         and accurate coverage of the vast frontiers (1.1m sq. km) and challenging topography of Ethiopia in
                         time for the enumeration. ArcGIS for Windows Mobile software will be used in conjunction with
                         GPS-enabled PDAs (Trimble Juno 3B) to gather GIS-based information for EA maps production. In
                         addition, high resolution satellite imagery (SPOT - 1.5m/6m Pleiades for rural and 50cm for urban
                         areas) will be used to enhance pace and quality of the EA maps production. The cartographic
                         activities will also employ the use of additional Apps (Dashboard & work force manager) installed
                         on the ArcGIS platform to promote effective deployment, task distribution and progress monitoring
                         and reporting.

                         The main components of the proposed Grant are below:

                         1.       Technical assistance in cartographic and GIS Methodology development
                         The Ethiopian government has adopted mobile GIS technology for the 2017 Census. However, CSA
                         technical staff have little experience to implement the technology (none of the staff has been
                         involved in the census hitherto). The only exposure they have so far came through study tours GIS
                         staff made to Brazil and Cape Verde. The only formal training on use of PDAs to collect data (with a
                         GIS component) was attended by a couple of CSA staff in South Africa for a week, supported by
                         FAO. This is inadequate and, therefore, cannot support the skill-intensive activities that mobile GIS
                         technology demands.

                         Accordingly, this activity partly entails the recruitment of a cartographic/GIS specialist who will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provide responsive and timely overall technical assistance and oversight on implementation of all
                         census cartography/GIS related activities. The ArcGIS software suite already supplied and being
                         used requires further re-engineering to be fully adapted to CSA➢❨ s needs. Thus, the technical
                         assistance will allow for the support CSA staff needs to resolve outstanding technical challenges (e.g.
                         software upgrade and customization, data synchronization and system automation), advise CSA on
                         mapping methodology amendment and development, identify, draw up and lead implementation of
                         additional capacity building needs, and establish pragmatic data quality assurance mechanisms and
                         fields monitoring and reporting framework. The cartographic / GIS specialist will be recruited
                         through competitive bidding in the global market place in accordance with UN procurement due
                         process to assure quality technical assistance and value for money. The UN➢❨ s hiring procedures
                         for long term consultants will guarantee successful recruitment of the right skills for the needs at
                         hand.

                         2.       Improved cartographic infrastructure
                         The existing census mapping methodology will be amended to enhance quality and pace of map
                         production. This will require, among other things, acquisition of additional Bluetooth and GPS
                         enabled hand-held data loggers. At least 500 devices will be required to facilitate the operations of
                         100 or so teams to be added (each team has one supervisor and six GIS assistants). Technical experts
                         will be consulted on appropriate and cost-effective devices.
                         3.       Technical capacity building of CSA staff
                         Due to high turnover of staff at CSA, none of the current CSA staff managing the censuses processes
Public Disclosure Copy




                         has been involved in census implementation previously. Because census cartography and GIS
                         development is an extremely high skill all CSA technical staff will require conceptual and hands-on
                         training so as to leverage the optimal benefits of the use of new technology. In full particular, full
                         capacity building in the following critical areas is inevitable:

                         ➢❨¢ Geodatabase development and management
                         ➢❨¢ EA maps production and concatenation
                         ➢❨¢ Field-office work flow management
                         ➢❨¢ Network security and administration
                         ➢❨¢ Disaster preparedness
                         ➢❨¢ Data documentation and archiving
                         ➢❨¢ Spatial data analysis
                         The capacity building programs will strengthen the skills of CSA staff to effectively implement all
                         the phases of the census (pre-enumeration, enumeration and post-enumeration) activities, as well as
                         support other national statistical system activities such as upcoming agricultural census and national
                         surveys. Further, the skills can and will be shared with other countries needing similar support
                         through the South-South cooperation initiatives, and of which CSA is already a big beneficiary
                         (Ethiopia 2017 Census cartographic activities were kick-started through devices (GPS-enabled data
                         loggers) and technical assistance provided by Namibia Statistics Agency through the South-South
                         Cooperation arrangement). Quite a few NSOs have already expressed interest to visit CSA when
                         they start preparing for their census to understudy Ethiopia➢❨ s census cartography and GIS
                         methodology.

                         4.       Geodatabase development and management and field supervision
                         The CSA needs to collect and manage the GIS data through a data base system that will ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operational efficiency in work flow management and quality and timely production of EA maps. To
                         this end CSA requires to develop a geodatabase through which project downloads, uploads, editing/
                         validation and compilation will be accomplished. The geodatabase will provide additional
                         advantages to census operations through linkages with other GIS-platform applications to facilitate
                         subsequent census processes/phases (e.g. data processing, analysis and dissemination).

                         The development of the Geodatabase will require an external/international IT/data processing expert
                         to work with the GIS Specialist and CSA GIS staff. Once developed the geodatabase will be
                         implemented both at head office and branch offices across the country. Regular monitoring through
                         scheduled field monitoring visits (FMVs) will be required for optimum and sustainable
                         implementation and benefits thereof.

                         5.      Training of additional cartography/GIS field personnel
                         The additional 100 or so teams (or at least 700 field mapping personnel) recruited to enhance the
                         pace of EAs production related activities must undergo comprehensive training and field practice (45
                         days, or 6 weeks) to bring them up to the required skill levels before embarking on field mapping.
                         Three international experts (Cartography, GIS & IT/data processing experts) will be hired for 3
                         weeks to train selected CSA staff (TOT) who, in turn, will train the field mapping personnel.
                           6.     UNFPA grant administration costs
                           A standard fee of seven percent of the entire cost of every donor funded program will be levied by
                           UNFPA head office to offset costs related to the program administration, including project review
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and audit.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The 2017 Population and Housing Census will collect information on all persons present within the
                           borders of Ethiopia on the census reference date.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Borrower has the institutional capacity to address safeguards policies.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Tamene Tiruneh Matebe (GSP01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               No significant environmental or safeguard
                           BP 4.01                                              issues are expected.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No               No significant environmental or safeguard
                                                                                issues are expected.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No               No significant environmental or safeguard
                                                                                issues are expected.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No               No significant environmental or safeguard
                                                                                issues are expected.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No               No significant environmental or safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.11                                              issues are expected.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No               No significant environmental or safeguard
                                                                                issues are expected.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No               No significant environmental or safeguard
                           4.12                                                 issues are expected.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No               No significant environmental or safeguard
                                                                                issues are expected.
                           Projects on International        No                  No significant environmental or safeguard
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                 issues are expected.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                  No significant environmental or safeguard
                           7.60                                                 issues are expected.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):            Name: Anne Margreth Bakilana
                           Approved By:
                         Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                    Date: 18-Oct-2016
                         Practice Manager/                Name: Sybille Crystal (PMGR)                                       Date: 18-Oct-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
