                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR1149
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P112626
                            Project Name:       Liuzhou Environment Management Project Phase II (P112626)
                            Task Team           Gang Qin
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           17-May-2010                                  Estimated   10-Mar-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GWA02                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Wastewater Collection and Transportation (77%), Wastewater Treatment and
                                                Disposal (19%), Solid waste management (3%), Public adminis tration- Water,
                                                sanitation and flood protection (1%)
                            Theme:              Pollution management and environmental health (50%), Other urban
                                                development (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       288.39           Total Bank Financing:                                       150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                             138.39
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                150.00
                              Total                                                                                                288.39
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to help improve the environmental conditions of the


                                                                                  Page 1 of 7
                         Liujian River through proper collection and treatment of waste                                water
                         within the urban area boundaries of Liuzhou Municipality.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project development objective is to help improve the environmental conditions of the
                         Liujian River through proper collection and treatment of waste                              water
                         within the urban area boundaries of Liuzhou Municipality.
                          3. Project Description
                         This is a restructure of Liuzhou Environment Management Project Phase II (P112626), which
                         consists of three components: (i) wastewater management; (ii) sludge management; and (iii)
                         institutional development and capacity building. As a result of a competitive bidding process and
                         lower interest payments during project implementation, the project has about US$ 37.04 million in
                         loan savings.

                         Liuzhou has been growing fast since the late 2000s, with a rapid increase in population, and
                         secondary and tertiary industries. Consequently, the volume of wastewater treated by LMWTC has
                         increased rapidly and the two largest WWTPs Baisha and Longquanshan WWTP located in Liubei
                         District and Yufeng District, within the urban boundary of Liuzhou Municipality, are reaching full
                         treatment capacity. These plants will also need to serve the demand of new areas in the future.
                         Supporting the expansion of WWTPs will reduce the financial burden on the city, and make sure that
                         they are completed in a time to treat the additional demand.

                         Agreement was reached with the Liuzhou Municipal Wastewater Treatment Company (LMWTC) to
                         use these loan savings towards the expansion of treatment capacity of the two largest Wastewater
                         Treatment Plants (WWTP) in the city. The Baisha WWTP will be expanded from the current
                         100.000m3/day to 180.000m3/day, and the Longquanshan WWTP will be expanded from the current
                         250.000m3/day to 350.000m3/day. The total cost will be US$ 55.6 million, of which US$ 29.7
                         million will be financed by the IBRD loan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project components will be located in the suburbs of Liuzhou, a city in Western China??s Guangxi
                         autonomous region, as well as four counties under its jurisdiction upstream of Liuzhou along the
                         Liujiang River. Liujiang River is the major river in north of Guangxi Zhuang Autonomous Region as
                         well as the primary water supply source for the city and counties along its course. Recent
                         environmental monitoring by LEPB shows that the Liujiang river in Liuzhou city and counties up-
                         stream generally meet the surface water quality standards, with a few county sections close to
                         drinking water intakes meeting the corresponding standard (required for meeting the water body
                         function as drinking water source). Liuzhou is surrounded by low hills and has a subtropical climate
                         with average annual precipitation 1461 mm and its relative average annual humidity 76%.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Dening Cheng (GSURR)
                         Xin Ren (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                                                     Yes



                                                                     Page 2 of 7
                            Environmental
                            Assessment
                            Natural      OP/BP
                                    Habitats     4.01
                                             OP/BP      No
                            4.04
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           Yes
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Restructuring involves the expansion of two existing WWTPs. Their environmental impacts are
                              similar to the original project??s component on WWTP, namely, dust, noise, storage and disposal
                              of spoil during construction. Potential impacts during operation include residual outflow from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                              WWTPs due to accidents and/or failure of WWTP operation, and disposal of sludge during the
                              shutdown of cement plant. The new EA prepared for the restructuring covers these issues. The
                              original Environmental Management Plan (EMP) still applies.

                             The environmental performance for the parent project has been satisfactory in general.
                             Construction has been carried out largely according to the EMP. For the operation of WWTPs,
                             monitoring of discharge has been undertaken routinely with results constantly meeting applicable
                             standards for WWTPs. Monitoring related to the co-combustion in cement plant and testing on
                             clinker quality both show compliance. Sludge test was however delayed and rather intermittent,
                             although improved in the last two years. The EMP implementation and environmental monitoring
                             reported in the semi-annual monitoring and progress report to the Bank timely.

                             Original project: To address resettlement work necessary for project construction, the Liuzhou
                             PMO prepared five resettlement action plans (RAP) for each component that caused involuntary
                             resettlement. An English Language Comprehensive Summary of RAP was prepared. The
                             resettlement planning work was carried out by the National Research Center for Resettlement
                             under the guidance of the line agencies, including PMO, local land bureaus and house demolition
                             offices. Planning work included project impact inventory surveys, social economic surveys and
                             consultations on resettlement and livelihood rehabilitation strategies. All resettlement work has
                             been carried out to the satisfaction to the task team.


                                                                        Page 3 of 7
                          Restructure: The proposed construction at two wastewater treatment plants affected two villages of
                          Liuzhou City, which are Jila Village, and Baisha Village. 57 households with 255 persons were
Public Disclosure Copy




                          affected by land acquisition and 23 households with 118 persons were affected by house
                          demolistion, including 18 rural field attendance houses (non-residential) for Longquanshan
                          WWTP III and 5 households for Baisha WWTP II affiliated with the enterprises. The 18
                          households whose field attendance houses were demolished did not require relocation since these
                          were not regular residential houses and only used during harvest seasons. The 5 households
                          affiliated with the enterprises were relocated. No household was affected by both land acquisition
                          and house demolition. The Project did not involve temporary land occupation.

                           The two WWTPs acquired land at the end of August 2015, and both WWTPs are ready to start
                           construction. Although necessary compensation was paid to affected households during land
                           acquisition and resettlement, livelihoods restoration work will continue to assist local people
                           improve employability, and progress of local people participating in social security programs will
                           be monitored. Findings will be captured in the external monitoring reports every 6 month.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The long-term impacts of expansion of two WWTPs during restructuring are similar to WWTPs
                           of the parent project, namely, outflow in accidence and sludge disposal. As the two WWTPS are
                           both located in Liuzhou city, their sludge is beginning to be transported to Yufeng cement plant
                           for co-combustion as the operation becomes more stable over time.

                          Sludge generated by the WWTPs in Liuzhou city will be transported to the Liuzhou Yufeng
                          cement plant for treatment at its three dry process rotary kilns. The calcination process is able to
                          destroy all major air pollutants typical of sludge burning (SO2, NOx, dioxins, heavy metals, HCl
                          etc.) due to: (i) high temperature (900-1400 degree C); (ii) long overall retention time in the kiln
                          (about 30 minutes); (iii) alkaline environment inside the kilns, and (iv) system design to shorten
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the retention time at 200-300 degree C to avoid re-formation of dioxin.

                          The air emissions at the Liuzhou cement plant after co-combustion of sludge have been in
                          compliance with relevant standards of China and that of the WB/IFC Environmental Health and
                          Safety (EHS) guidelines. Given that the amount of fed-in sludge (at 70-80% water content) will be
                          no more than 5% of the clinker production, even after more sludge from the expansion of
                          WWTPs, emissions are anticipated to be predominantly those from normal cement production
                          (PM, SO2 and NOx) and thus able to meet discharge standards.

                           People from 57 households lost a proportion of their land during land acquisition. Although they
                           were compensated for more than 50 years equivalent of annual income from the lost land, a longer
                           term restoration plan is needed to improve their employability so that their longer term livelihoods
                           is taken care of. The implementation of the restoration program will be monitored both by PMO
                           internally and by external monitoring team.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Alternatives considered for the wastewater treatment project included: WWTP treatment process
                           (modified Carrousel oxidation ditch and Cyclic Activated Sludge Treatment (CAST) process with
                           the former opted), disinfection technology (liquid chlorine disinfection and UV disinfection with
                           UV method chosen) with the least-impact option being selected.

                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            During restructuring, the EA/EMP for WWTP expansion was prepared by the same Liuzhou
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Science Institute which prepared the original EAs for the six WWTPs in the
                           project. After years of implementation of the Bank projects, the PMO (Liuzhou sewage treatment
                           company) is experienced with adequate capacity to implement environmental measures and the
                           EMP implementation has been satisfactory in general.

                          To prepare for land acquisition and house demolition required by the proposed activities under
                          restructuring, intensive work has been carried out by PMO. A resettlement expert team has been
                          commissioned to prepare the RAP. Consultations were held among local communities to assess
                          resettlement impact and their willingness to support project constructions. The most recent RAP
                          was updated based on information gathered in Octomber 2015.

                          With intervention from the Bank??s task team, the borrower has commissioned a capable
                          resettlement team to work on safeguards compliance. The work of the team has been satisfactory.
                          All resettlement impact directly caused by the proposed restructured activities has been mitigated
                          by recovering local communities?? livelihoods at least to their previous level. By end of August
                          2015, all clean lands at the two sites has been provided to construction team to enter. At the
                          request of Bank??s safeguards team, external monitoring was carried out to review the process of
                          land acquisition and resettlement at the two WWTPs, and external monitoring reports were
                          submitted to the bank in August and September, and an updated External Resettlement M&E
                          Report was submitted in October to include most updated data collected after the resettlement at
                          the two project sites. The resettlement team has been monitoring local communities?? satisfaction
                          to the resettlement work, and no complaints received.

                           Livelihoods restoration program will be monitored by the external monitoring team. In particular,
                           local affected people??s participation in employment training activities, and progress of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           voluntarily participating in social security programs will be monitored. Progress on the restoration
                           program will be recorded in future external monitoring reports.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             For restructuring, the first round disclosure of project announcement and outline for EA was in
                           December 2013 at the official website of Liuzhou Environmental Protection Bureau (EPB) and
                           bulletin boards around sensitive receptors. The second round was disclosure of draft complete EA/
                           EMP in July 2014 with the same channels as well as Liuzhou municipality??s official website. The
                           English version of the EA, EMP and the executive summary were posted at the World Bank
                           Infoshop on November 11, 2014.

                          Nearly 200 people were consulted through questionnaire and meetings, spanning different age
                          groups, gender, education and profession. The vast majority of people are positive about the
                          operation of the two existing WWTPs in pollution control and thus supportive for their expansion.

                          Resettlement work for the originally planned activities was carried out to local people??s
                          satisfaction.
                          The RAP for these two proposed WWTPs was prepared based on consultation and negotiation
                          with PAPs. The PAPs agreed to transfer the possession of their land after receiving land
                          compensation. PMO and local governments will take measurements to restore the income of


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           PAPs. The key resettlement information has disclosed to local government and people. An earlier
                           version of the revised English RAP was disclosed at the World Bank Infoshop on March 30, 2015.
                           The most updated English version of RAP and External Resettlement M&E Report (Special
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Report) has been submitted thru portal for disclosure on November on November 30, 2015.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03-Nov-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    11-Nov-2014
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive       ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       05-Nov-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    26-Nov-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?




                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gang Qin
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                              Date: 03-Dec-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                           Date: 04-Dec-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
