                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR18814
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Azerbaijan                                   Project ID:           P107617
                            Project Name:      Water Users Association Development Support Project (P107617)
                            Task Team          Pieter David Meerbach
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          08-Dec-2008                                  Estimated   26-Apr-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWA03                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Irrigation and drainage (84%), Sub-national government administration (16%)
                            Theme:             Water resource management (47%), Rural services and infrastructure (42%),
                                               Rural policies and institutions (6%), Decentralization (5% )
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
                            Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       114.30           Total Bank Financing:                                       80.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   34.30
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 3.20
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                          76.80
                              Total                                                                                               114.30
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives




                                                                                Page 1 of 13
                         3. Project Description
                         The original project would have three components targeting an expanded area:
                         (i) Component 1: Institutional and WUA Capacity Strengthening financing a training and capacity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support program to WUAs and regional support units (RSU) in 27 raions, and institutional
                         strengthening of AIOJSC;
                         (ii) Component 2: On-farm Irrigation and Drainage Rehabilitation financing rehabilitation of on-farm
                         I&D systems for about 34 WUAs in 15 core raions which have been selected based on irrigated area
                         and agricultural production potential;
                         (iii) Component 3: Project Management would finance project management and implementation
                         activities, and monitoring and evaluation by the Project Implementation Unit.

                         Component 1: Institutional and WUA Capacity Strengthening (~22% of project costs) to support
                         expansion of a focused capacity building program to about 27 raions, covering the majority of
                         irrigated areas in the country (949,000 ha, 419 WUAs). The component would finance:
                          -       Capacity building of AIOJSC Central, Regional and Raion WUA Support Units: RSUs
                         would be provided training and operational support to deliver the capacity         building program to
                         419 WUAs in 27 raions. In order to coordinate this extensive program, regional support centres for
                         the RSUs and the WUAs would be established.
                          -       Targeted training to and capacity building of WUAs: A concentrated training program,
                         complemented by on-the-job support would be delivered by RSUs to WUAs for effective O&M of
                         on-farm irrigation systems. During the project, the training program would be revised and targeted to
                         meet the changing training requirements                            as WUAs mature.
                          -       Provision of O&M equipment management facilities to WUAs: WUAs that meet pre-
                         determined performance criteria, would be able to apply, based on a business plan          , to a WUA
                         Support Fund (WSF) for a small excavator or other equipment, like concrete mixers or
                         communication and transportation equipment, possibly subject to repayment of part of the funds to
                         AIOJSC. WSF funds would also finance establishment of simple WUA offices. WSF funds would
                         be disbursed in phases, since not all WUAs are expected to meet the eligibility criteria
Public Disclosure Copy




                         simultaneously, and for every phase, the procedures will be amended to incorporate lessons learned
                         from the previous phase.
                          -       WUA Supervision and Regulation: The Law on Amelioration and Irrigation (LAI) has a
                         provision to establish a State Supervisory Body (SSB)for monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of WUA
                         performance, and of water delivery and usufruct agreements. The project would provide support to
                         the establishment and operationalization         of the SSB.
                          -       Institutional capacity building studies, and pilots: Under the 2008-15 State Program on
                         Sustainable Development of Amelioration and Water Management, AIOJSC                     aims to
                         strengthen its' capacity for integrated water resource management. Based on the Program (supported
                         by upcoming World Bank Azerbaijan Agriculture and Irrigation Strategy) the project would identify
                         pilot programs, study tours, technology demonstrations, and studies on a range of topics from
                         pumped irrigation to climate adaptation, with the objective to strengthen AIOJSC's capacity
                         accordingly.

                         Component 2: On-farm irrigation and drainage rehabilitation (~70% of project costs). To finance
                         rehabilitation and modernization of on-farm I&D systems on about                   100,000 ha managed
                         by about 34 WUAs located in 15 core project raions with a total irrigated area of about 600,00 ha.
                         Since the start of IDSMIP (2005), the base cost for rendering a WUA managed system operational
                         has increased from US$300 per ha to US$900 per ha due to increased unit prices (cement, steel,
                         labor). WUAs          eligible for rehabilitation will need to meet a set of eligibility performance and


                                                                      Page 2 of 13
                         economic criteria that benchmark them against other WUAs in the raion and would have to commit
                         to repaying a certain percentage of the investments through the irrigation fees. The concept is to
                         strengthen WUAs to a point where they would become sufficiently mature to be responsible for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         rehabilitation of their systems. Prior to rehabilitation, WUAs would sign an interim transfer
                         agreement, and after rehabilitation an agreement transferring responsibility for management,
                         operation, and maintenance to the WUA. Design and construction supervision will be done through
                         consultants engaged by the proposed project, with oversight from project engineers and WUAs.

                         Component 3: Project Management, and Monitoring and Evaluation (~8% of project costs). IDSMIP
                         Project Implementation Unit would be strengthened with staff, training and equipment and part of the
                         operational costs for the daily management, administration, coordination, and monitoring and
                         evaluation of the proposed project. A PIU in Baku would manage all project activities. Project
                         engineers and WUA support staff would operate from the regional support centres.

                         The proposed Additional Financing is to cover the costs associated with scaling up of project
                         activities to enhance the impact of the original project. Specifically, the AF will finance: (i) WUA
                         offices, office equipment, machinery and transportation to additional WUAs; and (ii) rehabilitation of
                         an additional 50,000 to 55,000 ha, managed by 20-22 WUA s which are currently not embarked for
                         rehabilitation under the original project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 2 will target nine core raions which were also included in IDSMIP (Quba, Khachmaz,
                         Sabirabad, Saatli, Imishli, Beylagan, Aghjabedi, Zardab, Goranboy) and six new core raions (Gusar,
                         Ismaili, Gabala, Balakan, Zagatala, Gakh). Component 1 would target core raions and twelve
                         additional WUA focus raions (Samukh, Shamkir, Hadjigabul, Salyan, Neftchala, Goychay, Aghsu,
                         Kurdamir, Ucar, Bilasuvar, Barda, Shamaxi). The project sites are all irrigated agricultural lands with
                         already existing irrigation infrastructure, much of which requires rehabilitation. The bulk of the
                         project areas are located in the Kura-Araz basin; irrigation water from international waterways under
Public Disclosure Copy




                         established international agreements and discharge into these waterways and eventually the Caspian
                         Sea. in some cases, project sites are near protected natural areas. These include protected wetlands in
                         the Kura-Araz basin and national parks, forests and natural areas in the mountainous raions.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (GEN03)
                         Lela Shatirishvili (GSURR)
                         Nina Gogoladze (GSURR)
                         Ximing Zhang (GWA02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            Just as with its predecessor project the IDSMIP, the
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     irrigation and drainage rehabilitation component of the
                                                                    proposed AF will involve environmental and social
                                                                    impacts that trigger this safeguard policy. Because the
                                                                    anticipated adverse impacts will not be significant or
                                                                    irreversible, and can be prevented or reduced through
                                                                    appropriate preventive actions or mitigation measures, the
                                                                    proposed AF does not change the category of the original


                                                                      Page 3 of 13
                                                       project and remains B. To ensure that appropriate
                                                       preventive actions and mitigation measures will be taken
                                                       during project implementation, the Borrower has updated
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       EA and EMMP of the original project.
                                                       The exact number and location of the specific
                                                       rehabilitation sub-projects to be undertaken under the
                                                       proposed AF have yet to be determined. Therefore, the
                                                       EIA identifies generic impacts for infrastructure
                                                       rehabilitation in the project areas and specify generic
                                                       prevention and mitigation measures for these impacts.
                                                       The EMMP includes environmental screening and review
                                                       procedures similar to those required for the IDSMIP to
                                                       ensure that appropriate preventive actions and mitigation
                                                       measures are applied, by means of site-specific
                                                       environmental management plans, to sub-project sites on
                                                       a case-by-case basis. In addition, the EIA addresses the
                                                       potential impacts of climate change on project
                                                       interventions, particularly on water resources, agriculture,
                                                       forests, and the Caspian Sea. It identifies a number of
                                                       climate change adaptation measures that should be
                                                       incorporated into the project design. Finally, the EIA
                                                       explains why the project will not introduce better
                                                       technological alternatives (e.g. lined canals, piped
                                                       systems) to the various irrigation systems to be
                                                       rehabilitated at project sites. In the end, the EIA indicates
                                                       that any gains in reducing water losses achieved by lining
                                                       canals, for example, would be modest (because of the
                                                       nature of the soils in the bulk of the project areas)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       compared to the gains expected to be achieved by the
                                                       project in correcting existing operational inefficiencies (e.
                                                       g. improved water measurement/ control structures,
                                                       enhanced water management capacity).
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   The project includes a number of raions in the northern
                         4.04                          region of Azerbaijan where there are national parks,
                                                       protected forests and natural reserves that may be
                                                       impacted by project interventions. The EA determines
                                                       whether any potential adverse impacts on these areas
                                                       trigger this safeguard policy. The rehabilitation of
                                                       irrigation schemes that may result in a potential adverse
                                                       impact will be not eligible for rehabilitation under the
                                                       project. The EA also determines whether project sites in
                                                       the new raions in the northern region will have potential
                                                       impacts on rivers and their tributaries important for
                                                       migratory fish populations (particularly Caspian sturgeon)
                                                       and their spawning areas. As indicated above, the project
                                                       conducts water quality monitoring at sites in the new




                                                        Page 4 of 13
                                                        raions in the northern region. It will also assess potential
                                                        impacts on the fish populations in the receiving waters.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    Although the IDSMIP did not trigger this safeguard
                                                        policy, the EA prepared for the IDSMIP recognized that
                                                        the recovery of the agricultural sector in Azerbaijan
                                                        was likely to increase pesticide use in the longer term.
                                                        Because the agricultural recovery that will likely take
                                                        place during the proposed project may induce an increase
                                                        in the use of pesticides, the project triggers this safeguard
                                                        policy.        The IDSMIP relied on the Bank's
                                                        Agricultural Development and Credit Project (ADCP),
                                                        with its one-day training courses and national information
                                                        campaigns on pesticide application, to provide awareness
                                                        raising and training on pesticide management and
                                                        integrated pest management (IPM) for water users. The
                                                        original project took advantage of the ADCP's extension
                                                        program until its closure in May 2011. But, more
                                                        importantly, the project is developing its own training
                                                        program on pesticide management and IPM under the
                                                        capacity building component.
                         Physical Cultural        No
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The rehabilitation component may not involve land
                         OP/BP 4.12                     acquisition since all irrigation infrastructure is planned in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        the Government owned lands. However, there could be
                                                        some temporary or permanent impacts in the form of loss
                                                        of economically viable tress, which may affect the income
                                                        loss to some of the tree owners. In addition, it is also
                                                        proposed to construct five Regional support centers and
                                                        about 200 WUA offices, which will require land.
                                                        Therefore, OP 4.12 is triggered. Since the location of the
                                                        new constructions are not known and to cover any
                                                        resettlement impacts stemming from rehabilitation, the
                                                        PIU has updated and re-disclosed the Resettlement Policy
                                                        Framework (RPF) of the original project. The RPF
                                                        describes the principles and mitigation measure for
                                                        potential land acquisition related issues. Based on this
                                                        RPF, social screening will be undertaken and appropriate
                                                        mitigation measures will be proposed prior to invitation of
                                                        bids for the corresponding civil works.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes    The Project triggers the Bank's Safeguard Policy on
                         4.37                           Safety of Dams -OP4.37, because the project will divert
                                                        water from reservoirs formed by a number of existing



                                                         Page 5 of 13
                                                           upstream dams, the project areas will depend on the
                                                           storage and operation of these existing dams for their
                                                           supply of water and could not function if the dam failed;
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           furthermore, there are also a number of upstream dams
                                                           which provide flood control protection to the project
                                                           areas, the Bank funded irrigation system will rely on the
                                                           performance of these dams, failure of the these dams
                                                           could cause extensive damage to or failure of the
                                                           irrigation systems. Totally 5 dams may trigger the
                                                           OP4.37, namely Ashig Bayramli and Yeka-khana Dams
                                                           in Ismailli District, Nohrgishlag Dam in Gabala District,
                                                           Safikurd Dam in Goranboy District and Mingechevir Dam
                                                           in Yevlakh District. Based on the official documents
                                                           provided by the Borrower, these 5 dams are operational
                                                           safe.

                                                           The borrower will hire one or more independent Dam
                                                           Safety Experts to (i) inspect and evaluate the safety status
                                                           of the existing dams, their appurtenances and performance
                                                           history; (ii) review and evaluate the owner's operation and
                                                           maintenance procedures; and (iii) provide written reports
                                                           of findings and recommendations for any remedial work
                                                           or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the
                                                           existing dams to an acceptable standard of safety. During
                                                           project implementation, the Task Team will, together with
                                                           the independent Dam Safety Experts, monitor the safety
                                                           status, operation and maintenance procedures and
                                                           emergency preparedness of these dams, and supervise the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           remedial works if any, to ensure the project
                                                           implementation is in line with the Bank's Safeguard
                                                           Policy on Safety of Dams (OP4.37) .
                         Projects on International   Yes   The Samur, Kura, and Araz Rivers (other rivers to be
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50              determined during project preparation), which supply
                                                           most of the water to the irrigation systems to be
                                                           rehabilitated in the proposed project, are international
                                                           waterways that trigger this safeguard policy. However, the
                                                           proposed project is not expected to have any significant
                                                           impacts on the quantity or quality of water flowing
                                                           through these rivers or into the Caspian Sea for two
                                                           reasons. First, the project design is limited to the
                                                           rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes; no new
                                                           irrigation schemes or extensions of schemes will be
                                                           constructed. Second, the rehabilitation activities are
                                                           expected to have minimal or no impact on the quantity or
                                                           quality of water in (upstream or) downstream water
                                                           bodies. The irrigation infrastructure improvements will
                                                           not result in significant increases in either withdrawals



                                                            Page 6 of 13
                                                                      from or discharges to the international waterways. And,
                                                                      based on water quality monitoring conducted during the
                                                                      IDSMIP, which indicated no significant impacts from
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      irrigation drainage in receiving water bodies, the project is
                                                                      not expected to result in significant impacts on the quality
                                                                      of water in these waterways. (The proposed project will
                                                                      discontinue the water quality monitoring performed at
                                                                      sites under the IDSMIP but will include similar water
                                                                      quality monitoring at sites in the new raions in the
                                                                      northern region.) Therefore, the project is not expected to
                                                                      have any adverse effects on the rights of the other riparian
                                                                      states on the international waterways, so the Bank will
                                                                      seek a waiver, as it did with the IDSMIP, pursuant to
                                                                      paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50 for this safeguard policy.
                            Projects in Disputed       No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The AF will not support any new types of activities, and only those which are similar to the ones
                              of the original project. therefore, no new safeguard policies are triggered, and the safeguard
                              instruments developed for the original project remain valid for the purposes of the Additional
                              Financing. The original EA and EMMP has been updated by the PIU to accommodate the
                              additional coverage of about 55,000 ha.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Environmental Assessment Safeguard Policy: Component 2 (irrigation and drainage
                             rehabilitation) will involve environmental and social impacts triggering OP4.01. Because the
                             anticipated adverse impacts are neither significant nor irreversible, and can be prevented or
                             reduced through appropriate preventive actions or mitigation measures, the project has been
                             classified as environmental Category B, requiring partial environmental assessment.

                             The exact number and location of the specific rehabilitation sub-projects to be undertaken under
                             the project have yet to be determined. Therefore, the EA identifies generic impacts, both positive
                             and negative, for infrastructure rehabilitation in the project areas and specifies generic prevention
                             and mitigation measures for these impacts. Positive impacts include increased agricultural
                             productivity, improved management of water resources, increased irrigation system efficiency,
                             enhanced soil fertility, and reduced exposure to water-borne disease vectors. Many of these are
                             also adaptation measures for the impacts of climate change. Potential negative impacts are
                             construction-related, such as limited access, cutting of trees, improper waste management, and
                             improper disposal of sediments excavated from canals and drains. There are also potential impacts
                             on water quality from drainage discharge, on the quantity and quality of downstream river flows,
                             on biodiversity and natural habitats in the project areas, and increasing use of pesticides. These
                             potential adverse impacts will require attention, preventive action, and appropriate mitigation
                             measures in the planning, design, construction, operation, and maintenance phases of the on-farm
                             infrastructure rehabilitation component of the project. Specific impacts and preventive and


                                                                       Page 7 of 13
                         mitigation measures will be identified during project implementation through environmental
                         screening and review of sub-projects.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management Safeguard Policy: More generally, the recovery of the agricultural sector that is
                         currently taking place in Azerbaijan is likely to increase pesticide use. Furthermore, with access to
                         improved irrigation and drainage, it is likely that project beneficiaries will increase their use of
                         pesticides. The Bank's Agricultural Development and Credit Project (ADCP), with its training
                         courses and national information campaigns on pesticide application, provides awareness raising
                         and training on pesticide management and integrated pest management (IPM) for water users. In
                         addition, the project will develop its own training program on pesticide management and IPM
                         under Component 1.

                          Involuntary Resettlement Safeguard Policy: It is unlikely that the project (Component 2) will
                         involve land acquisition since all irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation is planned on Government
                         owned lands. However, there could be some temporary or permanent impacts in the form of loss
                         of economically viable trees along irrigation canals and drainage collectors, which may affect the
                         income of people deriving benefit from the trees. It is also proposed to construct four regional
                         support centers and about 200 WUA offices, which might require some land. Therefore, OP 4.12
                         is triggered. It is estimated that about 9,000 m2 (0.90 ha) of land will be needed for construction
                         of four (4) regional support centers and about 200 WUA offices. Most of these sites could be on
                         Government lands.

                          Safety of Dams Safeguard Policy: The project triggers OP4.37 because the project will divert
                         water from reservoirs formed by a number of existing upstream dams, and project areas will
                         depend on the storage and operation of these existing dams for their supply of water and could not
                         function if the dam failed. Furthermore, there are also a number of upstream dams which provide
                         flood control protection to the project areas, and the Bank funded irrigation system will rely on the
                         performance of these dams # failure of which could cause extensive damage to or failure of the
                         irrigation systems. A total of 5 dams trigger OP4.37, Ashig Bay ramli and Yeka-khana Dams in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ismailli District, Nohurgishlag Dam in Gabala District, Safikurd Dam in Goranboy District and
                         Mingechevir Dam in Yevlakh District. Based on official documents provided by the Borrower,
                         these 5 dams are deemed to be operationally safe.

                         International Waterways Safeguard Policy: The Samur, Kura, and Araz Rivers, which supply
                         most of the water to the irrigation systems to be rehabilitated under the project, as well as the
                         Caspian Sea into which these rivers flow, are all international waterways that trigger OP7.50. By
                         design, the proposed project, however, is not expected to have any significant impacts on the
                         quantity or quality of water flowing through these rivers or into the Caspian Sea. The project
                         design is limited to the rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes. There is no construction of
                         new irrigation schemes, nor any extension of existing schemes. Moreover, the rehabilitation
                         activities are expected to have minimal or no impact on the quantity or quality of water in
                         (upstream or) downstream water bodies. The irrigation infrastructure improvements will not result
                         in significant increases in either withdrawals from or discharges to the international waterways.
                         Based on water quality monitoring conducted during the IDSMIP, which indicated no significant
                         impacts from irrigation drainage in receiving water bodies, the project is not anticipated to result
                         in significant impacts on the quality of water in these waterways. The project will include water
                         quality monitoring at sites in the new raions. As the project is not expected to have any adverse
                         impacts on the rights of the other riparian states on the international waterways, the Bank has
                         issued a waiver pursuant to paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50 for this safeguard policy.

                                                                   Page 8 of 13
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The most significant potential long-term impacts in the project areas are likely to be from climate
Public Disclosure Copy




                           change. The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) identifies and discusses a number of
                           potential climate change related impacts, borrowing from Azerbaijan's Initial (1998) and Second
                           (2010) National Communications on Climate Change, which addresses potential impacts to water
                           resources, agriculture, forests, and the Caspian Sea. By design, the project incorporates a range of
                           #good practice# water management/ irrigation engineering measures that effectively serve as
                           climate change adaptation measures as well. These include good practices for improved water
                           resources management, engineering features to increase irrigation system efficiency, rehabilitation
                           of drainage systems to reduce water logging in irrigated areas, and melioration of salinized soils in
                           order to restore soil fertility. The project will also finance a study on climate change adaptation in
                           the water sector.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The EA considered a range of technological alternatives (e.g. lined canals and piped irrigation
                           systems) to the basic irrigation system design employed by the proposed project. The EA ended up
                           rejecting these alternatives for the following reasons. First, the EA concluded that the gains in
                           reducing water losses achieved by lining canals would be modest (because of the nature of the
                           soils in the bulk of the project areas) in comparison with the gains achieved by the project in
                           addressing existing operational inefficiencies. Second, the EA concluded that piped irrigation
                           systems are already in place in project areas where the topography allows gravity systems (i.e. the
                           mountainous raions), but the project sites in the flat Kura-Araz River basin, where the bulk of the
                           project areas are located, would have to depend on pumping and power-driven systems, which
                           remain inefficient and unreliable at this point in Azerbaijan. As far as possible, the Government
                           lands will be identified for construction of Regional Support and WUA offices to avoid impacts to
                           private lands. Only if suitable Government lands are not available, private lands will be acquired.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The Borrower, through AIOJSC has prepared an EA and an Environmental Management and
                           Monitoring Plan (EMMP) for the project in order to ensure: (i) that appropriate preventive actions
                           and mitigation measures will be taken during project implementation; and (ii) that environmental
                           monitoring will be performed during implementation in order to detect and address any adverse
                           project impacts. The EA prescribes a range of measures to address the potential adverse impacts
                           identified, including environmental management guidelines for project construction contractors,
                           good practices to prevent water pollution, and awareness raising/training in integrated pest
                           management to reduce risks from any increased use of pesticides. The EA also continues the
                           ecological monitoring programme of IDSMIP, including ground and surface water quality
                           monitoring at project sites, as well as sediment and soil sampling and analysis. Due to the fact that
                           the activities to be supported by the AF are similar to those of the original project, no new
                           environmental issues other than those already considered by the original project's EA and
                           EMMP are expected. Therefore, the original EA and EMMP remains valid for the purposes of the
                           AF and has been updated by the PIU to accommodate the additional project coverage of about
                           55,000 ha.

                           The AIOJSC demonstrated its capacity to ensure compliance with the Bank environmental
                           safeguard policies during implementation of IDSMIP. The project will continue to employ a full-


                                                                      Page 9 of 13
                          time environmental specialist who will oversee and monitor implementation of the EMMP,
                          including compliance with the pest management safeguard policy, during the life of the project.
                          During implementation of the IDSMIP, the environmental specialist maintained careful records of
Public Disclosure Copy




                          the environmental activities that took place at each project site (e.g. specific preventive actions
                          and/or mitigation measures recommended; site inspections performed before, during, and after
                          construction, etc.) and reported on the results of the ecological monitoring performed at project
                          rehabilitation sites and at the sensitive lakes and wetlands in the project area (e.g. water quantity
                          and quality, plant and wildlife surveys, etc.). These site records and monitoring reports, which
                          were examined during preparation of this project, will be incorporated into the project's overall
                          monitoring and evaluation programme. It is the Task Team#s assessment that AIOJSC is able to
                          continue ensuring compliance with the Bank's environmental safeguard policies, as well as handle
                          any questions or grievances that arise during implementation of the EMMP.

                           In terms of possible land acquisition - since the location of any potential new construction of
                          WUA offices are not known, the Borrower prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                          under the original project which describes the principles and mitigation measures for potential land
                          acquisition related issues. This RPF has been updated to reflect the additional works and
                          geographic scope under the Additional Financing. The RPF describes the process for identification
                          of impacts and describes the entitlements for different types of anticipated impacts and grievance
                          redress mechanisms. Based on the RPF, social screening will be undertaken and appropriate
                          mitigation measures will be proposed if required in the abbrevieated Resettlement Action Plans
                          (ARAPs) prior to invitation of bids for the corresponding civil works and the ARAPs will be
                          implemented to ensure that any affected people receive required compensation and assistance prior
                          to commencement of the corresponding civil works.

                             During the preparation of the project, it was agreed that the borrower will hire one or more
                           independent Dam Safety Experts to: (i) inspect and evaluate the safety status of the existing dams,
                           their appurtenances and performance history; (ii) review and evaluate the owner's operation and
                           maintenance procedures; and (iii) provide written reports of findings and recommendations for any
Public Disclosure Copy




                           remedial work or safety-related measures necessary to upgrade the existing dams to an acceptable
                           standard of safety. During project implementation, the Task Team will, together with the
                           independent Dam Safety Experts, monitor the safety status, operation and maintenance procedures
                           and emergency preparedness of these dams, and supervise the remedial works if any, to ensure the
                           project implementation is in line with the Bank's Safeguard Policy on Safety of Dams (OP4.37).
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders at the local level include the farmers in the project areas, the members of
                           the participating WUAs, and the water and irrigation management officials in the local offices of
                           AIOJSC. At the national level beneficiaries consist of the water and irrigation officials at
                           AIOJSC, relevant officials at the Ministry of Agriculture (MOA), Ministry of Environment and
                           Natural Resources (MENR), and Ministry of Health (MOF). The Borrower disclosed the draft
                           EIA and EMMP in early August 2010 and held public consultations in Baku and Zardab on
                           August 20 and 23, 2010, respectively. The consultations were widely attended by WUA members
                           from a large number of project raions, representatives from NGO, and government officials
                           including representatives from the AIOJSC, MOA, MENR, and MOH. As part of social screening
                           and preparation for any land acquisition, necessary consultations will be held with concerned
                           stakeholders. The updated EA and EMMP has been disclosed on the official web-site of the
                           implementing agency and in Bank's Infoshop.


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       16-Dec-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    28-Jan-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       24-Dec-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    26-Jan-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank
                           Date of submission to InfoShop
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]




                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pieter David Meerbach
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)                Date: 18-Jun-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 13 of 13
