                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA13350
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-May-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Afghanistan                        Project ID:    P146184
                            Project Name:      Higher Education Development Project (P146184)
                            Task Team          Harsha Aturupane
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          27-May-2015                        Estimated   29-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Tertiary education (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for the knowledge economy (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          50.00              Total Bank Financing: 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                       50.00
                              Total                                                                                       50.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase participation in, and improve the quality and
                           relevance of, higher education in Afghanistan.
                            3. Project Description
                           The HEDP will support the country’s NHESP II 2015-2020. The HEDP is organized under two
                           components: (a) a Higher Education Development Program component; and (b) a Program

                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         Operations and Technical Support component. These components are different in nature, but
                         complementary. Component one has been strategically designed to assist the implementation of
                         NHESP II. Component two will support the implementation of component one through program
Public Disclosure Copy




                         coordination, technical assistance, capacity building, monitoring and evaluation, and research and
                         communication. These activities will benefit both the MoHE and the individual universities.

                         Project Components

                         Component One: Higher Education Development Program (estimated cost US$ 40 million)

                         This component will support the implementation of the NHESP-II through a Results–Based
                         Financing (RBF) modality. Disbursements will be associated with specific results called
                         Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs). Financing will be provided against Eligible Expenditures
                         Programs (EEPs) selected from annual MoHE budgets, rather than against specific inputs. The
                         following key themes would be supported under the component.

                         Theme 1.1: Increasing Participation in Priority Degree Programs for Economic Development
                         The objective of this theme is to expand enrollment in degree programs that are of direct relevance
                         for future economic development. Special attention will be given to increase female participation in
                         priority degree programs, through initiatives such as: (a) providing scholarships for female students
                         from disadvantaged backgrounds to enroll in priority degree programs; (b) strengthening orientation,
                         counseling and support services for women in universities; (c) improving transportation services to
                         and from universities; and (d) developing on-line higher education courses to expand opportunities,
                         especially for women who are physically constrained for cultural reasons from attending universities.
                         The expected increase in student numbers will also require expansion of a variety of physical
                         facilities and equipment, such as lecture halls, tutorial rooms, ICT facilities and equipment, science
                         and medical laboratories and equipment, libraries and e-resources, residential facilities and water and
                         sanitation. The construction activities required to implement the NHESP-II would be funded through
                         the MoHE budget.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Theme 1.2: Modernizing and Enhancing the Quality of Teaching and Learning
                         The objective of this theme is to assist universities to introduce modern outcome-based education
                         (OBE) and student-centered learning (SCL) in line with current international trends in higher
                         education. The introduction of OBE and SCL will require new approaches to curriculum design and
                         delivery; innovative teaching methods and techniques; active and dynamic learning models;
                         increased use of higher education publications, and ICT and internet-based resources; and the
                         modernization of assessment systems, in universities. The Staff Development Centers (SDCs) of
                         universities will play an important role in the provision of continuous professional development for
                         university academics, management and technical staff, to introduce and establish OBE and SCL and
                         to use ICT, web-based content and digital resources, for teaching and learning. The degree programs
                         which are considered priorities for the country’s economic development will be the first set of
                         programs to which OBE and SCL will be introduced. Over time, OBE and SCL will be expanded to
                         other degree programs. A key element will be to strengthen the capacity of the Afghanistan Research
                         and Education Network (AfgREN) to operate a national system that connects campus networks to
                         each other and to other research and education networks globally.

                         Theme 1.3: Improving the Qualifications and Skills of University Staff Members
                         Under this theme the number of academic staff members who are qualified to at least Master’s
                         Degree level will be substantially increased. Special attention for support will be given to: (a)

                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         academic staff from degree programs identified as priorities for economic development; and (b)
                         female academics. Scholarships will target faculty staff of public universities and will be restricted to
                         full-time, regularly employed faculty staff. Cost effectiveness and the quality of Master’s degree
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programs will be considered when selecting universities for study. Cultural factors in Afghanistan
                         create a preference among many female academics to pursue their postgraduate studies in-country. In
                         such cases, blended formulae will be used where possible, to combine overseas and in-country study
                         in partnership with foreign universities. Scholarship awardees will be bonded by an obligation to
                         work in Afghan universities after graduation. It is expected that at least 300 scholarships will be
                         awarded over the project implementation period. The program will be organized in parallel with the
                         recruitment of new staff so that the absence of faculty staff pursuing full time study will not create an
                         excessive shortage of teachers. The development of the universities will also require the skills of
                         technical staff, such as laboratory and ICT technicians and librarians, to be upgraded. Under this
                         theme the MoHE will support the improvement of the quality of university technical staff through
                         suitable short-term skills upgrading programs, organized mainly through the SDCs.

                         Theme 1.4: Strengthening Governance, Quality Assurance and Accreditation
                         The objective of this theme is to promote substantive and procedural autonomy of universities, and to
                         develop the quality assurance and accreditation system. Increased substantive autonomy will
                         empower universities to take greater initiative and responsibility for the development of academic
                         programs, research activities and community services. Under procedural autonomy universities will
                         have greater administrative powers and responsibilities. A by-law on financial autonomy has been
                         approved by the cabinet. This enables universities, in principle, to generate and retain revenues from
                         postgraduate degrees, research and consulting activities, and extension courses, to be used for
                         university development. The development of the procedures and systems to implement this by-law,
                         including training and capacity building of university leadership and management, and fiduciary
                         staff, is an important part of this theme. The exercise of substantive autonomy would initially be pilot
                         tested in about two-four universities and rolled out over time.

                         For universities to exercise autonomy and be accountable, a clear long term vision must be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         developed. To that end, universities will prepare and implement strategic institutional development
                         plans (SPs) aimed at progressively increasing the quality and relevance of their degree programs,
                         research outputs and community services, and utilizing feedback from external and internal quality
                         assurance reviews. SPs will have to be consistent with the NHESP-II and present a realistic and
                         sustainable financial framework. In parallel, universities will also develop Annual Progress Reports
                         (APRs) which will monitor and report progress towards achieving SP targets, including remedial
                         measures in case of deviations from the SP. Universities’ institutional development will be
                         strengthened through a Mentors Program. Mentors would be drawn from among senior academics
                         from foreign and Afghan universities who will support institutional development and the
                         achievement of the goals and targets set in university development plans. Mentors will interact
                         closely with the senior management of universities through regular visits.

                         Under this theme, quality assurance and accreditation (QAA) will be expanded and strengthened to
                         reflect international standards of rigor and utilization. At the national level, the Afghanistan Quality
                         Assurance and Accreditation Directorate (QAAD) in the MoHE will be developed, including through
                         membership of an international accreditation network such as the Asia Pacific Quality Assurance
                         Network (APQN). This will help MoHE to benefit from international good practice. The QAAD
                         would develop a cadre of QA reviewers trained to incorporate modern QA protocols and guidelines,
                         and conduct a fresh cycle of external quality assurance for public universities and private HEIs. The
                         capacity of the QAAD would also be enhanced to enable a clear, transparent and objective process

                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                         for the licensing, quality assurance and accreditation of private HEIs. This is an urgent necessity due
                         to the rapid growth of private HEIs of very variable quality.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A comprehensive Internal Quality Assurance System will also be developed in public universities.
                         This would involve: (a) setting up Internal Quality Assurance Units (IQAUs) in universities which
                         lack such units; (b) developing IQAUs in universities which have embryonic units; (c) assisting
                         universities to conceptualize, plan and conduct institutional self-assessments; (d) incorporate findings
                         from QA reviews into the design and implementation of university institutional development plans;
                         and (e) establish a process of continuous quality improvement of teaching and learning in
                         universities. The IQAUs will play a key role in assisting the academics to assess and develop the
                         quality of the novel OBE and SCL, and internet-based, teaching and learning methodologies.

                         Theme 5: Stimulating Development Oriented Research
                         The objective of this theme is to develop a research culture in universities. The focus will be on
                         applied, development oriented research projects, mainly from the priority disciplines. However,
                         research projects from other disciplines, if clearly development oriented, will also be eligible for
                         resources. Both group research projects and individual research will be supported. The group projects
                         could include research activities by teams drawn from a single university, or teams drawn from more
                         than one university. Collaboration on research projects with overseas researchers would also be
                         encouraged. The Kabul based universities would be expected to undertake research projects focused
                         on national development. The universities in the provincial towns could also undertake national
                         research, but would also act as research hubs for the development of their provinces. The research
                         culture to be developed will be results-focused and based on competition. This is consistent with the
                         principle that research activities are more productive if they are based on incentives and demand,
                         rather than supply-driven.

                         Component Two: Program Operations and Technical Support (Total US$ 10 million)

                         This component aims to strengthen the capacity of MoHE and universities to implement the reforms
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of the NHESP-II. Support under this component will cover coordination, capacity building, pilot
                         initiatives of innovations, monitoring and evaluation, research and communication. The technical
                         assistance and capacity building activities of this component will assist the MoHE to implement the
                         development initiatives of the NHESP-II. Policy studies could include beneficiary satisfaction
                         surveys of staff and students of institutions and programs supported by HEDP, as well as tracer
                         studies of graduates to analyze their job search and labor market experience. Communication would
                         enable higher education authorities to disseminate development initiatives to political authorities,
                         policy makers, academics, students, and the general public. The component would also help MoHE
                         to support pilots and innovative approaches such as the orientation of the universities in provincial
                         towns to support the economic development of their provinces. This component will also finance
                         incremental operating costs for an Operations and Monitoring Support Team (OMST) in the MoHE.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented throughout Afghanistan at existing higher education facilities, and
                         possibly at new locations if so required. The project activities may include renovation of existing
                         buildings and construction of new buildings such as university lecture halls, ICT centers,
                         laboratories, libraries, dormitories, and water, sanitation, residential and transportation facilities. The
                         physical terrain across much of the country is characterized by mountainous areas and rolling hills,
                         severely cold winters that leave mountain tops snowcapped and additional risks to people and


                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                           infrastructure from soil erosion, landslides and other natural disasters. These factors will pose
                           additional challenges at some locations that would need to be considered and addressed.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Abdul Mohammad Durani (GSURR)
                           Marzia Meena Sultan Ahmad (GSURB)
                           Mohammad Arif Rasuli (GENDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           No             No physical cultural resources will be impacted as in the
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       case of new facilities, the expansion of infrastructure is
                                                                       expected to take place on land already owned by MoHE
                                                                       and public universities. The ESMF contains Chance Find
                                                                       Procedures based on applicable Afghan law, to guide any
                                                                       chance finds during implementation.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             The project is of national scope, with special attention to
                            BP 4.10                                    inclusion of women. No communities identified as
                                                                       Indigenous People will be impacted
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               The ESMF comprises a Resettlement Policy Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12                                 (RPF) that clarifies resettlement principles, including the
                                                                       definition of “project affected peoples” (i.e. eligibility),
                                                                       compensation matrix, organizational arrangements,
                                                                       consultations and design criteria to be applied to
                                                                       subprojects in the event of sub-projects which require
                                                                       land acquisition.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Since project activities comprise renovation of existing buildings, any adverse environmental and


                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                           social impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific. The MoHE
                           has conducted an environmental assessment and has prepared a sectoral environment and social
                           management framework (ESMF) to address potentially negative environmental and/or social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Given the nature of the activities and their potential adverse impacts that will be manageable at an
                           acceptable level, no long-term impact due to project activities is foreseen.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           N/A.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The MoHE has developed an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                           comprising guidelines and procedures for managing and mitigating potential negative impact. The
                           MoHE has produced the ESMF as applicable also to activities funded under the government
                           budget. The ESMF comprises a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that clarifies resettlement
                           principles, including the definition of “project affected peoples” (i.e. eligibility), compensation
                           matrix, organizational arrangements, consultations and design criteria to be applied to subprojects
                           in the event of sub-projects which require land acquisition. The RPF is customizing an existing
                           RPF applied in a number of ministries, the basic principles of which were approved by an inter-
                           ministerial committee in December 2010. The MoHE acquired some experience in handling
                           safeguards issues under the SHEP project and is expected to be able to manage the implementation
                           of the ESMF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During preparation consultations have been held with a range of sectoral stakeholders and their
Public Disclosure Copy




                           comments taken into account. The MoHE disclosed the ESMF locally in English and local
                           languages (Dari and Pushto) and forwarded it to the Bank for disclosure on InfoShop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        06-May-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12-May-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Afghanistan                                                        06-May-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        06-May-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     12-May-2015




                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Afghanistan                                                      06-May-2015
                              Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Harsha Aturupane



                                                                        Page 7 of 8
                         Approved By
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Yoko Nagashima (PMGR)   Date: 13-May-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 8 of 8
