INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12093
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Liberia                    Project ID:   P154114
Project Name:   Liberia Forest Sector Project (P154114)
Task Team       Paola Agostini,Neeta Hooda
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Nov-2015                Estimated     29-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENO7                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Forestry (80%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Other environment and natural
resources management (30%), Climate change (20%), Biodi versity (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      37.50            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
BioCarbon Technical Assistance Trust Fund                       37.50
Total                                                           37.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
Improved management of and increased benefit-sharing in targeted forest landscapes. (Targeted
forest landscapes will be defined during preparation)
C. Project Description
Under the leadership of FDA, in coordination with the Ministry of Agriculture, the Environment
Protection Agency, the Land Commission and the Ministry of Lands, Mines and Energy, the project


﻿will finance technical assistance, works, goods, workshops, training, services, and operational costs
to support the implementation of the REDD+ strategy; focusing on investments for early
implementation of strategic land use options in selected sites. The project will also support the
development of institutional capacities, which will strengthen the enabling environment for effective
O
decentralized implementation of forest sector management, and particularly the REDD+ Strategy,
which is developed currently through FCPF, with the engagement of local communities. As part of
the enabling environment, the proposed project will also include the design of a Measurement,
Reporting and Verification (MRV) system that will allow for credible measurement, reporting and
verification of REDD+ activities.
The project will include investments for on-the-ground activities as well as capacity building for the
stakeholders and communities engaged directly in the implementation of the selected options. Both
investments and capacity building strategies will target both women and men supporting their
engagement in forest management, exploring and understanding gender-specific roles, needs and
dynamics. The early implementation of results-based activities will provide lessons to enrich the
national strategy enabling the people of Liberia to make informed decisions about the best land use
options for the country. The early implementation of the land use options in target areas will build on
the analysis that will be conducted with FCPF's support including the Strategic Environmental and
Social Assessment (SESA) and draft Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF).
The activities to be conducted by the project will be thus phased so that studies, consultations and
sources of specific land conflicts and proposed resolutions will be conducted before initiating on-the-
ground activities related to community, commercial, conservation and carbon use of forests.
The analysis of REDD+ options will involve the participation of private and public representatives of
the mining, agriculture, energy and forest sectors in the discussions around land allocation, especially
considering the overlap in proposed concessions between forest, agriculture, mining, and protected
areas.
The project is developed and will be implemented through multi-stakeholder processes. The draft
project concept note has been reviewed by various stakeholders and has integrated their comments.
Detailed preparation and implementation of the project will be coordinated with ongoing activities,
including those related to REDD+ that have been supported by other development partners such as
FLEGT/VPA, USAID, GIZ, LEITI, KfW, SDI, FERN, CI, etc.
Specifically, the project will support the following components (see Annex 3 for more details by
subcomponent and main activities).
* Component 1. Strengthened Regulatory and Institutional Arrangements for Implementation of
REDD+ (US$10 million)
* Component 2. Strengthened Management of Targeted Forest Landscapes (US$31 million)
* Component 3. Forest Monitoring Information System(US$4 million)
* Component 4. Project Monitoring and Management (US$5 million)
Component 1. Strengthened Regulatory and Institutional Arrangements for Implementation of REDD
+ (US$10 million)
This component will finance technical assistance, works, goods, workshops, and operational costs to
support strengthening capacity in institutions at national and subnational levels (public, private,


﻿CSOs) for improved management of forest landscapes and to complete the process of legal reform
and enforcement. The capacity building activities will be conducted for the duration of the project for
key stakeholders (central and decentralized public agencies, private sector, CSOs and communities)
to deliver on the legal/regulatory and institutional governance components of the project, and to
O
develop forest information systems and mapping, M&E, outreach and communications activities,
sound financial management and fiduciary processes, with particular support for benefit sharing/
social agreements, gender equality and community forest management. The support to legal reform
and enforcement to guarantee success of REDD+ strategy implementation will focus on the
Community Rights Law (CRL 2015- to be approved by Parliament) and its regulations; and the
harmonization of the Forest Law (2006) and the Community Forestry Law (2009) and their
regulations.
Component 2. Strengthened Management of Targeted Forest Landscapes (US$31 million)
First, this component will finance technical assistance, works, goods, workshops, and operational
costs for land use planning, conservation, community forestry, sustainable agriculture and forests
management. The Land use planning activities will be implemented in close relation with the Land
Administration Project and will consider different economic sectors (ie. agriculture, mining, etc.) that
have an impact on the forest sector. The Land Commission will be engaged in the implementation of
this component.
Second, based on the proposed land use management and planning, the component will support the
strengthening and management of protected areas and community forests areas in targeted forest
landscapes. Third, it will support the development of sustainable public-private partnerships to
strengthen sustainable agriculture development, forest-based enterprises, and biodiversity offset from
mining. For protected areas, the component will contribute to the enlargement, performance and
functioning of Liberia's protected area network, detailing adequate resources necessary to safeguard
existing and future protected areas. For community forestry, the component will support forest
communities and their organizations to manage forests using sound sustainability principles by
strengthening community governance structures and institutions, developing internal regulation and
responsibilities for improving the use of their common pool resource, identifying capacities, needs
and development alternatives to improve the productive potential of their natural resources,
developing and formalizing community enterprises and promoting third party certification of
a       Sustainable Forest Management (SFM) using international standards, as a best practice tool for sound
forest. The component will finance alternative models of agriculture investment including
identification of land areas/commodities that are suitable for deforestation-free supply chain
investments based on agroforestry systems and will assist with the implementation of the roadmap
for biodiversity offsets from mining. The component will also support the establishment of a public-
private coalition with micro-small-medium enterprises (MSMEs) committed to zero deforestation
policies. Finally, the project will support investments for small and medium scale initiatives
involving specific products such as palm oil, cocoa, paper, pulp, wood and climate smart rice,
charcoal, wood processing, etc.
Component 3. Forest Monitoring Information System(US$4 million)
The component will finance technical assistance, works, goods, workshops, and operational costs for
Measurement, Reporting and Verification (MRV) systems; Reference Level Development; and
Development of Safeguards Information System (SIS). The initial MRV and SIS are in the process of


﻿establishment under Phase I with FCPF, and this component will support their implementation and
regular update. The MRV system will need to comply with UNFCCC guidelines for operational data
collection, synthesis, analysis, and reporting, allowing for the monitoring, estimation, and accounting
of emissions and removals of carbon in comparison to the projected reference scenario. The SIS will
O
U       cover all measures proposed in the REDD+ Strategy and relevant activities, in accordance with the
Warsaw Framework on REDD+ and international best practice, including the World Bank safeguard
policies. Independent civil society forest monitors who operate under the auspices of an NGO
coalition are an important potential actor in the SIS, and its capacity will be developed through the
REDD+ technical working group.
Component 4. Project Monitoring and Management (US$5 million)
This component will finance technical assistance, works, goods, workshops, and operational costs for
a Project Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) system to report on the expected project's results
(disaggregating by gender where appropriate) and systematizing the project's lessons learned. The
project level M&E will be integrated into Liberia's M&E Framework for the national REDD+
readiness process that has been designed to track readiness progress and be able to report
comprehensively at national and international level including to the different donors and
implementing partners supporting Liberia's REDD+ process. Support will also be provided for
FDA's day-to-day project implementation and management including, procurement, financial
management, environmental and social safeguards, preparation of annual work plans and
organization of audit reports. The component will provide support for office operating costs for the
existing FDA REDD+ Implementing Unit, the NCCSC, EPA and county level functionaries relevant
to the project, as well as the hiring of technical specialists (consultants) that will support the civil
servants' work at the FDA's departments/units involved in REDD+. Capacity building of existing
institutions will be conducted in close collaboration with the VPA Support Unit (VPA SU).
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project locations are not yet known and will be selected based on the outcome of the analysis of the
Forest Carbon Partnership Facility (FCPF), Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF), and the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA). The process of preparing
these documents and selecting project intervention sites will involve extensive stakeholder
consultations. The selected project sites will comprise protected forest areas, community forests, and
commercial forest areas. Because the project locations are not yet known, an ESMF is under
preparation and will be disclosed in-country and in the Bank's InfoShop (public information center)
prior to appraisal. The SESA will be completed during Project Year 1.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The World Bank has been engaged with the forest sector in Liberia for the past 10 years. Over this
period there has been progressive capacity building for the implementation of Bank Safeguard
Policies as well as national environmental standards. The managers and some staff of Liberia's
Forest Development Authority (FDA) and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) are broadly
familiar with the Bank's environmental and social safeguards requirements. Nonetheless, both of
these agencies will require further strengthening to effectively address the environmental and social
safeguards-related issues that could arise under this project. Accordingly, the project would support
additional safeguards capacity building for FDA, EPA, and other relevant national- and local-level


﻿Liberian institutions as needed, including the contracting of specialized environmental and social
staff where appropriate.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Demba Balde (GSURR)
George Campos Ledec (GENDR)
O
Gloria Malia Mahama (GSURR)
Nicholas Meitiaki Soikan (GCCFL)
Robert A. Robelus (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Although the project would be implemented within
OP/BP 4.01                               environmentally and socially sensitive areas
(Liberian forests), project interventions are designed
to be environmentally very positive overall. None of
the planned project investments or activities are
expected to generate significant adverse
environmental impacts.
Liberia's forests comprise the world's largest
remaining area of the biologically rich and unique
Upper Guinean Rainforest ecosystem. These forests
face numerous threats and challenges, including land
use conflicts; uncertain land and forest ownership;
overlapping concessions for mining and other non-
forest land uses; the spread of large-scale
commercial agriculture (particularly oil palm);
smallholder agricultural expansion; illegal logging
and fuel-wood harvesting; and widespread bush-meat
hunting that is depleting the wildlife in many areas.
This project will therefore be situated in a context
that poses many environmental and social challenges
and risks. However, the project interventions
themselves will be designed to be beneficial and
sustainable from an environmental and social
standpoint.
The proposed project is expected to have
environmental and social impacts that are highly
positive overall. Consistent with the intent and
approach of the REDD+ program, this project seeks
to reduce deforestation and forest degradation within
Liberia. It would do this by promoting improved
planning of forests and adjacent landscapes, long-
term conservation of protected forest areas, and
sustainable management of community forests and


﻿other wooded landscapes. The project would finance
a variety of planning, capacity building, and on-the-
ground interventions to promote the conservation and
sustainable use of Liberian forests. The project
would support sustainable forest management and
environmentally compatible agricultural activities
that are intended to reduce the ongoing pressures for
deforestation and forest degradation. It would not
finance any large-scale civil works (such as roads)
that could be environmentally problematic.
From a social standpoint, the project is intended to
benefit forest-based communities by strengthening
their capacity to manage designated Community
Forests, promoting improved benefits-sharing from
different types of forest-based activities, and
supporting the development of more sustainable
forest-based livelihoods.
This would be a nationwide project, with specific
areas for on-the-ground interventions not yet
definitively identified. Accordingly, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) will be prepared and publicly disclosed (in-
country at publicly accessible locations and through
the Bank's InfoShop) prior to appraisal. There is also
a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA) of Liberia's forested areas under preparation,
with completion expected no later than Year 1 of
project implementation. The SESA is expected to
provide detailed information that will facilitate land
use planning and other project-supported activities.
Project implementation will also include the
establishment of a Safeguards Information System
(SIS), which will monitor compliance with the World
Bank Safeguard Policies (among other criteria).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          The project would affect natural habitats-native
forests and associated ecosystems-albeit in a
positive manner. It is designed to reduce ongoing
patterns of loss and degradation of natural habitats,
notably forests.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         The project is intended to bring about positive
changes in the protection, management, and
sustainable utilization of Liberian forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD         Limited pest management activities might be needed
to protect forest tree nurseries. This will be addressed
in the ESMF.


﻿Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          Liberians living around forested areas recognize
OP/BP 4.11                                various physical cultural resources, including sacred
forest areas as well as individual sacred trees and
bushes. The ESMF will provide criteria and
procedures to ensure the appropriate treatment of
physical cultural resources; this will include Chance
Finds Procedures for (generally small-scale) civil
works contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           There are no communities in Liberia who meet the
4.10                                      specific Indigenous Peoples criteria of OP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         Expansion of Liberia's protected areas network is
BP 4.12                                   likely to involve new restrictions of access to natural
resources (such as wood or bush-meat harvest) in
specific areas. In accordance with OP 4.12, a Process
Framework (PF) will be prepared to avoid or
minimize any adverse impacts upon local livelihoods
and to support the development of alternative
livelihoods as needed.
Owing to the low human population densities around
Liberia's proposed protected areas, it will not be
necessary to relocate villages or households in order
to establish new protected areas. The creation of new
protected areas would deal with established, pre-
existing human settlements through boundary
adjustments and internal park zoning, rather than by
requiring their relocation. This was also the approach
used in the previous World Bank-supported EXPAN
Project in Liberia. Accordingly, a Resettlement
Policy Framework or Resettlement Action Plan will
not be needed for this new project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           There are no dams involved in the project.
Projects on International    No           The project would not take water from, or otherwise
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      affect, international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         There are no disputed areas involved in the project as
BP 7.60                                   defined in OP 7.60.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Sep-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Preparation of the ESMF and SESA is underway. The required ESMF will be completed and
publicly disclosed prior to project appraisal. The SESA will be completed no later than Year 1 of
project implementation, in order to guide certain project activities. Preparation of the PF will
begin shortly and the PF will be completed and publicly disclosed before project appraisal.
8 IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paola Agostini,Neeta Hooda
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:  Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)              Date: 03-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/    Name: Timothy H. Brown (PMGR)               Date: 07-Dec-2015
Manager:


