INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA13353
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ethiopia                    Project ID:  P154680
Parent        P096323
Project ID:
Project Name: Tana & Beles Integrated Water Resources Development Additional Finance
(P154680)
Parent Project Tana & Beles Integrated Water Resources Development (P096323)
Name:
Task Team       John Bryant Collier,Catherine Signe Tovey
Leader(s):
Estimated       08-Jun-2015                 Estimated    21-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Flood protection (40%), Forestry (30%), Public administration- Agriculture,
fishing and forestry (15%), General transportation secto r (10%), Water supply
(5%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (50%), Rural services and infrastructure (25%),
Participation and civic engagement (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.10             Total Bank Financing:     5.10
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                   5.10
Total                                                                         5.10
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 8


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
Develop enabling institutions and investments for integrated planning, management and
development in the Tana and Beles Sub-basins to accelerate sustainable growth.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
Develop enabling institutions and investments for integrated planning, management and
development in the Tana and Beles Sub-basins.
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
This ISDS has been updated for the Additional Financing and sixth restructuring of the Tana & Beles
Integrated Water Resources Development Project. There are no changes to the safeguards regime for
the project.
During original project design, a two-phased approach was proposed with the TBIWRDP-I, however,
planning for a second phase, which would have involved preparation of larger scale investments, was
discontinued at mid-term. The final project focused on:
- Setting up an institutional framework for integrated water resources planning and management in
the Tana-Beles integrated sub-basin.
- Initiating activities in key areas of natural resource management such as watershed and flood
management (flood preparedness and early warning of floods) in Tana sub-basin.
- Promoting small scale irrigation.
The project implementation has been guided by the following principles: (i) interventions should be
bottom-up and demand driven based on local capacity; (ii) there should be strong private/public
partnerships; (iii) planning should be participatory and development should be local; and (iv) there
should be a strong element of capacity building. A strong stakeholder consultation process was
conducted during project preparation (the conceptual framework itself is a product of a series of
stakeholder consultation at federal and regional levels) and it has been followed up with ongoing
consultation during project implementation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The physical investments undertaken by this project are concentrated in the Tana basin. This
includes physical investments in the Lake Tana catchment area for small-scale watershed
management and small-scale community-level flood management interventions. The institutional
capacity building also includes national and regional level institution strengthening.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENDR)
Page 2 of 8


﻿Desta Solomon (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          TTBIWRDP is primarily designed to strengthen
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                institutional capacity supported by small-scale
investments in watershed and flood management. At
design, these were not expected to have significant
adverse environmental or social development impacts and
this has proven to be the case during implementation. The
watershed and flood management sub-projects are nearly
complete and have been carried out in accordance with
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) prepared for the project. The physical
investments have been small-scale, community-driven
activities that were each screened in accordance with the
ESMF and site specific ESMP prepared for each
intervention. Outcomes, which have had significantly
positive impacts on the local environment, have been well
documented. As expected, the ESMF has helped the
project to maximize social and environmental
opportunities and effectively manage environmental and
social development risks, including appropriate
consultation with various stakeholders during the scoping
and draft recommendation stages.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           Actual project activities are implemented on degraded
4.04                                 watershed and have not affected natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Project activities are implemented on degraded
watersheds and involve neither natural nor plantation
forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          This policy was triggered for the original project due to
those activities targeted to improve the livelihood of
communities by investing on small-scale irrigation and
such investment can encourage the use of agrochemicals
(e.g. insecticides and herbicides). The project is
constructing 13 small-scale irrigation schemes out of
which 6 have been completed and started to operate. As
mandated in the ESMF, preparation of each of the small-
scale irrigation schemes has included a site specific
ESMP that includes an integrated pest management plans.
In the coming 6 months, the project will promote
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and safe utilization of
pesticides by the targeted communities.
Physical Cultural       No           The project activities did not have impacts on physical
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 cultural property. Since the project will continue to
implement activities to rehabilitate degraded watersheds,
impacts on physical cultural resources are not anticipated.
Page 3 of 8


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         This policy is considered triggered due to potential land
OP/BP 4.12                           acquisition for small-scale watershed and flood-
management investments. A Resettlement Policy
Framework was prepared and is being applied to the
small-scale investments.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Although small-scale irrigation are constructed, they do
4.37                                 not require special procedures to follow, as provided in
the Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37. The small scale irrigation
were mainly diversion of water from rivers and do not
involve construction of dams. Thus, the project does not
trigger the policy.
Projects on International  Yes       The physical activities -watershed development and flood
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 management - have been agreed by the Eastern Nile
Council of Ministers (ENCOM) as part of the Eastern
Nile Strategic Action Plan (ENSAP) of the Nile Basin
Initiative.
Projects in Disputed    No           The policy is not triggered, as the project will not be
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     implemented in disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Additional Finance for TBIWRDP is an EA Category "B" project given that the project is not
expected to have adverse impacts that are large, unprecedented or sensitive. The nature of the
projec activities focus on institutional development, and watershed and flood management
investments. Potential impacts are all manageable and are being addressed within the project.
The safeguards policy concerns vary by project component and none are expected to cause any
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse impacts:
* Component A (Sub-basin Planning and Management): During the development of sub-basin
development and management plans, it will be important to balance economic, environmental and
social factors with a good mix of analysis and stakeholder consultation to achieve sustainable
development. Institutional development activities will include relevant activities linked to capacity
building for environment and social issues and ensure that institutions responsible for managing
development around Lake Tana have the necessary structures, skills and procedures in place to
ensure that development is done in an environmentally and socially sustainable manner.
* Component B (Natural Resources Management in Tana Sub-basin): Most of the
interventions are environmentally beneficial or are likely to have insignificant adverse impacts.
Nonetheless, some interventions, especially those linked to watershed management and site
selection of structures, and small scale irrigation require adequate technical (environmental,
gabion construction) knowledge to ensure they achieve their intended objectives and meet the
Page 4 of 8


﻿requirements of the project's ESMF as required under OP 4.01. Some activities may also involve
limited concerns for involuntary resettlement resulting from land acquisition or restrictions on
access to resources that are not wholly communal or which affect specific households more than
others. There are no indigenous peoples in the project area. Project design includes necessary
criteria and procedures to ensure that specific needs of vulnerable groups are identified and
addressed.
* Component C (Growth-Oriented Investment Preparation): Component C was canceled in
the third restructuring.
* Component D (Project Management): The project monitoring needs to include appropriate
environmental and social indicators.
The project triggers the OP 7.50 on international waters. The physical activities -watershed
development and flood management - have been agreed by the Eastern Nile Council of Ministers
(ENCOM) as part of the Eastern Nile Strategic Action Plan (ENSAP) of the Nile Basin Initiative.
The GoE formally notified the NBI Council of Ministers through the Eastern Nile Technical
Regional Office (ENTRO) regarding the TBIWRDP.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are not expected to be significant adverse impacts due to project-related activities in the
project area. However, there are a number of activities that are not related to the project but that
have taken place over the life of the project in the Tana and Beles sub-basins that are of
environmental and social concern - including a Tana-Beles Hydropower diversion tunnel
(completed), flow regulation weirs on rivers tributary to Lake Tana, and the development of
intensive irrigated agriculture around the lake (on-going) as well as the potential for unplanned
fisheries development, and urban development without adequate waste water treatment. The
development of sub-basin development and management plans is focused on shaping basin
developments to carefully consider environmental, social, and economic aspects to ensure that
proposed investments are sustainable and appropriate instruments are developed for effective Lake
regulation. The environment and social instruments also ensure that all activities are undertaken
using environmentally sound techniques and to benefit a broad range of stakeholders.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project has sought to focus project physical investments (Component B) on sustainable natural
resource management - specifically on watershed management and on community-based flood
management which are intended to maximize the environmental and social benefits of the project
while minimizing any adverse impacts. The f Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), Pest
Management Plans (PMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) prepared for
Component B sub-projects each considered alternatives to avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
No alternatives to the Additional Finance were proposed.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An ESMF that included a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared for TBIWRDP
(integrating environmental and social assessments and frameworks developed as part of the
preparation of the physical interventions - watershed development and flood management). As
Page 5 of 8


﻿needed, they prescribe the preparation of Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), Pest
Management Plans (PMPs) and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) for Component B subprojects
by the responsible regional bureau. Gabions/ check dams for gully reclamation and flood
management works will be designed by qualified engineers. The ESMF also mandates including
environmental and social issues in the development of the Tana and Beles Sub-basin Integrated
Water Resource Development Plan during project implementation (Component A).
The borrower has limited capacity to implement safeguard policies, though the regional
environment bureau (EPLAUA) has staff trained and experienced in the relevant disciplines and
procedures. As described in the ESMF and RPF, TBIWRDP has provided training and capacity
building to support implementation of the safeguards instruments, especially for Components B.
On Component A, TBIWRDP is providing long-term technical assistance to support the plan
development process, in particular its environmental and social aspects.
The ESMF/RPF documents were disclosed in the Bank and in the country on February 8, 2008.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Preparation of the sub-basin plans in Component A continues to be a highly consultative process
on all dimensions of the plan, including environmental and social issues. This process will include
government and private stakeholders at the national, regional and local levels. The development of
sub-projects in Component B will also involve consultations with local people during sub-project
planning, design and implementation, including the safeguards aspects. The social analysis
completed for the flood and watershed activities involved participatory methods and ensure that
project design takes into account the different needs of community sub-groups. M&E will also be
done through beneficiary participation to ensure adequate consultation for future investment. The
safeguards instruments have been developed through consultation and have been disclosed as
required.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Feb-2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                           08-Feb-2008
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Ethiopia                                                 08-Feb-2008
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Feb-2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                           08-Feb-2008
"In country" Disclosure
Ethiopia                                                 08-Feb-2008
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Page 6 of 8


﻿Date of receipt by the Bank                                08-Feb-2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                             08-Feb-2008
"In country" Disclosure
Ethiopia                                                   08-Feb-2008
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [X] No [     ]  NA [    ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Page 7 of 8


﻿All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: John Bryant Collier,Catherine Signe Tovey
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 05-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)         Date: 05-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


