INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12306
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Nov-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Mozambique                 Project ID:   P154513
Project Name:    Aquaculture and Climate Change Project (AquaCC) (P154513)
Task Team        Xavier F. P. Vincent,Benjamin Garnaud
Leader(s):
Estimated                                   Estimated     30-Sep-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENO7                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):        Other environment and natural resources management (60%), Climate change
(20%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.05             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
Africa Climate Change Program                                     5.05
Total                                                             5.05
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective (PDO) is to pilot an inclusive out-grower scheme in aquaculture
in selected locations and increase fish production and value addition
C. Project Description
The project will assist the Government of Mozambique in developing and piloting a sustainable,
economically-viable aquaculture model linking small, medium and industrial production levels on a


﻿same site (aquaparque). This innovative model will involve the private sector in a simple, pilot but
viable aquaculture scheme, and aim at building social, economic and environmental resilience. The
approach would be to link small- and medium-scale producers to private seafood firms through an
out-grower scheme monitored by the Government. Similar schemes exist in the agriculture sector,
O
U       but are nascent in aquaculture and inexistent in Mozambique. Their development is a priority for the
Government. The project would take place in Inhassunge, near Quelimane, and would be
implemented along three major components:
Component 1: Implementation of the aquaculture model
The first component would support the implementation of the aquaculture contract farming system
(aquaparque) in Inhassunge. It would include the following sub-components:
(1.1)  Design and implementation of the legal arrangements between the private companies, the
government and the farmers.
(1.2)  Construction of the Aquaparque (aquaculture ponds and supporting infrastructure units).
(1.3)  Support to the launch of the production.
Component 2: Development of the value-chain
The second component would support the development of the related value-chains in order to
maximize the economic benefit extracted from the aquaculture model. It would include the following
sub-components:
(2.1)  Development of a socially responsible business model (including marketing, quality
certification and promotion of business development along the value chain / alternative livelihoods).
(2.2)  Strengthening of the institutional capacity of the public sector (replication of best practices
and lessons learned in future provincial plans and strategies, creation of linkages with universities
and private companies).
(2.3)  Facilitate access to finance for the farmers.
(2.4)  Launch of an economic monitoring program.
(2.5)  Development of research programs in collaboration with the local university.
Component 3: Project management
The third component would support project coordination and implementation, including monitoring
and evaluation. It will operate through a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) hosted by the MIMAIP
and shared with the SWIOFishI project.
Financing. The project will be financed through a C4.24 million grant from the Nordic Development
Fund (NDF) Africa Climate Change Program, of which C1.1 million would be devoted to the
preparation of the project in order to establish the legal, institutional, technical and economic
framework to design the investment and ensure its feasibility. The balance (C3.14 million), would be
used to build and operate the aquaculture facility and develop the related value-chains. The current
financing secured with the Nordic Development Fund will not cover the needs expressed by the
Government of Mozambique and additional funds will be sought during project preparation. The
Government of Mozambique expressed interest in accessing funds from the Japan Social
Development Fund (JSDF) to finance activities related to value-chain development and capacity-
building of small operators. It also expressed interest in seeking financing from the Global
Environment Facility (GEF), potentially through its Least Developed Countries Fund (LDCF), to
finance activities related to reducing the vulnerability and enhancing the resilience of the investment,
the producers and the environment.


﻿D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The new aquaculture investment will take place in Inhassunge, Zambezia Province (Mozambique),
near the banks of the Bons Sinais River, close to the town of Quelimane and adjacent to an existing
commercial aquaculture facility. The total area that would be devoted to new aquaculture ponds and
associated facilities encompasses about 440 hectares, of which approximately 70 hectares would first
developed under this project. The project site had previously been devoted to salt production. It
currently comprises mostly dry mudflats and short saline grassland (pradaria pantanosa salgada) that
occurs widely in the area. The proposed new aquaculture facility (Aquaparque) is located close to
acacia savanna vegetation, along with biologically diverse mangroves and inter-tidal mudflats along
the banks of the Bons Sinais River. The project area is part of the extensive Zambezi River Delta,
and lies within an internationally recognized Important Bird Area of about 500,000 ha. However,
although the new aquaculture facility would generally be within a large area of high ecological value,
its specific location is an area of low environmental sensitivity. In particular, the saline mudflats to
be converted to aquaculture ponds under the project are only infrequently wet, and thus much less
ecologically valuable than the nearby, more biologically productive inter-tidal mudflats that provide
an important habitat for migratory shorebirds and other fauna.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Ministry in charge of Fisheries lacks experience and capacity in implementing safeguards
policies in general, and World Bank procedures in particular. Capacity is currently being developed
through the preparation and implementation of the SWIOFish1 (P132123/Pi32029) in Mozambique,
and would be further developed during project preparation by hiring and training dedicated staff and
capitalizing on other Governmental institutions' experience with addressing environmental and social
safeguards.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
George Campos Ledec (GENDR)
Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GENDR)
Shri Vasantt Kumar Jogoo (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project in Mozambique will be located in
OP/BP 4.01                              Inhassunge. As small-scale negative impacts could
arise through the construction and operation of the
different aquaculture production facilities, safeguards
management will need to adequately handle those
risks through good engineering practices for design
and construction. Furthermore, production of non-
native species that could threaten native species will
be excluded from project funding. The project is
classified as Category B because it has been carefully
located to occupy an area of rather low
environmental sensitivity, even though more
sensitive ecosystems (mangroves and inter-tidal
mudflats) are nearby. Even though the project is


﻿Category B, an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) with a set of implementable
mitigation measures will be prepared by the
Recipient prior to Appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          The aquaculture facility would occupy an area of dry
mudflats and short saline grassland that was
previously used for salt production. More
biologically productive inter-tidal mudflats,
mangroves, and the Bons Sinais River itself are
nearby, but would not be altered or significantly
affected by the proposed project. The nearby,
existing commercial aquaculture facility itself
provides a valuable and safe (no hunting) habitat for
many species of aquatic birds. Thus, the new
Aquaparque would convert about 70 hectares out of
440 hectares of relatively low-value, previously
altered habitats, but is expected to become a useful
habitat itself for native aquatic birds and other
biodiversity. Project design and operation will seek
to avoid adverse indirect impacts on natural habitats
from ancillary facilities (including the access road)
and the operating practices and behavior of
aquaculture farmers and workers. The ESIA will
provide further details on how the project should be
constructed and operated so as to minimize any
adverse (even indirect) impacts upon terrestrial and
aquatic natural habitats and enhance local
biodiversity benefits.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           Although mangrove forests occur nearby along the
Bons Sinais River, the Aquaparque and ancillary
facilities are not expected to adversely affect them. It
is possible that some mangrove trees will be planted
(or encouraged to grow) along aquaculture pond
dikes for environmental enhancement.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         It is possible that the aquaculture facility would use a
very short-lived natural pesticide, Tea Seed Cake
(Camelia plant extract), to rid new tank water of
small aquatic fauna that would compete with,
parasitize, or prey upon juvenile shrimp right before
they are introduced to the tank. (This would be
consistent with certified organic production, since
"organic" is usually interpreted to mean "no
synthetic compounds" -- not "no pesticides" per se.)
To comply with the World Bank's Pest Management
Policy (OP 4.09), the ESIA will include a Pest
Management Plan that would (i) describe the Tea
Seed Cake or similar substances and how they would


﻿be used; (ii) describe how the Aquaparque would
accommodate the aquatic birds that might feed upon
shrimp or other aquaculture species (the existing,
adjacent private aquaculture facility tolerates all local
bird species and does not practice any lethal control);
and (iii) specify the criteria and procedures to be
followed if any other pesticide use or other pest
management practice were to be considered in the
future.
Physical Cultural Resources  No           The project is not expected to damage any physical
OP/BP 4.11                                cultural resources. There is a relatively large, run-
down old house within the project area that is not
considered to be historically or culturally significant.
The ESIA will indicate Chance Finds Procedures,
just in case any items of cultural value were to be
uncovered during project construction.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  TBD         It is not anticipated that project activities will cause
BP 4.12                                   any involuntary resettlement or loss of access to
natural resources. The land identified for the
aquaculture park is owned by the State, leased to a
private company and is currently unoccupied and
unused (highly saline). Retrocession of the lease to
the Government, as already agreed with the private
company, will be a precondition to any investment.
Else an alternative site will have to be identified
during preparation and the need to trigger the OP/BP
4.12 will be assessed.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           Project activities will not involve construction of
dams, nor rely on dams.
Projects on International    TBD          The Project would be in the Zambezi River Delta and
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      should not affect the waterways of any other country.
This will be verified during project preparation.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Not applicable.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESIA is currently being prepared by the Government and will be sent to the World Bank by
January 2016.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Xavier F. P. Vincent,Benjamin Garnaud
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:  Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)              Date: 26-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/    Name: Sanjay Srivastava (PMGR)              Date: 26-Dec-2015
Manager:


