                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA13396

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Turkey                           Project ID:    P154259
                                                      Parent         P106284
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     Land Registration and Cadastre Modernization Project - Second Phase
                     (P154259)
   Parent Project    Turkey Land Registration and Cadastre Modernization Project (P106284)
   Name:
   Task Team       Elif Ayhan
   Leader(s):
   Estimated       18-Jun-2015                        Estimated   27-Aug-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit: GSURR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Central government administration (90%), Sub-national government
                     administration (10%)
   Theme(s):         Land administration and management (50%), Administrative and civil service
                     reform (20%), Municipal governance and institution buildi ng (10%), e-
                     Government (10%), Tax policy and administration (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:     130.00           Total Bank Financing:              91.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                    Amount
     Borrower                                                                              39.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 91.00
     Total                                                                                130.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                            Page 1 of 6
 Is this a          No
 Repeater
 project?

 2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The overall goal of the project is to contribute to government agenda to improve quality and
   effectiveness of public services through spreading and making effective e-government
   applications. The specific objective of the proposed project is to improve the effectiveness and
   efficiency of the land registry and cadastre services. This objective will be achieved through: (i)
   renovating and updating cadastre maps to support digital cadastre and land registry information;
   (ii) making the digital land registry and cadastre information available to public and private
   entities (iii) improving customer services in land registry and cadastre offices; (iv) improving
   human resources in the Turkish Land Registry and Cadastre Agency (TKGM); and (v) developing
   policies and capacity to introduce best international practices in property valuation.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The objective of the Project is to improve the effectiveness and efficiency of the land registry and
   cadastre services through: (i) renovating and updating cadastre maps to support digital cadastre
   and land registry information; (ii) making the digital land registry and cadastre information
   available to public and private entities; (iii) improving customer services in land registry and
   cadastre offices; (iv) improving human resources in TKGM; and (v) developing policies and
   capacity to introduce best international practices in property valuation in Turkey.
 3. Project Description
The proposed changes of the additional finance project include:
(i) finance costs associated with scaling up of cadastre renovation works so as to complete all high
priority parcels as foreseen by the Government at the beginning of Land Registry and Cadastre
Modernization Project (LRCMP) and also improve cadastre data using other available methods such
as digitization;
(ii) key technical cooperation components such as improved service delivery, human resources and
institutional development and property valuation will continue without any major change in
component definition;
(iii) no further support for model office construction as TKGM now rolls out the model office
concept with government resources nationwide after implementing it at three cities under the original
loan;
(iv) parallel co-financing of project activities by the Government around 30 percent using the Bank's
procurement methods which provide more efficient outcomes in terms of time and cost; and
(v) revision of indicators and targets in the results framework to capture and monitor the AF
outcomes and allow for consolidation of project results.

There are not outstanding issues related to the original loan so far and the additional finance for the
project will not have any implications related to the model office activities and no new construction
works will be added to the project.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
N/A


                                              Page 2 of 6
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Esra Arikan (GENDR)
Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (OPSOR)

6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes         Changes foreseen for the additional financing will not
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                have any impacts related to environmental impacts or
                                     safeguard requirements. Cadastre renovation works,
                                     technical assistance for improved service delivery, use of
                                     procurement methods will not add any extra
                                     environmental safeguard requirements to the project.
                                     Since the simple construction works are still ongoing
                                     under the original loan, it was decided that the
                                     environmental category of this AF is kept as ‘B’. All the
                                     environmental safeguard documents and implementation
                                     arrangements are in place for the original loan, so there
                                     will be no environmental safeguard requirements neither
                                     for the preparation nor for the implementation of this
                                     additional finance project. However OP4.01 is triggered
                                     for the Project because of the activities under the original
                                     loan, and not because of the activities under the AF.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No

Pest Management OP 4.09 No

Physical Cultural        Yes         OP4.11 was triggered for the original the loan There are
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 no specific activities under the AF which suggests that
                                     OP4.11 has to be applied but it is kept triggered for the
                                     entire Project.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          The proposed Additional Financing does not present
OP/BP 4.12                           social issues different from and not covered under the
                                     original loan. Cadastre renovation under Component 1
                                     seeks to update and rectify outdated and erroneous
                                     cadastral information. This does not involved involuntary
                                     land acquisition or existing any change in property rights,
                                     therefore OP 4.12 was not triggered under the original
                                     project and need not be triggered under this project. This
                                     cadastral renovation improves records and remedies
                                     deficiencies in ownership documentation, which has the
                                     positive social impacts of ensuring that owners are able to
                                     more easily document ownership of better defined plots



                                      Page 3 of 6
                                             and to benefit from secondary effects of improved
                                             records, such as access to credit. Component 2's objective
                                             of improved service delivery for land registry and
                                             cadastral services has been monitored under the original
                                             project through citizen satisfaction surveys, which will
                                             continue under the Additional Financing. Gender-
                                             disaggregated results from these surveys are also
                                             incorporated into the project result framework. Significant
                                             improvement in citizen satisfaction regarding service
                                             delivery has been recorded so far
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
   4.37
   Projects on International   No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Changes foreseen for the additional financing will not have any impacts related to environmental
     impacts or safeguard requirements. Cadastre renovation works, technical assistance for improved
     service delivery, use of procurement methods will not add any extra environmental safeguard
     requirements to the project. Since the simple construction works are still ongoing under the
     original loan, it was decided that the environmental category of this AF is kept as ‘B’. All the
     environmental safeguard documents and implementation arrangements are in place for the original
     loan, so there will be no environmental safeguard requirements neither for the preparation nor for
     the implementation of this additional finance project.

    The proposed Additional Financing does not present social issues different from and covered
    under the original loan. Cadastre renovation under Component 1 seeks to update and rectify
    outdated and erroneous cadastral information. This does not involved involuntary land acquisition
    or existing any change in property rights. However OP 4.12 is triggered for the entire project,
    because of the activities under the original loan but not because of the activities under the AF.

     The cadastral renovation improves records and remedies deficiencies in ownership
     documentation, which has the positive social impacts of ensuring that owners are able to more
     easily document ownership of better defined plots and to benefit from secondary effects of
     improved records, such as access to credit. Component 2's objective of improved service delivery
     for land registry and cadastral services has been monitored under the original project through
     citizen satisfaction surveys, which will continue under the Additional Financing. Gender-
     disaggregated results from these surveys are also incorporated into the project result framework.
     Significant improvement in citizen satisfaction regarding service delivery has been recorded so far.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:


                                               Page 4 of 6
  N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The Borrower/Turkish Land Registry and Cadastre Agency (TKGM) has prepared an
  environmental management framework (EMF) for the original loan, specifically to address
  appropriate mitigation and monitoring measures for the model office activities. And during the
  implementation of the original loan TKGM prepared site-specific environmental management
  plans (EMPs) for 3 model offices. The model office in Bursa has already been completed and the
  construction works for the Kilis and Kahramanmaras offices are ongoing under the original loan.
  Additional finance package will not include any activities involving construction works.

  TKGM is responsible for the implementation and monitoring of the Banks safeguards policies and
  resulting environmental management and mitigation measures. TKGM fulfills its responsibility
  related to environmental management of the project activities. TKGM also sent staff to safeguard
  training events organized by the Bank.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The EMF was disclosed in-country in local language and in English through the TKGM✇❨ s
  website on December 10, 2007, as well as at the Infoshop in Washington on December 10, 2007
  for the original project. This additional finance package will not have any safeguard requirements
  and there will not be a need for a stakeholder consultation to discuss environmental and social
  issues.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Dec-2007
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Dec-2007
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Turkey                                                           09-Dec-2007
  Comments: The EMF was disclosed in-country in local language and in English through the
                TKGM’s website on December 10, 2007, as well as at the Infoshop in Washington
                on December 10, 2007.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment


                                            Page 5 of 6
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
    Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    property?
    Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Elif Ayhan
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/    Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                          Date: 04-Jun-2015
   Manager:




                                              Page 6 of 6
