                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC11973

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Feb-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Moldova                       Project ID:      P154573
                            Project Name:        Moldova Skills Data Capacity Building
                            Team Leader(s):      Victoria Levin
                            Estimated Date       30-Jun-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSP03                         Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          General education sector (35%), Other social services (65%)
                            Theme(s):           Improving labor markets (65%), Other human development (35%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    0.3                      Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                               0.3
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To support Government of Moldova in strengthening capacity for enhanced collection and analysis
                           of data on workforce skills and labor market needs
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed grant would strengthen the measurement of labor market mismatches in Moldova via
                           work on two components: (1) revised employer surveys on demand for skills, and (2) revised surveys
                           of the resident working-age population, supply of skills, and barriers to employment. The activities
                           proposed under each of the components are outlined below.

                           1. Revised employer surveys on demand for skills in Moldova
                           Under this component, the work would focus on assessing the quality of the existing Labor Market
                           Forecast survey of employers and introducing a module on the demand for skills. Specifically, the
                           activities under this component would include:

                           1a) Assessment of the current Labor Market Forecast survey and development of recommendation
                         for improved data collection and analysis. Currently, the National Employment Agency (NEA)
                         produces indicators on past and future occupational demand using a brief questionnaire implemented
                         on a nationally-representative sample of around 3,000 firms. This survey was designed with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support of the project “Consolidation of migration management capacities in the Republic of
                         Moldova,” financed by the European Union and implemented by the Swedish Public Employment
                         Service, but is now run by the NEA with much more limited assistance. The survey allows obtaining
                         general data on labor market trends and it is used to construct the Professions Barometer, which is
                         used by NEA employees to provide guidance to job seekers and to plan training activities. However,
                         these data do not provide details on the level and structure of labor demand and they utilize
                         employers’ estimates of future occupational demands rather than tracking retrospective trends, which
                         are more reliable. Moreover, most of the survey questions are not utilized in the analysis or reporting,
                         so the survey can be used to better address the needs of data users. Under the grant, the NEA would
                         proceed with an assessment of the data collection and analysis of the existing Labor Market Survey,
                         and with development of recommendations to ensure better utilization of this instrument.

                         1b) Design and implementation of a module on the demand for skills.
                         The NEA would prepare a module on the demand for skills and implement it as part of the Labor
                         Market Forecast survey. Demand would be measured both for basic cognitive and socio-emotional
                         skills. The module would draw on the existing employer surveys that are part of the World Bank
                         Skills Towards Employment and Productivity (STEP) skills measurement program.

                         2) Revised surveys of the resident working-age population on the supply of skills and barriers to
                         employment.
                         Under this component, the work would focus on producing new data measuring the supply of
                         different dimensions of skills (focusing on cognitive and socioemotional) and barriers to employment
                         for Moldova’s working-age population that resides in Moldova. The data collection on the new
                         modules (on skills and barriers to employment) would be conducted separately from the Labor Force
                         Survey (LFS), but the team will rely on the National Bureau of Statistics (NBS) to draw a nationally-
                         representative sample using the same sampling methodology as for the LFS, and to provide the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementing agency with the full LFS questionnaire and training manuals in order to collect
                         comparable basic labor market information. The final product (modules on skills and barriers to
                         employment) would be discussed extensively with the NBS to provide them with the capacity to
                         implement similar methodology independently in future waves of the LFS or as ad-hoc surveys.
                         Specifically, the activities in this component would include:

                         2a) Design of a module on supply of skills of Moldova’s resident working-age population
                         Educational attainment explains only a portion of labor market outcomes, as the quality of formal
                         education and participation in non-formal learning can mediate this relationship. In order to better
                         understand labor market outcomes, actual skills possessed by individuals need to be measured. These
                         include cognitive skills (such as literacy, numeracy, memory) as well as socioemotional skills
                         commonly valued by employers (such as conscientiousness, openness to experience, grit, and
                         decision-making). In this activity, MLSPF would design a module measuring these skills. The latest
                         supply-side STEP questionnaires and similar surveys conducted in other countries (e.g. Bulgarian
                         Longitudinal Inclusive Society Survey, aka BLISS, in Bulgaria, and the European Skills and Jobs
                         Survey) would inform the design of the skills module.

                         2b) Design of a module on barriers to employment.
                         With very low employment rates, mostly due to low labor force participation, there is a need to better
                         understand barriers to employment in Moldova. Aside from lack of adequate skills, barriers to
                           internal mobility, high reservation wages, and caregiving duties could be important constraints to job
                           matching. The proposed module would assess the willingness of individuals to get closer to jobs,
                           either by migrating internally or accepting a long commute. It would assess whether the barriers to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           mobility are due to market and coordination failures (e.g. transportation problems arising from high
                           geographical fragmentation of employers) or due to low willingness to change location (e.g. due to
                           poor functioning of land and rental markets). It would also explore the reservation wages and
                           caregiving duties and norms for those who are not in employment.

                           2c) Data collection of the household survey
                           In this activity, the basic LFS questionnaire would be complemented with modules on skills and
                           barriers to employment, and data would be collected on a nationally-representative sample of
                           households in Moldova (using NBS to draw this sample). Such data will allow understanding how
                           skills correlate with labor market outcomes in Moldova. In particular, by comparing the skills of the
                           employed to those of the unemployed and inactive, it will provide additional and more direct
                           measurement of skills-related barriers to labor force participation and employment faced by different
                           population groups in Moldova. Questions on utilization of different skills in and out of the
                           workplace, educational qualifications for the jobs held by the employed, and questions on the first
                           jobs held after schooling would enable an in-depth assessment of how different skills are utilized and
                           how they contribute to school-to-work transition.

                           3. Capacity building
                           Capacity building activities would ensure sustainability of data collection and data analysis. Given
                           that data collection on skills is new in Moldova, development of detailed TORs and manuals would
                           be necessary to ensure adequate design and implementation of the new modules. These activities
                           would draw on the experience of the STEP surveys, which have been collected in a few cases by
                           public employment services. In particular, project stakeholders will be heavily involved in adapting
                           existing survey instruments to the Moldovan context. In terms of implementation of the new
                           modules, capacity-building activities would focus on how to minimize non-response and missing
                           values. For data analysis, Stata training will be provided to the staff in project stakeholder agencies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The implementing agency will be encouraged to disseminate the results of the activity, and the team
                           will use blogs to do so as well.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Victoria Levin
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                           Date: 16-Feb-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Andrew D. Mason (PMGR)                                       Date: 16-Feb-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
