                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.:

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Uganda                          Project ID:       P161704
                            Project Name:   Uganda: Mitigating Risk of Sexual Violence and Strengthening Response for
                                            Children
                            Team Leader(s): Margarita Puerto Gomez
                            Estimated Date 07-Nov-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSU07                           Lending           IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.673                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.672999
                              Special Financing                                                                          0.000001
                            Environment         C - Not Required
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Grant is to enhance referral mechanisms and improve integration of child
                           survivors and those at risk of sexual violence into the social protection system.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed grant is supported by the Rapid Social Response (RSR) Multi-Donor Trust Fund
                           managed by the World Bank. The overall RSR grant includes Recipient Executed (RE) and Bank
                           Executed (BE) activities to develop a set of guidelines, toolkits, and interventions to improve social
                           risk management and social protection of child survivors and those at risk of sexual violence.

                           This initiation note refers to the RE grant. The proposed RE activities aim to address vulnerability of
                           child survivors and those at risk of sexual violence and abuse by: i) strengthening referral
                           mechanisms and response services for child survivors of sexual violence, ii) strengthening capacity
                           of national and local authorities to provide quality, child friendly response services; and iii)
                           improving targeting of children at risk of sexual violence in existing social protection interventions.

                           The grant will include three components as follows:
                         Component 1. Strengthening referral mechanisms and response services for child survivors of sexual
                         violence (USD 400,000). This component will support the improvement of referral mechanisms for
                         children who have experienced sexual violence to gain access to services in Kamwenge and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Kabarole. Under this component, a rapid assessment of quality and accessibility of services will be
                         carried out with a focus on the availability of medical, psychosocial, and legal services for child
                         survivors of sexual violence as a minimum comprehensive response. The assessment will also
                         consider challenges to sustainability after the grant duration of two years.

                         The enhanced referral and case management mechanism will draw on lessons learned from the
                         Emergency Children Protection Response (ECPR) in Kamwenge and Kabarole, established in
                         collaboration with the MoGLSD, Uganda National Roads Authority (UNRA), and District
                         authorities. The ECPR currently addresses cases associated with the Transport Sector Development
                         Project (TSDP), provides services to child survivors, and works towards the prevention of further
                         SGBV in project affected sites.

                         Preliminary experiences and lessons from the ECPR suggest that an integrated package of services
                         for child survivors inclusive of livelihood support, psychosocial support comprising of family
                         therapy and counseling, legal redress, and reintegration into schools, is critical to not only overcome
                         extreme vulnerability but also prevent recurrence of violence. Existing collaboration between service
                         providers, in this case BRAC and the Transcultural Psychosocial Support Organization, TPSO, has
                         demonstrated such partnerships are essential for the provision of a holistic set of services for child
                         survivors of SGBV. This is particularly important in districts where institutional capacity is limited.
                         Furthermore, community engagement, support from local governments, and coordination between
                         the MoGLSD and MDAs are key elements in the provision of these supports.

                         Under this component, the grant seeks to: (i) support District Action Centers (DACs) within the
                         Department of Community Based Services (DCBS). This could include training, equipment, and
                         materials for case management; (ii) expand services through a community outreach in select
                         locations that: a) support livelihoods including peer-support for girls (girls clubs) and training on life
Public Disclosure Copy




                         skills and vocational training for girls; b) provide emergency health care and psycho-social support
                         for child survivors of sexual violence and their families; c) support mechanisms for legal redress; and
                         d) incentivize households to keep girls in school. Simultaneously a set of evidence-based community
                         interventions that promote behavioral change to reduce acceptability of SGBV will be carried out in
                         communities and schools.

                         From an implementation perspective, this component will generate lessons-learned to be shared with
                         the Government of Uganda on how service provision of social protection services for child survivors
                         of sexual violence can be effectively established in partnership with CSOs.

                         Component 2. Strengthening capacity of national and local authorities to provide quality, child
                         friendly response services (USD 173,000). This component will provide technical assistance to
                         national and local authorities, particularly those in the Districts where referral mechanisms for child
                         survivors of sexual violence will be strengthened.

                         At the national level, the grant will support the MOGLSD to oversee the implementation of
                         component 1 in targeted districts to ensure quality of referrals and service provision. At the district
                         level, the grant will support data collection capacity to monitor reported cases of sexual violence.
                         Capacity on data collection and analysis for overall monitoring and evaluation of these activities will
                         be assessed, including use of tools such as the National Gender Based Violence Database (NGBVD)
                         and the Child Help Line. Local level authorities will be guided on how to feedback aggregate
                         anonymous data to service providers to strengthen coordination and response. This monitoring
                         mechanism will allow for consistent surveillance of incidents of sexual violence and exploitation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         bottlenecks in service delivery and the referral pathway.

                         This component will also strengthen capacity of the Community Based Services Department (CBSD)
                         in Kamwenge and Kabarole including the District Probation and Social Welfare Officer, Community
                         Development Officer, District Orphans and Vulnerable Children Committees (DOVCCs), and the
                         Sub County Orphans and Vulnerable Children Committees (SOVCCs), assigned to provide
                         accompaniment for survivors. CBSD will involve other departments, particularly police, health,
                         magistrate, production, and education to enhance a coordinated response at the district level. Support
                         will include provision of training resources, materials, equipment and logistic resources.

                         At the community level, contact points for when violence has occurred will be strengthened, such as
                         the Community Development Officers, Police, Village Health Teams (VHTs), para social workers,
                         local council chairpersons, religious leaders, and opinion leaders in the community. These contact
                         points will be empowered through training on child- friendly services, provision of materials and
                         training tools, and relevant basic logistical support to enhance prevention of abuse and support
                         functionality of referral and follow up of cases.

                         Component 3. Improving targeting of children at risk of sexual violence in existing social protection
                         interventions (100,000). This component aims at developing standardized guidelines and tools to
                         improve inclusion of children at risk of sexual violence in the social protection system. In addition, it
                         seeks to strengthen country systems to mitigate social risks of SGBV associated with large influx of
                         workers. Specific activities will include:

                         (i) Development of guidelines and tools to target and support children at risk of sexual violence.
                         These stand-alone tools are expected to be adopted and implemented by existing social protection
                         interventions, including the Social Assistance Grants for Empowerment (SAGE), the Youth
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Livelihood Program (YLP), and the Uganda Women Entrepreneurship Program (UWEP). Specific
                         recommendations on geographic criteria will be considered in order to target those populations at
                         risks of SGBV associated with labor influx of infrastructure projects. Similarly, the proposed
                         activities would benefit from the accumulated experience of three generations of the Northern
                         Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF) interventions through community mobilization. For instance,
                         the community structures put in place by this grant such as Village Livelihood Improvement
                         Committees (VLIC), Youth Empowerment Groups (YEG), and the NUSAF Self-help Groups
                         (NUSAF-SHGs) could provide good entry points to the proposed ELA+ methodology that supports
                         livelihoods and peer-support for girls.

                         (ii) Finalization and rolling out of a toolkit on social risk management on VAC and SGBV. This
                         activity will be conducted through the existing inter-ministerial task force to introduce core
                         principles, key definitions, and guidelines for codes of conduct that outline reporting, monitoring and
                         sanctioning procedures for SGBV occurring as a result of large influx of laborers related to
                         infrastructure projects.

                         Although beyond the scope of this initiation note, BE activities will complement these efforts.
                         Firstly, this includes technical assistance to strengthen and pilot Grievance Redress Mechanisms
                         (GRM). In close collaboration with government counterparts, the Bank will support formulating
                         standardized guidelines and activating local Grievance Redress Committees (GRCs), including
                           capacity for receiving and referring social risks and SGBV. The GRM will also be piloted in the
                           targeted areas where the referral mechanism for child survivors of SGBV is implemented. This will
                           also have a supporting grievance management action plan and stakeholder engagement plan to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           monitor activities and ensure the involvement of critical stakeholders in decision making processes.

                           Secondly, BE activities will strengthen mechanisms for inter-ministerial coordination on social
                           protection and social risk management. This will be achieved by providing technical assistance to
                           key line ministries as well as MoGLSD, OPM, and MLG to help them better target and include child
                           survivors of SGBV into social protection programs. In addition, the assistance will help clarify the
                           roles and responsibilities of government agencies and national, district, sub-county and parish levels,
                           ensuring information systems are available at all levels to effectively monitor referral pathways.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The grant is located in two districts of Uganda, Kamwenge and Kabarole.

                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Gender, Labor and Social Development holds the national mandate for all social
                           development programs including SGBV
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Catherine Asekenye Barasa (GSU07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               The project has not potential impacts on the
                           BP 4.01                                               environment and is Category C
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project will not have any interaction with
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                 natural habitats
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               No direct interface or impact on Forests
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No               There will be no use of pesticides in project
                                                                                 activities
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No               No direct interaction or impact with physical
                           BP 4.11                                               cultural resources
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No               There is no presence of Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                 (IPs) in the project area
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No               There will be no land take in the
                           4.12                                                  implementation of the project
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No               No existence of Dams in the project area
                           Projects on International            No               No International waterways
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No               The project is on sexual and gender based
                           7.60                                                  violence with no interface with disputed areas if
                                                                                 any.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Margarita Puerto Gomez
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                    Date: 06-Oct-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Robin Mearns (PMGR)                                          Date: 06-Oct-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
