INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC9839
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Ukraine                    Project ID:   P149322
Project Name:    Road Sector Development Project (P149322)
Task Team        Simon David Ellis
Leader(s):
Estimated        27-Apr-2015                Estimated     07-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (95%), General transportation
sector (5%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Trade facilitation
and market access (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     960.00             Total Bank Financing:   800.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        160.00
o          International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           800.00
Total                                                           960.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
14.    The proposed project development objective is to develop a high standard regional road
corridor between Kiev, Kharkiv and Dnepropetrovsk by improving select sections of the M-03 and
P52 roads and adopting modern road management practices in investment planning, road safety and
asset management.
C. Project Description


﻿The proposed project would be an Investment Project Financing (IPF) consisting of a loan in the
amount of US$800 million to the Ministry of Finance of Ukraine. The total cost of the proposed
project is US$960 million, including value added tax (VAT). This project will be a continuation of
the ongoing RSIP and RSIP2, and will leverage returns on major road infrastructure investments in
Ukraine, such as the EBRD, EIB and EU-funded improvements to European priority road corridors.
The main road being upgraded to Kharkiv in the East of the country is a crucial domestic and
regional corridor and one that is increasingly important to maintain connectivity with the East. The
project will also have a strong focus on the implementation of the sector?s lagging reform process
*       including support to: (i) the development of a robust pipeline of sustainably financed road
investments; (ii) improving road safety performance through a more multi-sectoral approach and;
(iii) reversing the decline in the condition of the network and the revenues available for maintenance.
The project will include the following components:
Component 1: Improvement of the M-03 road corridor from Kiev to Kharkiv (total estimated cost US
$790 million of which $660 million is IBRD loan). This component would continue World Bank
support to improve to motorway standard the road between Kiev to Kharkiv to develop a high
standard and safe corridor to integrate with the EU extended TEN-T network. It will also support the
further development of the corridor and support ways to improve the financial sustainability of initial
investments and long term operations. It would finance two sub-components as follows:
Component 1(i): Improvement of the road corridor between Poltava and Kharkiv (total estimated
cost US$780 million of which $650 million is IBRD loan). This sub-component will finance the civil
works for the improvement of the section of the M-03 highway between Poltava to Kharkiv (145
km). The road would be built to a category 1 standard, which is a four lane divided highway with
high safety specifications including central crash barriers and side crash barriers where required. The
project would finance all necessary bridges, interchanges, bypasses, site supervision and technical
audits.
Component 1 (ii): Design and private finance options for Boryspil bypass (estimated cost $10 million
O
Q       from IBRD loan). This component would finance the preparation of detailed design and bidding
documents for the Boryspil bypass which is near Kiev on the Kiev to Kharkiv road corridor. Given
the high traffic volume on the road consideration is being given to tolling (a first for Ukraine) and
exploring other private finance options. This component will also finance studies to address the
prospects for tolling, on this road and more widely, and other private finance options.
Component 2: Improved road safety (total estimated cost US$160 million of which $130 million is
IBRD loan). This component will finance improvement to selected sections of the Reshetilovka to
Dnipropetrovsk road corridor where road safety is a particular concern. It will also finance selected
activities to support the now lagging implementation of the countries road safety action plan.
Component 2(i): Road safety improvements on the Reshetilovka to Dnipropetrovsk road corridor
(total estimated cost US$160 million of which US$129 million is IBRD loan). This sub-component
will finance road safety and capacity improvements to select sections of the P52 Reshetilovka to
Dnipropetrovsk road corridor. Improvements would be made to category 1 standard which includes
four lane divided highway and safety measures to international standards. The civil works to be
financed would consist of a number of sections where road safety is a particular concern mainly
because of poor alignment, where the road passes through urban areas and where there are current
capacity constraints.


﻿Component 2(ii): Activities to support implementation of the road safety action plan (estimated cost
of US$1 million from IBRD loan). Ukraine has an approved road safety action plan which is strongly
supported by the development partners but where implementation has been lagging. This component
O
U       will finance activities from the road safety action plan that complement the activities of the other
partners. It is likely that this activity will focus in the area of enforcement which is the single largest
cause of road deaths.
Component 3: Road management and maintenance (estimated cost of US$10 million from IBRD
loan). This component will finance institutional support to implementation of road management
reform. This will include issues associated with asset management systems, extending private sector
contracting for road maintenance, supporting the decentralization agenda on a pilot basis and
addressing the long term financing needs of the sector.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
All project locations/sites are along the existing road networks in Poltava and Kharkiv oblasts. The
project will be improving the existing M-03 road between Poltava and Kharkiv between km 341 and
km 472 (about 140 km) and will construct four bypasses.
The roadpasses mainly through the landscapes which have been significantly modified by human
activities during the last centuries. The terrain is flat, lowland agricultural land: large-scale farming
has dominated land use for several decades. The landscape was also significantly modified by the
development of infrastructure associated with large-scale agribusiness, populated villages and towns
along the road (private housing, shops, public buildings and various local infrastructure facilities).
There are five railway lines crossings which will require grade separation and bridges over five small
rivers: Vorskla, Chutivka, Kolomak, Mza and Karamushina. In addition, the existing main road
between Poltava and Kharkiv was constructed more than 50 years ago and has changed the landscape
and local ecosystems in the broader road corridor. Given that the ecosystems and biological
communities have been historically affected by the above economic and social activities, and taking
into account that the road upgrading works generally will not result in significant conversion or
degradation of natural habitats. During project preparation the team will check if there are any nature
protected areas and if OP 4.04 (Natural Habitats) will be triggered.
Forested land in the project area do not represent natural forests or related natural habitats. The
predominant type of land use in the project area is agricultural and not dependent on forest cover.
The project may potentially affect only small segments of forested land as a result of construction of
bypasses. All forested land potentially affected by the project are planted with low-value tree
species. Based on the above, OP 4.36 (Forests) is not triggered.
The M-03 road is one of the main corridors in the country and mainly consists of category II road
(two lanes with asphalt-concrete pavement). Some sections (i.e. exit from Poltava, between Sharivka
and Sanzhari, and the approach to Kharkiv) are Category I standard (four lanes with asphalt-concrete
pavement and dividing strip). The project will finance upgrade (widening) of the road from two to
four lanes, and construction of associated road infrastructure (bridges, culverts, underpasses for
cattle, crossings, etc.)
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Ukravtodor is the Ukrainian Government Agency responsible for the network of National roads. It is


﻿under the general oversight of the Minister of Infrastructure. Ukravtodor will be responsible for the
overall implementation of the Road Sector Development Project(RSDP). Ukrdorinvest is the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) presently carrying out many of the implementation functions for the
RSIP-2, such as procurement, financial management, compliance with safeguards and others.
0
Ukrdorinvest has experience of working on environmental safeguards under the ongoing Road and
Safety Improvement Projects (RSIP and RSIP-2 respectively). A designated staff at Ukrdorinvest has
been assigned to work on environmental and social safeguards issues in close collaboration with road
design institute (UKRGIPRODOR), local environmental authorities, rayon administrations and
Oblast-level Road Service units. Ukrdorinvest has prior experience in organizing public consultations
and will organize such consultations on Environmental Management Framework (EMF) and
respective Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) in project locations.
Supervision of environmental performance of contracts through site visits and preparation of regular
environmental reports by supervision engineers under RSIP- 1 and RSIP-2 suggest that environmental
performance of these projects was satisfactory broadly. Works under new project will be monitored
closely by the environmental specialist of Ukrdorinvest and supervision engineers. This will allow to
assess compliance with environmental requirements and provide guidance, if needed.
The PIU has an experience of implementing the resettlement instruments under RSIP and RSIP-2
projects. The PIU has a good track record in reporting on the resettlement implementation to the
Bank. The Bank's Social Safeguards Specialist will provide additional training and support in
preparing the site specific RAPs and will supervise resettlement implementation in course of the
regular supervision missions.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
Klavdiya Maksymenko (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
O
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         This is Category B project. The environmental
OP/BP 4.01                              documentation (EIA and EMP for sections of the
road where design documentation has been prepared,
and EMF for sections where the design is under
preparation) will be prepared by the Client, disclosed
and consulted on.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  TBD        There are no formally protected habitats along the
alignment but the on-going EIA will address this
issue in more detail and a decision whether this
policy is triggered will be made later.
Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
Pest Management OP 4.09    No
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD        No assessment has yet been made on the existence of
OP/BP 4.11                              cultural or historical sites. The alignment will be


﻿looked at from this angle and decision whether this
policy is triggered will be made later.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         It is expected that mainly private farmland will be
BP 4.12                                   acquired for the project however physical
displacement of a few households may also be
caused by construction of bypasses. The RAP for the
upgrading and rehabilitation of the sections of M03
(for which the technical design is ready) will be
prepared by the borrower satisfactory to the Bank
and disclosed on the web-sites of UAD,
administrations of the affected raions and in Bank's
Infoshop prior to appraisal. The designs of the
bypasses are not expected to be ready by appraisal
thus abbreviated RAP(s) covering bypasses will be
prepared by the borrower satisfactory to the Bank,
duly disclosed and implemented prior to stating any
construction works. In order to cover for all design
and construction works that may be funded by or
result from the project an RPF will be prepared
satisfactory to the Bank disclosed on the web-site of
UAD and Bank's Inforshop prior to appraisal.
Ukrdorinvest has a good track record working on
involuntary resettlement under the ongoing RSIP2.
The staff member is assigned to work on safeguards
issues and monitor implementation of the RPF and
RAP by the local authorities and the Road services of
the respective oblasts. The fact that the cost of land
acquisition is going to be financed from the project
provides the UAD more control over planning and
implementation of resettlement while reducing the
risks of delays in land acquisition. Poltava regional
roads administration will appoint a focal responsible
for implementation of the resettlement plans.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Apr-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿It is expected that the EIA, EMP and disclosable draft of the EMF will be completed by April 30.
It is expected that the updated version of the RPF will be available by the end of August and the
draft RAP for the first section of the road will be prepared within a month after design for the
section is completed (which is expected by end of September).
It is expected that disclosable draft of the RPF will be ready by April 30.
It is expected that the disclosable draft of the RAP for the linear sections of the M03 road will be
O
ready by the end of May.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Simon David Ellis
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                      Date: 16-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                     Date: 18-Apr-2015
Manager:


