                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC13249

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Dec-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uzbekistan                       Project ID:      P153613
                            Project Name:      Livestock Sector Development Project (P153613)
                            Task Team          Olivier Durand,Peter Goodman
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          21-Feb-2017                      Estimated        25-May-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA03                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    170.00                     Total Bank Financing:        150.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            20.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  150.00
                              Total                                                                        170.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) would be to improve livestock production and supply
                           chain management in target oblasts by improving access to finance, nutrition and support services.
                           C. Project Description
                           1. The project will have three components: (i) Component 1 Livestock Services and Supply Chain
                           Development; (ii) Component 2 Access to Finance; and (iii) Component 3 Project Management. The
                           Project IDA/ IBRD funding for the Project will be US$150 million.

                           2. Component 1 Livestock Services and Supply Chain Development will comprise of the three sub-
                           components described below. The information in brackets shows whether the activities involve
                         national level capacity building or target oblast / target raion level field activities.

                         3. Sub-Component 1.1 Livestock Supply Chain Development (Target Raions): This Sub-Component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         would help to improve the competitiveness of dairy and beef supply chains by building productive
                         partnerships between small farmers, processors, feed suppliers, and other actors in the value chains.
                         Productive partnerships would in most cases be built around a processor wishing to participate in the
                         Project to improve the consistency and quality of its supplies from farmers. The project would
                         finance sub-projects, which would include a comprehensive set of investments to address all key
                         constraints along each value chain, including: (a) technical assistance for the establishment,
                         supervision and monitoring of productive partnerships and preparation of sub-project proposals; (b)
                         all types of farm-level investment indicated under the Livestock Farm Support Program above; (c)
                         works for construction or improvement of communally utilized storage and distribution infrastructure
                         such as cooling tanks; (d) training and works for farm and agribusiness infrastructure/equipment
                         improvement to help ensure that farms and agribusinesses comply with food safety standards; and (e)
                         technical assistance and studies to provide business and technical advice to agribusinesses and
                         processors.

                         4. Sub-Component 1.2 Livestock Nutrition, Husbandry and Breeding (National/ Target Oblasts):
                         This Sub-Component would include: (i) Fodder Crop Seed Improvement; (ii) Pasture Improvement;
                         (iii) Breed Improvement; and (iv) a Livestock Production Farm Support Program.
                         (i) Fodder Crop Seed Improvement - would improve the availability of high quality fodder crop seed
                         to farmers. It would finance rehabilitation, equipment, training and technical assistance to strengthen
                         national-level agencies and state seeds farms producing elite seed, as well as training and technical
                         assistance to private seed farms producing certified seed for distribution to farmers, to undertake:
                         plant breeding selection and maintenance; variety testing and listing; seed inspection, testing and
                         certification; seed multiplication and distribution, serving target project locations.
                         (ii) Pasture Improvement - would finance improved access to pastures, pasture management planning
                         and improvement. It would finance: (a) infrastructure rehabilitation (watering points, pasture track
                         and bridges) to improve access to pastures in non-arid areas; (b) technical assistance and training to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         local government to improve the administrative arrangements for allocation of pasture rights, pasture
                         management planning at both national, district level and field level; and (c) research, demonstrations
                         and advisory services on pasture improvement, through public research institutes.
                         (iii) Breed Improvement - would improve arrangements for production and /or importation of semen
                         and the artificial insemination services. Based on an assessment to be undertaken during project
                         preparation this would finance: (a) technical assistance to support the transformation of the national
                         cattle breeding company which produces and distributes semen (privatization or improved state
                         management) and /or development of arrangements for importation of semen; (b) upgrading the
                         distribution network for semen from national level to veterinarians. These investments would be
                         complemented by investments in training and advice to veterinarians and farmers on artificial
                         insemination provided under the Veterinary Services Improvement activities and the Livestock Farm
                         Support Program activities.
                         (iv) Livestock Farm Support Program - would provide a package of support to farmers groups (Note:
                         Primarily small farmers that would otherwise have limited access to services - selection criteria to be
                         defined during preparation. The detailed flow of funds and the legal form of the grant recipient has
                         yet to be determined. This might involve either grants to individuals within an informal group or
                         grants to legally established groups) as a full or partial matching grant with credit line co-financing,
                         to improve the productivity of livestock and poultry production. The project would finance: (a)
                         advisory services including farmer field schools on all aspects of animal health, husbandry and
                         marketing including demonstrations on the use of improved seed and animal breeds; (b) farm
                         infrastructure improvement including housing, handling and storage, waste management and biogas
                         facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Sub-Component 1.3 Animal Health and Food Safety (National/ Target Oblasts): This Sub-
                         Component would include investments to improve veterinary services and limited investments in
                         food safety improvement. It would strengthen the capacity of the public veterinary services under the
                         Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources to prevent and control zoonotic, trans-boundary and
                         production diseases, which variously constrain productivity and cross-border trade and are a risk to
                         human health. It would finance: (a) technical assistance to support improving the legal framework
                         and strategy for development of the veterinary services in Uzbekistan; and (b) technical assistance,
                         training and equipment to selected public veterinary agencies to improve disease surveillance and
                         reporting systems, veterinary diagnostics laboratories and standard operating procedures, vaccine
                         storage and distribution facilities, public awareness, rapid response capacity; and (c) civil works for
                         selected laboratories for improving laboratory facilities. The project would also finance technical
                         assistance for studies on border control and quarantine, veterinary drug regulation and animal
                         identification, registration and movement control. The project would build the capacity of private
                         veterinarians through support for professional training and provision of basic field equipment in
                         target oblasts to undertake public service contracts for disease control and to provide improved
                         services to farmers by providing them.

                         6. The Sub-Component would also undertake some limited training on food safety. It would
                         strengthen compliance of agribusinesses along beef and dairy supply chains with existing food safety
                         legislation. In general, the legislation provides a sufficient basis for compliance with Codex
                         Alimentaris and the principles of Hazard at Critical Control Point (HACCP) but compliance is weak.
                         It would finance food safety training for farmers and agro-processors based on needs assessments to
                         be undertaken during project preparation. This will be complemented by enterprise specific
                         investments in upgrading agro-processing facilities to improve food safety under Sub-Component 1.3
                         and Component 2.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         7. Component 2 Access to Finance (Nationwide) would finance: (i) a credit line to commercial banks
                         for provision of working capital and investment finance to the livestock and poultry sector
                         nationwide; (ii) training and advice for commercial banks on loan product development, loan
                         appraisal and monitoring in the livestock sector; and (iii) conducting environmental assessment of
                         sub-projects.

                         8. Component 3 Project Management would finance project management, including coordination and
                         supervision of the implementation, financial management, procurement, monitoring and evaluation
                         (including gender disaggregation of results) and progress reporting.

                         9. Special Issues: (i) Child and Forced Labor. The project design will adopt the same approach as
                         that adopted for the Horticulture Development Project which includes third party monitoring and
                         feedback by the International Labor Organization; (ii) Citizen Engagement will involve a
                         consultation process through focus group discussions and public consultation w ith beneficiaries
                         during preparation and establishment of a grievance redress mechanism during implementation.
                         Starting from FY16, five World Bank-financed projects (four projects in the agriculture and water
                         sectors, and one education project) were covered by additional measures to mitigate the risks of child
                         and forced labor in the cotton harvest. These measures included comprehensive training and
                         awareness raising activities, support to National Feedback Mechanism, as well as Third Party
                         Monitoring. This work is carried out by the World Bank in partnership with the International Labor
                           Organization (ILO). Following Third Party Monitoring in 2015, the ILO Assessment report has
                           concluded that the systemic use of child labor in the cotton harvest has been eliminated and that "the
                           monitoring has not provided conclusive information that beneficiaries of World Bank projects used
Public Disclosure Copy




                           child and forced labor during the cotton harvest." The Assessment report for 2016 harvest concludes
                           that forced labor remains a risk for some categories of people, including staff of educational and
                           medical facilities and government employees; but the Government of Uzbekistan continues to make
                           policy improvements aimed at reducing risks of bad labor practices.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           10. At national level, the project will strengthen government organizations including those related to
                           veterinary services, pasture management, fodder crop seeds and animal genetics and will provide a
                           credit line through commercial banks. Other project activities will be targeted to either to: (i) all
                           oblasts other than Jizzakh Oblast and Qashqadaryo Oblast (Note: Ferghana, Andijan, Namangan,
                           Syrdarya,Tashkent, Surkhandarya, Samarkand, Bukhara, Novoi, Khorezm and Karakalpakstan)
                           where IFAD is making similar investments; or (ii) specific raions (to be selected) where there is
                           greatest potential for diversification into fodder crop production. The project's activities in arid
                           pasture areas will be very limited because of environmental and social constraints to investment in
                           these areas.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           11. The Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources will implement the project through the Rural
                           Restructuring Agency (RRA). RRA's responsibilities will include overall implementation and
                           monitoring of the credit line. The RRA is a specialized organization that was created for
                           implementing investment projects in the agriculture and rural sector. It implements a number of
                           donor-funded projects, including the Bank-funded Horticulture Development Project, Rural
                           Enterprise Support Project (RESP) II and Global Environment Facility (GEF) Sustainable
                           Agriculture and Climate Change Mitigation project. RRA is staffed by a number of teams with
                           responsibility for implementing specific projects. The RRA has an Environmental Specialist which is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           fully aware on WB safeguards requirements.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Arcadii Capcelea (GEN03)
                           Ekaterina Romanova (GSU03)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            This OP is triggered as a series of proposed project
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      activities under Component 1 (upgrading veterinary
                                                                           and Food Safety analytical laboratories; upgrading
                                                                           agro-processing facilities to improve food safety;
                                                                           infrastructure rehabilitation (watering points, pasture
                                                                           track and bridges) to improve access to pastures in
                                                                           non-arid areas; minor works for rehabilitation of
                                                                           irrigation for forage production; farm infrastructure
                                                                           improvement including housing, handling and
                                                                           storage, waste management and biogas facilities;
                                                                           works for construction or improvement of
                         communally utilized storage and distribution
                         infrastructure such as cooling tanks; minor works for
                         improvement of public utilities or roads serving
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supply chains) as well as sub-projects to be financed
                         under Component 2 (on a credit line to commercial
                         banks for provision of working capital and
                         investment finance to the livestock and poultry sector
                         nationwide) might generate a series of various
                         environmental and social impacts. These impacts
                         would be associated with biodiversity degradation,
                         noise, dust, air and water pollution, health hazards
                         and labor safety issues, etc. All these impacts are
                         expected to be typical for small scale construction/
                         rehabilitation works or for various agricultural and
                         food processing activities, temporary by nature and
                         site specific and can be easily mitigated by applying
                         best construction and/or agro-processing practices
                         and relevant mitigation measures. To address these
                         impacts the client will prepare an Environmental and
                         Social Management Framework (ESMF) which will
                         be aimed at specifying the set of mitigation,
                         monitoring, and institutional responsibility measures
                         to be taken during the project implementation to
                         eliminate adverse environmental and social impacts,
                         offset, or reduce them to acceptable levels. The
                         ESMF will provide a screening mechanism for
                         investments to be supported in particular under
                         Component 2 that would include clear criteria and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         procedure for determining the sub-projects'
                         environmental category and the type of
                         Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) to be
                         applied.
                         The document would also suggest a series of
                         environmental issues to be included in the proposed
                         technical assistance (TA) activities: (a) for
                         continuing education of veterinary specialists on
                         managing sector environmental and social impacts;
                         (b) strengthening the national food safety control
                         system with application and effective enforcement of
                         mandatory requirements for domestic and imported
                         food stuff; (c) developing an information campaign
                         reaching various segments of the population with
                         information to avoid food born disease including
                         basic hygiene practices, handling of suspected
                         diseased animals and preventive measures when
                         preparing food; and (d) TA activities for the
                         Participating Financial Intermediaries on conducting
                                                                                                                        Environmental Assessment (EA) of selected sub-
                                                                                                                        projects.
                                 Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                                 Yes                        The project might support pasture management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        activities that can trigger this OP. The ESMF will
                                                                                                                        provide relevant advises on addressing the NHs
                                                                                                                        issues within the sub-projects' EA, assessing also
                                                                                                                        potential for impacts on agro-biodiversity and
                                                                                                                        proposing relevant mitigation and monitoring
                                                                                                                        measures.
                                 Forests OP/BP 4.36                                          No                         The project will be implemented in non-afforested
                                                                                                                        areas and thus no impacts on the forests status are
                                                                                                                        expected.
                                 Pest Management OP 4.09                                     TBD                        The team will look into the possibility of the project
                                                                                                                        financing, or stimulating increased use of, livestock
                                                                                                                        dips (e.g. acaricides) which can present a risk of
                                                                                                                        environmental contamination. If so, the policy will
                                                                                                                        be triggered and the ESMF will provide guidance for
                                                                                                                        mitigation measures (a free-standing Pest
                                                                                                                        Management Plan is not expected to be required).
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 No                         The analytical laboratories to be selected for
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             rehabilitation and/or agro-processing enterprises will
                                                                                                                        be screened out and if any such resources will be
                                                                                                                        involved? They will be excluded from the project
                                                                                                                        financing.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         N/A
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                TBD                        No physical or economic displacement is anticipated,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.12                                                                                e.g. by the small works to be supported, but the team
                                                                                                                        will explore with the Borrower whether there is
                                                                                                                        potential for restriction of access to pasture areas in
                                                                                                                        the context of pasture management plans. In case it is
                                                                                                                        determined that there is a need to restrict access to
                                                                                                                        pasture areas, OP 4.12 will be triggered and a
                                                                                                                        Process Framework will be prepared, consulted and
                                                                                                                        disclosed by Appraisal.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         N/A

                                 Projects on International      TBD                                                     The team will work with the Borrower to identify the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   scope of possible support for small scale irrigation.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      N/A
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Jan-2017




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                             Before Appraisal, draft ESMF (in Uzbek or Russian) will be disclosed on the RRA website,
Public Disclosure Copy




                             inviting all interested parties to the public consultation. Furthermore, the hard copies will also be
                             made available to the key stakeholders (Ministry of Agriculture and Water Resources; State
                             Committee for Environmental Protection; Academy of Science; Agricultural University;
                             specialized scientific institutions and large NGOs) -- the details of where and how can be
                             discussed with the Borrower during project preparation. In about two weeks from the ESMF
                             disclosure the RRA will conduct a public briefing.

                             Due to concerns of child and forced labor in the agriculture sector, which tend to be limited to the
                             cotton sector, in Uzbekistan, an assessment of these risks under this project will be done during
                             project preparation. Labor issues are highly unlikely to concern the Livestock Sector Development
                             Project. The need to include this project under the umbrella of Third Party Monitoring and
                             Feedback Mechanism will be determined during the project preparation in consultation with the
                             CMU.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Olivier Durand,Peter Goodman
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                          Date: 12-Dec-2016
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Julian A. Lampietti (PMGR)                             Date: 16-Dec-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
