                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSC14945

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           West Bank and Gaza              Project ID:      P150991
                            Project Name:      GZ-Integrated Cities and Urban Development Project (P150991)
                            Task Team          Noriko Oe
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          18-Apr-2016                     Estimated        08-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU11                           Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Sub-national government administration (35%), General water, sanitation and
                                               flood protection sector (30%), Urban Transport (20%), Ho using construction
                                               (10%), Housing finance (5%)
                            Theme(s):          Urban services and housing for the poor (40%), Urban planning and housing
                                               policy (25%), Urban Economic Development (20%), City-wide Infrastructure
                                               and Service Delivery (15%)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      5.00                     Total Bank Financing:         0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.00
                              Special Financing                                                            5.00
                              Total                                                                        5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO would be to strengthen institutional capacity to leverage public resources for
                           growth in selected urban agglomerations.
                           C. Project Description
                         Tentative areas to be supported under the proposed project would include policy and institutional
                         strengthening support at the central and local levels for: (i) preparing for urban growth; (ii) preparing
                         for spatial economic development; (iii) improving intra-urban agglomeration connectivity; and (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improving private and DP investment-oriented transactions. While not a primary objective, support
                         to those areas would be expected to attract funding for infrastructure investments from other sources
                         that can serve as a catalyst for economic development initiatives led by the private sector, including
                         but not limited to affordable housing. Limited funding from the World Bank might be made available
                         for infrastructure, although a larger share would be expected from other DPs or private investment
                         funds. Hence, the project would be designed to focus on the following main components:

                         14. Component I: Technical Assistance (TA) and capacity building support to agglomerations.
                         This component provides technical assistance to relevant Local Government Units (LGUs) that
                         formulate greater Ramallah, Bethlehem, Hebron, Nablus, and Gaza City urban agglomerations. The
                         technical assistance aims at strengthening their capacity to proactively use public resources as
                         leverage for urban growth by focusing on 4 key priorities for achieving sustainable urban
                         development: (i) preparing for urban growth; (ii) preparing for spatial economic development; (iii)
                         improving intra-urban agglomeration connectivity; and (iv) improving private and DP investment-
                         oriented transaction.

                         a.       Sub-component 1.1: Preparing for urban growth. This subcomponent will support urban
                         agglomerations to strengthen analytical underpinning of current land use management and urban
                         planning practice to better prepare for urban growth. First, each LGU will be supported to establish
                         spatial population baselines and forecast future population growth and its spatial needs. Next,
                         advanced tools of spatial analysis will be provided to establish comprehensive land inventory in
                         which vacant and/or under-utilized land as well as unregistered land are identified. Based on the
                         established urban growth baseline, forecast, and available public resources, LGUs will be further
                         supported to identify the cost of needed infrastructure and service delivery investment and
                         maintenance. They will be supported to coordinate with other member LGUs of respective
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agglomeration to optimize opportunities existent at agglomeration level and prioritize respective
                         public investment, its maintenance, and service delivery to meet their needs. Throughout this
                         exercise, traditional planning tools would be complemented with more recent concepts of resilience
                         and disaster risk planning, densification, energy efficiency, optimized urban land use and traffic
                         management.

                         b.       Sub-component 1.2: Preparing for Spatial Economic Development. This subcomponent
                         complements the Palestinian Authority’s emerging Local Economic Development approach by
                         focusing on supporting LGUs in urban agglomerations to better prioritize their local economic
                         development initiatives based on spatial economic development needs. First, LGUs will be
                         supported to grasp the current composition of local and regional economy, the spatial concentration
                         of existing economic activities, and their productivity. Employment and income sources of citizens
                         and their location will also be identified through technical assistance. Combining the findings from
                         these two exercises, LGUs will be assisted to understand local and regional economic growth trends,
                         forecast the trajectory, and prioritize needed pubic investment and service delivery.

                         c.       Sub-component 1.3: Improving Intra-Agglomeration Connectivity. This subcomponent will
                         provide technical assistance to the LGUs to collaborate in assessing current mobility patterns and
                         truck infrastructure (e.g. water, waste water, electricity, roads) connectivity within agglomerations.
                         The LGUs will then be supported to forecast future mobility trends based on spatial economic plans
                         from sub-component 1.1 and 1.2. Based on the forecast, LGUs will be assisted to collaborate to align
                         and rationalize traffic management plans as well as trunk infrastructure maintenance and investment
                         plans across the agglomeration. As a result, LGUs will prioritize needed infrastructure for intra-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agglomeration connectivity.

                         d.       Sub-component 1.4: Improving the Transaction for Private Sector and Development Partner-
                         oriented Investment. As a result of support under sub-component 1.1 to 1.3, LGUs will have
                         prioritized spatial intervention areas through the lens of urban agglomerations. This subcomponent
                         will support LGUs to conduct regulatory reform to reduce the cost of transactions for private sectors.
                         Such reform areas may include re-zoning, design of land value capture instruments, shortening
                         construction and business permitting procedures, and revision of building codes. In addition, this
                         sub-component will provide support for LGUs to package prioritized investments from
                         subcomponents 1.1-3 for private sector and/or Development Partners’ investment. The support area
                         may include development of more advanced methodologies for economic and financial analysis from
                         basic analysis to life-cycle costing, feasibility study, and business plans for the prioritized
                         investment, subject to the capacity and readiness of targeted LGUs.

                         15. Component II: TA and capacity building to support central ministries. This component supports
                         relevant ministries to provide an enabling environment and incorporate lessons learned from
                         Component I to the Palestinian Authorities’ policies.

                         a.       Sub-component 2.1: Technical Assistance to Ministry of Local Government (MoLG),
                         Planning and Local Economic Development Units. Strengthening the institutional and technical
                         capacity of MoLG is critical to create the enabling environment for urban agglomerations to unleash
                         their spatial economic potential. This sub-component will provide technical support to the MoLG’s
                         planning department staffs to submit revised zoning regulations for inter-ministerial decisions to
                         increase flexibility in optimizing urban land use. The MoLG planning as well as local economic
                         development department staffs will be provided technical assistance to reflect lessons from
                         Component 1. The planning department staff will be supported to update relevant urban planning
Public Disclosure Copy




                         manuals such as for the Strategic Development and Investment Plan, Master Plans, and Street
                         Addressing Manual, so that urban planning practice becomes more suitable for promoting sustainable
                         socio-economic growth in urban agglomerations. The local economic development department staff
                         will be supported to develop the skills required to collect existing and primary data from various
                         economic development initiatives and analyze it to further update the Local Economic Development
                         Strategy.

                         b.       Sub-component 2.2: Technical Assistance to Ministry of Public Works and Housing. The
                         cost of private sector investments in urban agglomerations is partially determined by the building
                         codes and construction permitting process at the central level. To decrease the cost of private sector
                         investments, the Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MoPWH) departments’ staff will be
                         supported to increase the relevance and effectiveness of building codes (e.g., mandatory stone
                         finishing, large plot size and low floor-area ratios, and other cost drivers) based on the past housing
                         technical assistances as well as other donors’ support. The staffs will be provided with technical
                         assistance to submit a revised building and construction permitting procedure to the inter-ministerial
                         consideration to reduce private sectors’ transaction costs with public sector in their investment.

                         16. Component III: Selected public infrastructure investments. This component would finance, with
                         seed funding provided from the World Bank, selected public infrastructure investments identified
                         and prioritized by activities supported under Component I. However, it would be expected that
                           funding from other DPs would become available and be channeled through this component once a
                           pipeline of viable investments has been identified. Hence, despite a small initial funding allocation
                           from the Bank, this component would serve as a window to accommodate co- and/ or parallel
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financing to support larger scale capital investments identified through a rigorous selection process
                           demonstrating sustainable economic and financial returns and the potential to leverage additional
                           private sector resources.

                           17. Component IV: Project Implementation Support and Management Cost. This component would
                           finance goods and consultan cy services for project management, monitoring and evaluation, public
                           outreach and communication occurred by the implementing agency.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           West Bank and Gaza - areas under Palestinian Authority's administrative responsibility. Particularly,
                           the project is targeting 5 municipal agglomerates in West Bank and Gaza, namely, (1) Ramallah-
                           AlBiereh, (2) Nablus, (3) Hebron, (4) Beithlehem, and (5) Gaza city.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Institutional responsibilities to support integrated urban development at the central level are divided
                           between the Ministry of Local Government (MoLG), Municipal Development and Lending Fund
                           (MDLF), and the Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MoPWH). The responsibility to oversee
                           the safeguards compliance of the project will be given to the MDLF who has long history with the
                           Bank implementing operations of municipal development (i.e., EMSRP, MDP1, MDP2, LGSIP).
                           MDLF retains competent environmental and social team who are familiar with Bank policies and
                           have a good track record through previous operations
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Dania Mosa (GENDR)
                           Hana Salah (GSU05)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (GEN05)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            Component III involves physical infrastructure
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       investments for which environmental and social
                                                                            impact assessments is required. The Project is
                                                                            categorized as “B” and therefore any investments
                                                                            that are expected to cause significant impacts
                                                                            (category A) are excluded. The funds from the Bank
                                                                            and/or other development partners will be confirmed
                                                                            by project appraisal, and the exact location and
                                                                            nature of investments might be defined during
                                                                            appraisal and/or during implementation, the
                                                                            instrument to be used is a environmental and social
                                                                            management framework (ESMF) which will cater
                                                                            screening of those investments and for any other
                                                                            instruments that may deem necessary during
                                                                            implementation such as specific ESMPs. Any
                                                              additional instruments which might deem necessary
                                                              will be prepared before the commencement of any
                                                              construction activities. The team will also insure the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              ToRs for the studies financed under the first and
                                                              second components contain provisions to examine
                                                              the environmental and social implications of any
                                                              policy changes, modifications in land use, and any
                                                              other aspects of the studies. Initial selections for
                                                              infrastructure projects in Hebron and Nablus involve
                                                              an extension of the Industrial Park in Hebron and
                                                              moving the Bus station in Nablus from one location
                                                              to another. There are potential environmental and
                                                              social impacts for those projects both during the
                                                              construction phase, e.g., dust, noise, disruption of
                                                              traffic, and possible damages to existing
                                                              infrastructure, and the operational phase, e.g.,
                                                              increased volumes of wastewater discharge from the
                                                              industrial park, increased usage of water, and shifting
                                                              the traffic patterns and noise levels in Nablus with
                                                              moving of the main bus terminal. Those impacts and
                                                              others will be examined carefully with project-
                                                              specific ESMPs once the finance from developing
                                                              partners is confirmed and the projects move forward.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD   This policy will be examined further once the
                                                              location and nature of infrastructure investments are
                                                              known.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    The investments are expected in urban settings in 5
                                                              municipal agglomerates and their surroundings.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Examination of those settings indicated no existence
                                                              of forests of any significance.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    No investments expected under the operation to
                                                              finance pest management substances, equipment, and
                                                              associates.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    TBD   Some of the envisaged infrastructure investments are
                         OP/BP 4.11                           expected in city centers which might impact
                                                              buildings or landmarks of significant cultural value.
                                                              The preparation mission will determine if this policy
                                                              will be triggered by the physical investments
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    Not applicable
                         4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   TBD   We propose that investments that are not on
                         BP 4.12                              municipal (or local government owned land) or that
                                                              have squatters/ users of lands for livelihoods on
                                                              municipal land be excluded given the delays that
                                                              would be incurred for the implementation of sub-
                                                              projects. Therefore, we propose that the World Bank
                                                                                                                        Policy on Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.12, does
                                                                                                                        not apply to this project. In other words, investments
                                                                                                                        will be excluded that involve relocation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        households, temporary or permanent land take, and
                                                                                                                        impacts on livelihoods, including those that may
                                                                                                                        occur through restriction of access to resources. To
                                                                                                                        screen out for these exclusions, the Project would
                                                                                                                        rely on guidelines in Operations Manual, which will
                                                                                                                        include a rigorous sub-project screening process to
                                                                                                                        be done by municipalities. In cases where the
                                                                                                                        municipalities may purchase land through a willing-
                                                                                                                        seller willing-buyer approach or in cases of voluntary
                                                                                                                        land donation (VLD), the municipalities will need to
                                                                                                                        document for power of choice.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         Investments do not target new construction or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of existing dams, none exists in the
                                                                                                                        vicinity of the 5 municipal agglomorates (nor in
                                                                                                                        West Bank)
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      Not applicable
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      Not applicable
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Apr-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      April-2016
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Noriko Oe
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                                                                                          Date: 28-Feb-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Ayat Soliman (PMGR)                                                                                                    Date: 07-Mar-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
