The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Moldova Education Reform Project (P127388)




                       Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                   Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Oct-2016| Report No: ISDSR19705




                       Regional Vice President:    Cyril E Muller
                              Country Director:    Satu Kristiina J. Kahkonen
                Senior Global Practice Director:   Amit Dar
                   Practice Manager/Manager:       Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza
                            Task Team Leader:      Andrea C. Guedes
         The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Moldova Education Reform Project (P127388)



I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                  Project Name
P127388                                                     Moldova Education Reform Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                         Country
Andrea C. Guedes                                            Moldova
 Estimated Board Date                                      Environmental Category
                                                           Partial Assessment (B)
 Managing Unit                                             Is this a Repeater project?
 GED03


PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                          Total Bank Financing
40000000.00                                                 40000000.00
Financing Gap
-40000000.00

Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
International Development Association (IDA)                                                       40000000.00
Total                                                                                            40,000,000.00


2. PROJECT INFORMATION

 Current Project Development Objective
 The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the quality of education while supporting the efficiency
 reforms being implemented in the education sector.



 Proposed New PDO
 The Project Development Objective is to improve learning conditions in targeted receiving schools and strengthen the
 Recipient's education monitoring systems, while promoting efficiency reforms in the education sector.

3. PROJECT DESCRIPTION
        The World Bank                                                                                RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Moldova Education Reform Project (P127388)



The Moldova Education Reform Project (MERP) was designed to support the government’s education reform program
by financing actions, outputs, and outcomes that would strengthen the quality of education and lead to more efficient
use of resources within the education sector. The project is organized into three components covering five priority
areas of intervention. Component 1: Strengthening the Quality of Education focuses on the following four areas: (i)
implementation of quality assurance standards in receiving schools – that is, schools that have received students
transferred from other schools that were closed in the process of optimizing the school network; (ii) establishment of
teachers and directors’ training and remuneration programs; (iii) improvement of the student assessment system; and
(iv) strengthening the quality of data and the education management information system (EMIS). Component 2:
Improving the Efficiency of the Education Sector supports efforts to eliminate excess capacity and to create a leaner
General Education system which will be better equipped to provide education that meets the demands of a modern
economy. Component 3: Improving the Ministry of Education’s Capacity to Monitor the Reform finances technical
assistance for the MoE to support the implementation, monitoring and measurement of Moldova’s education reform
program.

Specifically, the project supports activities to improve the learning conditions of selected receiving schools, with a focus
on infrastructure; strengthening the managerial qualifications of school directors and the performance of teachers in the
classroom through training; revising the remuneration program for teachers and directors to introduce links to
performance; modernizing the national student assessment system and supporting Moldova’s participation in
international student assessments; promoting efficiency in the allocation of resources and the use of the school
network; and consolidating various education information systems and databases into a single Management Information
System.

The Project uses an Investment Project Financing instrument, supported through an IDA credit in the amount of SDR
26.1 million (US$40 million equivalent at the time of Board approval). The Project was approved on January 24, 2013,
and became effective on July 1, 2013. The current closing date for the Project is August 31, 2018. The Project follows a
results-based approach with disbursements originally linked to the attainment of 16 measurable results, referred to as
Disbursement-Linked Indicators (DLIs). Under the proposed restructuring, the total number of DLIs would be revised
from 16 to 13; the three DLIs that are being eliminated under the restructuring pertain to the implementation of school
standards, which would be financed using traditional disbursement methods and implemented by Moldova’s Social
Investment Fund.

4. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
The project is part of a Government of Moldova program and is being implemented in schools country-wide. The
project was originally designed as a Category “C? in terms of the World Bank's environmental safeguards. However, as
the first set of schools to undergo rehabilitation was identified, it became clear that the extent of the proposed work
was not minor as originally anticipated -- some of the required works might include construction of new boilers; energy
conservation activities; water supply and sanitation sub-projects to incorporate toilets within the school premises;
connecting schools to the water networks; replacement of electricity systems; replacement of roofs, windows, etc. As
these activities could have an actual or potential social and/or environmental impact if not properly managed, the
project was restructured in June 2015 to trigger OP 4.01 and raise the environmental safeguard to Category B.

5. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM
        The World Bank                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Moldova Education Reform Project (P127388)




 Name                                                Unit
 Sophia V. Georgieva                                 GSU03
 Cesar Niculescu                                     GEN03


6. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED

Safeguard Policies                     Triggered     Explanation

                                                     Yes. The project will finance the rehabilitation of 21
                                                     schools, including construction of new boilers; energy
                                                     conservation activities; water supply and sanitation
                                                     sub-projects to incorporate toilets within the school
                                                     premises; connecting schools to the water networks;
                                                     and replacement of electricity systems. Out of the 21
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP
                                       Yes           rehabilitations, 15 would be under the responsibility of
4.01)
                                                     MSIF and directly financed by the project while 6
                                                     would remain under the Ministry of Education's
                                                     responsibility and financed by the national budget.
                                                     Given the potential environmental and/or social impact
                                                     of these civil works, the client prepared an EMF to
                                                     guide the EA process.
                                                     No, as the schools to be rehabilitated under the project
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)        No            are located within the boundaries of localities and no
                                                     impacts on natural habitats will occur.
                                                     No, as the schools to be rehabilitated under the project
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                 No            are located within the boundaries of localities and no
                                                     impacts on forests will occur.


Pest Management (OP 4.09)              No            N/A

                                                     No, none of schools which are included in the list on
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP                 national or local PCRs will be supported by the project.
                                       No
4.11)                                                At the same time, individual environmental screening
                                                     procedures will confirm this.

Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)      No            N/A
        The World Bank                                                                                  RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Moldova Education Reform Project (P127388)



                                                                     No, as the school to be rehabilitated under the project
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)     No                       will be located within the existing school areas and will
                                                                     not require any land acquisition.


Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)               No                       N/A


Projects on International Waterways
                                            No                       N/A
(OP) (BP 7.50)


Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60) No                         N/A




 II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES

 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

   The project was previously restructured in July 2015 to trigger OP 4.01. The current restructuring does not change any
   safeguard category nor triggers new ones. However, under the restructuring, implementation responsibility for 15 of
   the 21 school rehabilitation planned under the project changes from the Ministry of Education (MoE) to Moldova’s
   Social Investment Fund (MSIF). MoE will remain responsible for 6 of the schools. This ISDS is being updated to reflect
   the addition of an implementing agency with responsibility for safeguards.

   Some of the rehabilitation works could qualify as Category B under OP 4.01 as they might generate some social and/or
   environmental impacts if not properly managed. All these potential impacts are relatively minor and can be managed
   during implementation.
   (a) dust and noise due to rehabilitation activities;
   (b) dumping of construction wastes, accidental spillage of machine oil, lubricants, paints, and solvents, etc.;
   (c) groundwater and surface water contamination;
   (d) asbestos (although at this stage it is not known if asbestos has been used in premises to be proposed for
   rehabilitation, but taking into account it large usage in the former USSR it is possible to find such material used as an
   insulation material and/or roofing material); and
   (e) health & safety impacts.
   To address specified impacts, the MoE prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) providing guidance
   for the environmental screening of the schools to undergo rehabilitation, as well as the required mitigations that
   should be put in place. The EMF provides guidelines on procedures, criteria and responsibilities for screening,
   preparing, implementing and monitoring school specific environmental assessments and mitigations. Taking into
   consideration the scope of the proposed work, the EMF includes guidance to determine whether a school should have
   an Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) and/or an Environment Management Plan (EMP) or an EMP Checklist
        The World Bank                                                                               RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Moldova Education Reform Project (P127388)



  prepared, or no additional environment document prepared before work commences. The EMF also includes
  guidelines on: (a) mitigation measures for potential environmental impacts of rehabilitation activities; and (b)
  requirements for conducting monitoring activities for category B activities. Finally, the EMF also recommends
  institutional responsibilities for its implementation.

2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
  N/A

3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
  N/A

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
  capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The MoE has hired an environmental specialist to support project implementation; that specialist is also supporting
  MSIF in the implementation of a trust fund that finances 20 small school rehabilitations. Environmental Management
  Plans (EMPs) have been prepared for the six schools that MoE will rehabilitate; three of those six EMPs have been
  shared with the Bank and reviewed by an environmental specialist. Both MoE and MSIF will need to retain an
  environmental specialist --the position could be shared between the two agencies-- for the duration of the civil works
  to ensure full compliance with Bank's environmental safeguard policies and procedures.

  MSIF, which will undertake implementation responsibility from MoE for the rehabilitation of 15 schools, has extensive
  experience in implementing World Bank projects. Its staff is familiar with Bank’s safeguard requirements but most of
  the works implemented by MSIF have been of very small scale and usually qualified as Category “C? and/or requiring
  only simple Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) such as an EMP Checklist. Additionally, no special reports on
  environmental compliance have been produced by MSIF for the last several years. Taking into account that school
  rehabilitations within the project would include significant volumes of civil works which would require an
  Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and an EMP, it would be necessary to strengthen MSIF’s capacity to undertake
  this responsibility, including that an Environmental Consultant who would remain responsible for all related to EA
  issues. Maintaining an environment specialist in MSIF’s staff would be a covenant under the amended Financing
  Agreement. At the same time, a mechanism for screening and assessing potential negative environmental impacts of
  the subprojects as well as developing mitigation plans was already developed. Details of the procedures to be
  followed for environmental assessments and mitigation plans will also be described in the revised Project Operational
  Manual (POM), a disbursement condition for the civil works under MSIF’s responsibility.

5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies, with
  an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  A draft Environmental Management Framework was disclosed by MoEd by posting it on a national public web-
  platform (particip.gov.md), as well as on websites of the Ministry of Education (www.mec.gov.md). The MoEd/PCU
  has further forwarded electronically the EMF summary to all interested stakeholders. The consultation on the draft
  EMF took place on March 31, 2015 at the Ministry of Education in Chisinau with the participation of representatives of
  the MERP PCU, beneficiaries, national environmental authorities and NGOs representatives. During the consultation,
  the MoEd presented a summary of a draft EMF to participants. Particularly, the audience was informed about
  screening procedures of the sub-projects, types of EIA for sub-projects, potential impacts which may by generated by
  sector activities as well as measures to be taken to prevent/mitigate potential impacts. Meeting's attendees actively
  participated in discussions which were mainly focused on proposed environmental screening procedures and
  capability of implementing agencies to perform environmental management and monitoring of sub-projects. The draft
          The World Bank                                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Moldova Education Reform Project (P127388)



    EMF was finalized after the meeting and its final version was disclosed on the MERP's page of the website of the
    Ministry of Education on May 7, 2015 in both Romanian and English languages. The English version had also been
    previously disclosed both at InfoShop and MERP's website.

    A non safeguards social assessment was conducted during project preparation and found that there would need to be
    more intensive consultations with stakeholders on the reform measures being implemented by the Government of
    Moldova and supported by the Project. Key findings and recommendations of this social assessment have been
    incorporated into Project design.


 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS


Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                    Date of submission to Infoshop
07-May-2015                                                    07-May-2015
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors


“In country? Disclosure
Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
Moldova                                                        07-May-2015
Comments
The Ministry of Education's (MoEd) Project Coordination Unit disseminated the draft EMF to key stakeholders, and, also,
on March 20, 2015, the document was posted on a Public Consultation web-platform (www.particip.gov.md) for broad
access to the public. On March 31, 2015, the MoEd organized a consultation on the project and EMF provisions. After
the consultation, the draft EMF document was revised to consider inputs from consulted parties. On April 27th, 2015
the final English version EMF was published on the Ministry of Education's website); On May 7, 2015 the Romanian
version of the EMF was also published on the website. The link is:
http://edu.gov.md/ro/anunturi/cadrul-managementului-de-mediu-pentru-desfa-urarea-lucrarilor-de-renovare-in-
cadrul-proiectului-re     fo-17132/

On May 7, 2015 both English and Romanian versions of the EMF were submitted to InfoShop. (On April 23, the same
English version of the EMF had been submitted to InfoShop via email.)




C. COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL
         The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
         Moldova Education Reform Project (P127388)



OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment

Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                    Yes
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review and
                                                                                                     Yes
approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the credit/loan?                   Yes




The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information

Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank's Infoshop?                   Yes
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form and
language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups and local                 Yes
NGOs?


All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been prepared
                                                                                                     Yes
for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project cost?                   Yes
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the monitoring of
                                                                                                     Yes
safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the borrower and
                                                                                                     Yes
the same been adequately reflected in the project legal documents?


 III. APPROVALS


  Task Team Leader(s)                       Andrea C. Guedes


  Approved By

  Safeguards Advisor                        Nina Chee                                03-Nov-2016

  Practice Manager/Manager                  Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza            03-Nov-2016
