                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA13658
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jul-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Aug-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                               Project ID:    P146936
                            Project Name:      Uttar Pradesh Pro-poor Tourism Development Project (P146936)
                            Task Team          Stefania B. Abakerli B
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          09-Jun-2015                         Estimated   17-Nov-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU06                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (60%), Sub-national government
                                              administration (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social development (40%), Participation and civic engagement (20%),
                                              Cultural Heritage (30%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterpris e support (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     300.00           Total Bank Financing:                  210.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        90.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              210.00
                              Total                                                                                    300.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase tourism related benefits for local communities in
                           targeted destinations
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 12
                         1. Description

                         The project will support the state’s plans for restructuring its tourism sector in a pro-poor manner
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with a view to increasing benefits to local communities and improving the management of its tourism
                         destinations. Many developing countries have recognized pro-poor tourism as an effective means of
                         reducing poverty and as a driver for more inclusive economic growth, as well as a means of
                         contributing to better stewardship of heritage assets. Tourism’s pro-poor potential relies on the fact
                         that, when well-planned and managed, tourism is consumed at the point of production, is labor
                         intensive, and can finance basic services in backward areas often overlooked by traditional tourism
                         development schemes.

                         At its core, the project emphasizes the government’s key role in structuring and regulating tourism
                         development for its adequate growth in a pro-poor manner. Experience shows that the greatest
                         impediment to pro-poor benefits from tourism is not the type or size of tourism, but the way the
                         tourism sector is structured, its approach to development, supply chains, linkages and expenditure
                         reach. Governments also have a central role to play in removing bottlenecks to critical private sector
                         investments in tourism through adequate policies, regulations and focused public investment.

                         The pro-poor approach adopted by the project also aims at catalyzing the impact of key sectors in a
                         given area, such as accessibility/connectivity, environmental preservation, asset management and
                         business development on local communities. The project will do so by promoting an integrated area-
                         based approach in which tourist destinations and their iconic heritage assets are planned, promoted,
                         served, stewarded and linked geographically. This area-based approach also allows for improved
                         understanding of a given area’s potential and linkages with other industries, the strengthening of the
                         skills of the local population, and the promotion of small-scale entrepreneurship, especially amongst
                         poor women and youth.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Project Components

                         The project has four proposed components:

                         Component 1: Destination Planning and Governance aims to test new approaches and establish the
                         institutional structures, policies and coordination mechanisms necessary for bringing together the
                         public and private sectors and local communities for effective destination-level tourism planning and
                         governance. It will achieve this by providing a combination of advisory and technical assistance and
                         financing for (i) the formulation of integrated destination-level tourism development plans for the
                         Project target areas; (ii) the refinement and implementation of branding and promotion strategies for
                         the target areas; (iii) the strengthening of public, private and community institutions involved in the
                         tourism sector for coordinated destination management; (iv) the improvement of the state’s visitor
                         management and information systems; (v) the review of the state tourism policy based on inclusion
                         and sustainability principles; (vi) support to public-private dialogue; and (vii) training of individuals
                         and groups employed in the tourism sector.

                         Component 2: Tourist Products Development and Management aims to enhance the tourist
                         experience while simultaneously contributing to improving local living conditions and livelihood
                         opportunities by transforming existing tourist “attractions” into tourist “products” that incorporate
                         local communities both physically and economically. Activities under this component will include


                                                                       Page 2 of 12
                         advisory and technical assistance and financing for (i) the enhancement of existing attractions and
                         their surroundings (e.g. crowd management, illumination, landscaping); (ii) the provision of
                         interpretation and information at monuments and sites of interest, including signage and information
Public Disclosure Copy




                         kiosks; (iii) the development/rehabilitation and diversification of destination-level products and
                         activities, such as museums and heritage walks; (iv) the provision of basic facilities and services for
                         tourists and local communities alike, such as drinking water, rest areas, toilets; and (v) the
                         improvement of access and transportation to main sites and tourist products and their adjacent
                         communities.

                         Component 3: Support to Local Economic Development aims to improve the linkages of those
                         involved in the productive and creative economies with the tourism value chain in the project target
                         areas by providing advisory and technical assistance and financing for (i) mapping of local
                         productive and creative industries and support to business development and tourism service
                         providers; (ii) the provision of training, information, tools and infrastructure for business
                         development, production and marketing within the tourism value chain; (iii) enhancement and/or
                         diversification of skills; and (iv) branding and promotion of locally produced goods linked to tourism
                         products.

                         Component 4: Project Management aims to provide the necessary technical, advisory and financial
                         support for the adequate implementation, management and coordination of the project through (i) the
                         establishment and operation of a State Project Coordination Unit (SPCU) at the state Department of
                         Tourism in Lucknow and Technical Support Units (TSU) at the local Development Authorities in
                         selected Project target areas; (ii) project monitoring and information system; and (iii) project
                         communication.

                         3. Project Potential Activities and Investments (Subprojects)

                         The following potential subprojects may be financed under the project:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         All locations
                         •       Support to public-private dialogue
                         •       Review of tourism policy
                         •       Institutional strengthening
                         •       Improvement of tourism information systems
                         •       Training in hospitality for Tourism and other concerned departments and agencies at city
                         level
                         •       In-depth mapping of local creative and productive industries
                         •       Support to branding and promotion for local creative and productive industry

                         Agra
                         •       Integrated Tourism Development Plan
                         •       Branding and promotion (“Agra beyond the Taj”)
                         •       Basic service provision to communities adjacent to Mehtab Bagh
                         •       Tourist walkway between Taj Mahal and Agra Fort
                         •       Basic service provision to communities adjacent to Itmaud ud Daulla
                         •       Tourist Facilitation Centre at West Gate of Taj Mahal
                         •       Taj East Drain Improvement
                         •       Center for Living Traditions (inlay)
                         •       Improvement of overall transport and access, services and surroundings of selected ASI

                                                                      Page 3 of 12
                         monuments (Chini ka Rauza, Humayun Mosque, Roman Catholic Cemetery, Dara Sikoh Library
                         etc.) and other tourist routes (M.G. Road, Trans Yamuna area, Purani Mandi Crossing etc.).
                         •        Illumination of monuments, signage, waste management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •        Sound and Light Show at selected monuments
                         •        Agra City Museum/Visitor Center
                         •        Interpretation Centre and provision basic services to adjacent communities at Fatehpur Sikri
                         •        In-depth mapping of local creative and productive industries
                         •        Support to branding and promotion for local creative and productive industry
                         •        Skill development program and support to artisans

                         Braj region

                         •        Integrated Tourism Development Plan
                         •        Branding and promotion for Braj region
                         •        Area-based and access improvement in Vrindavan Biharji temple
                         •        Forest/ecology development between Mathura and Vrindavan
                         •        Revitalization of 11 kunds along the parikrama
                         •        Center for Living Traditions (Krishna crafts related)
                         •        Visitors Centers in Vrindavan, Govardhan and Barsana, and mobile vans for tourist
                         information
                         •        Revitalization of cultural walk in old Vrindavan
                         •        Afforestation in Govardhan and Sunrakh in Vrindavan
                         •        Access improvement and services at Mathura Museum
                         •        Basic service provision, access, parking, signage, water, waste management and illumination
                         at key temples/tourist areas
                         •        Sound and Light Show at selected temples/kunds
                         •        Establishment of Braj Haat; support and skill development for artisans

                         Buddhist Circuit
Public Disclosure Copy




                         •       Integrated Tourism Development Plan
                         •       Branding and promotion for Buddhist Circuit
                         •       Development of Buddha Walks and service provision to adjacent communities
                         •       Revitalization of Kushinagar Museum
                         •       Moksh Forest in Kushinagar
                         •       Visitors Centers and mobile vans for tourist information
                         •       Buddha Cultural Center in Sarnath
                         •       Rehabilitation of Deer Park and Zoo and mud houses around Sarnath
                         •       “Jetvan” meditation forest in Shravasti
                         •       Environmentally-friendly modes of transport at main sites
                         •       Illumination of monuments, signage and waste management in all three locations
                         •       Skill development and support to artisans

                         Proposed subprojects require further studies for the definition of their exact location or the specific
                         scope of investments. These are being sequenced and will be carried out throughout the project
                         implementation. The ESMF will further guide the analysis and subprojects detailing.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                                                                       Page 4 of 12
                         The project will be implemented in the state of Uttar Pradesh (UP) which is the fifth largest state in
                         India. With an area of 243,290 km2, equal to 6.88% of the total area of India, UP is the country’s
                         most populous state with a population of nearly 200 million. One sixth of India’s population lives in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the 70 districts of UP. UP forms the bulk of the Gangetic plain in India and though it has very little
                         forest cover, it has many protected areas, including bird and animal sanctuaries, national parks and
                         cultural heritage sites.

                         The project targets 11 destinations in five districts (Varanasi, Agra, Mathura, Kushinagar and
                         Shravasti), including Agra; Mathura, Vrindavan, Barsana, Nandgaon, Gokul-Mahavan, Baldeo and
                         Govardhan in the Braj region; and Varanasi-Sarnath, Kushinagar and Shravasti in the Buddhist
                         Circuit. The population of the five districts covered by the project totals over 15 million, equivalent
                         to around 7.5% of the state's total population, of which about 47% is female. The average literacy
                         rate in these districts is 56%, and 33% of the population is engaged in some form of work (Source:
                         2011 Census of India, http://www.censusindia.gov.in/). A large percentage of the state population
                         belongs to scheduled caste and is therefore socially and at times economically vulnerable. No tribes
                         were found in the project target areas during the screening process.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GENDR)
                         Parthapriya Ghosh (GSURR)
                         Pradeep Dadlani (GEN06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            OP 4.01 is triggered because the project will upgrade or
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       provide basic services in touristic areas and near cultural
                                                                     and natural heritage sites. Impacts envisaged may relate to
                                                                     the execution of these civil works and their temporary
                                                                     impact, broadly defined, on the air, water, soil,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     ecosystems and human health.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP       Yes            Some project activities will promote the use of native
                         4.04                                        species and potential long-term recovery of modified and/
                                                                     or degraded environmental areas, such as kunds, parks
                                                                     and forests. No anticipated adverse impact is foreseen.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes            Project may involve the rehabilitation of degraded forest
                                                                     areas, with no negative impact foreseen.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                  Project does not involve activities related to pest
                                                                     management.
                         Physical Cultural            Yes            OP 4.11 is triggered because the project will upgrade
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                        basic services and/or promote tourism in communities
                                                                     living and/or working near cultural and natural heritage
                                                                     sites. Impacts envisaged may relate to the (i)
                                                                     rehabilitation/restoration of cultural properties or cultural
                                                                     landscapes and/or (ii) execution of civil works in
                                                                     surrounding communities, where lesser known
                                                                     monuments may be present. The possible discovery of
                                                                     archaeological sites or random findings during the



                                                                       Page 5 of 12
                                                                       rehabilitation of cultural landscapes and/or the execution
                                                                       of civil works will require measures to manage chance
                                                                       finds.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No                There are no tribal areas in the Project target areas.
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               OP 4.12 is triggered as the project will upgrade or provide
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 basic services near cultural and natural heritage sites in
                                                                       some densely populated or visited areas. Temporary
                                                                       impacts are expected to happen during the execution/
                                                                       construction phase, especially during the improvement of
                                                                       access roads, construction of tourist amenities, provision
                                                                       of basic services (i.e., toilets) to surrounding
                                                                       communities, and upgrading of public spaces.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             Project does not involve activities related to dams and
                            4.37                                       their safety.
                            Projects on International   No             Project is not located in/do not involve international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             Project is not located in disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Overall, the project is expected to have positive social, environmental and cultural heritage
                              impacts, particularly through improvements in living conditions and livelihood opportunities of
Public Disclosure Copy




                              poor communities near cultural and natural sites and tourist areas, the rehabilitation of natural and
                              ecological features of the selected destinations (e.g. public parks, forest areas, water bodies), and
                              the rehabilitation of lesser known cultural assets (e.g. monuments, sacred sites). Subprojects
                              planned under the project emphasize the importance of rehabilitating and better stewarding both
                              environmental features and cultural assets of the project target areas, mostly currently at-risk due
                              to neglect, mismanagement and other factors. Subprojects also target vulnerable groups (i.e.
                              rickshaw drivers, craftspeople, street vendors) and will support their increased linkages with the
                              tourism sector from a social and economic viewpoint.

                              From a social perspective, the preliminary analysis shows that the project is expected to have
                              direct positive social impacts on the communities in its target areas through the provision of basic
                              services such as toilets, and job opportunities to poor communities living and/or working around
                              cultural and tourist sites, as well as by engaging communities in destination planning and
                              implementation of subproject. No private land is expected to be acquired for the purpose of any
                              subproject. The project screening shows that adverse social impacts on communities will be
                              minimal and the area of impact will be confined to the construction site and stage. The project is
                              expected to have limited adverse impacts from land transfers and resettlement. Still, some of the
                              subprojects may require land transfer and/or acquisition for investments in such as cultural
                              facilities and tourism amenities. Such land transfer and/or acquisition could result in loss of land
                              or structures, loss of livelihood and/or access to areas for livelihood support, noise and other


                                                                         Page 6 of 12
                         construction related disruptions. There is also a possibility that in some of the areas where
                         subprojects will be taken up in the later years of project implementation, the land parcels
                         earmarked for public use are encroached. Squatters on the public land reserved for infrastructure is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         not unknown in India, although no such cases came to notice in the sample sites investigated
                         during screening. Therefore the World Bank’s Operational Policy OP/4.12 Involuntary
                         Resettlement has been triggered. According to preliminary social analysis, the scale of involuntary
                         resettlement at individual subproject sites is however likely to be small, given the pro-poor nature
                         and focus of investments and the Department of Tourism ownership of non-encroached land and
                         properties in all target areas. Each subproject will go through further screening process to ensure
                         that adverse impacts are identified, avoided and/or minimized/mitigated early on.

                         Preliminary analysis of the project areas and sample destinations also shows no presence of tribal
                         community and therefore OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples has not been triggered.

                         From an environmental perspective, the project screening shows that subprojects for the
                         rehabilitation and better management of degraded water bodies (kunds), public parks and forests,
                         which are part of tourist attractions in the project target destinations and serve both ecological and
                         spiritual purposes, are expected to positively impact the overall environment of the project
                         locations and benefit the local populations, in the long-term. Nevertheless, the project triggers the
                         OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment, because it will upgrade or provide basic services and
                         infrastructure in communities near cultural and natural sites (all man made and modified by human
                         activity), which may lead to potential adverse environmental impacts during the execution stage of
                         civil works. These, if any, will need to be identified and addressed upfront and mitigated/avoided/
                         minimized as needed in line with the project pro-poor objectives. The project also triggers the OP/
                         BP 4.04 Na tural Habitats and OP/BP 4.36 Forests, given planned activities such as for the
                         rehabilitation of water bodies and forest and public park areas. As in the case of social impacts,
                         any subprojects found to have potentially negative environmental impacts during initial screening
                         will require an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA), and, if determined, of an Environmental
                         and Social Management Plan (ESMP), to include a mitigation plan, the development of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental management structure, guidelines for the integration of the ESMP with work
                         contracts, details of environmental monitoring, auditing and corrective action, and EMP budget
                         planning.

                         Finally, as in the case of environment, the project places a particular focus on improving the
                         protection and management of cultural sites of historical, aesthetic and spiritual value in its target
                         areas. Despite the envisaged positive impacts of the project on the rehabilitation of such assets and
                         their surroundings, the project activities trigger the safeguard OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural
                         Resources as a prevention. Under OP/BP 4.11, “cultural property” can include, inter alia,
                         monuments, buildings, sacred sites, archaeological (buried) items and structures, natural features,
                         landscapes, and intangible living cultural property. Impacts on selected cultural properties may
                         occur during their rehabilitation and/or the rehabilitation of their cultural landscapes, as well as the
                         provision of basic services and tourism promotion in communities living near the sites. In
                         addition, the possibility of random archeological findings during the execution of civil works will
                         require measures to manage chance finds. The triggering of the safeguard policy is important for
                         the project as a means to highlight the importance of tried and tested approaches and procedures
                         for improved safeguarding of cultural and natural assets against, for instance, misuse,
                         encroachment, and/or neglect. The ESMF specifies the types of cultural properties typically
                         impacted by development projects and provides specific guidance on how to identify and address
                         those potential impacts early on during subprojects detailing. In short, any subprojects with

                                                                     Page 7 of 12
                           potential negative impacts on physical cultural resources will require the inclusion of an impact
                           assessment within the Environment Impact Assessment. In addition, if required, a Physical
                           Cultural Resources Management Plan (PCRMP) will be prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           One of the main contributions expected from the project is precisely the improvement of
                           approaches to and practices in tourism development in the state. At its core is the focus on (i)
                           improving the stewardship of natural and cultural assets of the project target areas – tourism main
                           draws, but mostly currently under threat or neglect – and (ii) increasing linkages between local
                           communities, currently by-passed by major tourism investments, with the tourism sector from a
                           social, service delivery and economic viewpoint.

                          The project design not only builds upon the World Bank and other agencies’ experience in this
                          domain, but is based on extensive consultations and grounded assessments of the factors currently
                          inhibiting UP’s tourist destinations from leveraging their unique cultural and natural assets as
                          endogenous sources of inclusive growth and poverty reduction through pro-poor tourism
                          development (see section C of the PAD). In a move away from the current monument-centric and
                          large infrastructure tourism development model that focuses on the tourism value of individual
                          monuments or mega investment, which have benefited few, the project approach values and
                          further develops the tourism attractions in their broader geographical, socioeconomic and
                          historical contexts.

                           Yet, the project may cause some potential adverse impact on social groups, environment and
                           cultural properties, particularly during the execution of civil works. Based on the lessons learned
                           from other projects implemented in India and worldwide and all project preparatory work, the
                           Department of Tourism prepared an exhaustive list of potential adverse environmental, social and
                           cultural heritage impacts that subproject implementation under the project may trigger. The list is
                           part of the ESMF, also prepared and disseminated by the Department of Tourism. This list will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           a critical guide for any subproject development and implementation, and will be shared upfront
                           with those who will be hired for the preparation of detailed project reports (for subprojects) and
                           the implementation of civil works to ensure any potential negative impact is identified, mitigated/
                           minimized or avoided early on.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The ESMF prepared for safeguard management under the project requires analyzing various
                           alternatives for each subproject while carrying out upfront Environmental and Social Impact
                           Assessments (ESIA). As per the ESMF guidelines, the ESIAs will be reviewed and cleared by the
                           World Bank prior to approving any subproject for implementation.

                          In addition, the safeguards principles and tools are and will continue to be fully embedded into
                          subproject preparation and implementation, to ensure that any potential negative impact on the
                          environment, social groups and cultural properties are identified and mitigated/avoided as early as
                          possible. Each subproject development will first undergo screening to identify (and, if the case,
                          avoid) early on any adverse impact. In case impacts are unavoidable, mitigation plans will be
                          drawn as per the agreed entitlement framework in the ESMF, and reviewed by the Bank prior to
                          the given subproject financing. No category A subproject will be financed under the project. Such
                          individual subproject activity will be replaced with an element that presents a less significant
                          environmental risk (Category B or C).

                                                                     Page 8 of 12
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Given that subprojects are not finalized yet, the Borrower has prepared an ESMF for the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The ESMF details the policies, procedures and institutional responsibilities for assessing and
                           managing subprojects’ potential environmental and social risks and impacts. It is offered to all
                           agencies responsible for the development and execution of all subprojects to be implemented
                           under the project. The ESMF also provides detailed guidance, and sample terms of reference and
                           reporting structures, for compliance. Each subproject will be subject to the further risk mitigation
                           measures, including the preparation of a detailed Environmental and Social Management Plan
                           (ESMP), Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), and Physical Cultural Resources Management Plan
                           (PCRMP), as applicable. The project has also developed a Resettlement Policy Framework which
                           includes (1) a Gender Development Framework (GDF); (2) an integrated Grievance Redress
                           Mechanism (GRM); (3) specific procedures on public consultation and disclosure; (4) social
                           measures implementing arrangements, monitoring arrangements covering selection, appraisal and
                           implementation of subprojects; (5) outlines for ESIA and ESMP/RAP, and (6) schedule,
                           procedures and terms of reference for periodic environmental and social assessments/monitoring.

                           The State Project Coordination Unit (SPCU) in the State Department of Tourism in Lucknow,
                           responsible for safeguards compliance, will be supported by competitively selected decentralized
                           teams (Technical Support Units – TSUs) based in the project core areas. The TSUs will be housed
                           in the respective Development Authorities, the project implementing entities, and will support
                           them in the day-to-day execution of related subprojects. Given that the Department of Tourism is
                           implementing a World Bank-financed project for the first time, the capacity to address social,
                           cultural and environmental issues as per the World Bank safeguards policies is limited. To this
                           end, the Department of Tourism has already hired an experienced Social Development Specialist
                           for the SPCU and is in the process of hiring Heritage Management and Environment specialists to
                           coordinate, review, support and monitor all respective safeguards aspects of the project. The
                           specialists will also train and strengthen the capacities of specialists in the TSUs and in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementing entities. The Department of Tourism/SPCU will also hire qualified civil society
                           organizations for the implementation of a Resettlement Action Plan or a Physical Cultural
                           Resources Plan, if required. The SPCU and TSUs may also be supported by competitively
                           recruited experts in highly specialized areas, as needed.

                           The current Project staff at the Department of Tourism has received training in the management of
                           safeguards issues. This training program will continue throughout the Project implementation. As
                           part of this on-the-job training program, the Department of Tourism has shown interest in
                           developing decentralized local capacity on managing environmental, social and cultural properties
                           issues associated with various investments (Bank and not Bank financed). In order to achieve this
                           objective, a network of technical human resources such as staff from universities/research
                           institutions, civil society organizations, etc. is being identified. These persons will be further
                           engaged during the course of the Project, as needed, so that they can provide additional support to
                           the Project entities in conducting the required impact assessments and later in implementing all
                           applicable management plans (including Resettlement Action Plan, Gender Action Plan, as
                           relevant) and also offer support on an on-going basis.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project preparation has been carried out in a participatory manner, and its scope has been
                           defined based on the insights and suggestions of more than 600 stakeholders involved at state,


                                                                     Page 9 of 12
                           destinations and community levels.

                           In addition, the Department of Tourism also translated, disseminated and conducted consultations
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on the ESMF in the core project target areas (Agra, Mathura and Varanasi/Sarnath). Specific
                           suggestions, particularly to ensure that local stakeholders continue to be involved in subprojects
                           development, are addressed in the final version of the ESMF. This is a critical point, since
                           sustainability of the project activities and investments will depend on the continued meaningful
                           participation and support of key stakeholders. During project preparation, perceptions of various
                           stakeholders were recorded and they indicated high demand at the grassroots level for greater
                           transparency and involvement in the planning of tourism investments supported by the state and
                           others, including NGOs. Therefore, local stakeholders will continue to be engaged to ensure their
                           participation in the planning as well as in implementation stages through: (i) dissemination of
                           project information in a meaningful and transparent manner; (ii) establishment of a Community
                           Panel in each subproject area for further local participation and oversight; (iii) consultations during
                           subproject preparation and implementation; (iv) education and communication campaigns; and (v)
                           independent oversight, if required. Reputable NGO partners hired on a competitive basis for RAP
                           implementation, if any, will be responsible for implementation of these investment-level social
                           intermediation programs.

                           The ESMF was disclosed in country on April 11, 2015 in both English and Hindi as well as on the
                           World Bank’s InfoShop on April 30, 2015. The link for in-country disclosure is: www.uptourism.
                           gov.in. A revised version of the ESMF, incorporating feedback from consultations, was disclosed
                           in-country on July 6, 2015 and in the World Bank Infoshop on July 16, 2015
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      30-Apr-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                               11-Apr-2015
                           Comments: Following the participatory methodology employed in the project preparation, this
                                         ESMF also benefited from the insights and suggestions of key government agencies
                                         and concerned stakeholders. Public consultations were carried out in core Project
                                         areas namely Agra, Mathura, Varanasi and Sarnath to get feedback and suggestions,
                                         especially from local stakeholders on the draft ESMF. In order to ensure wider
                                         access to the ESMF and productive discussions, the draft version of this ESMF was
                                         translated into Hindi and was disclosed on websites, main newspapers in the state
                                         and placed with the offices of the nodal agencies prior to the consultation meetings.
                                         The minutes of the meetings have been prepared by the Department of Tourism
                                         highlighting the key discussions and issues raised by the stakeholders. The latest
                                         ESMF document assessed and incorporates those suggestions. The final, revised
                                         ESMF and RPF were re-disclosed by DoT in July 2015.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         15-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      30-Apr-2015

                                                                      Page 10 of 12
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                                11-Apr-2015
                           Comments: The Resettlement Framework was disseminated together with the ESMF. The latest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         version includes all key issues discussed with local stakeholders during
                                         consultations, particularly an entitlement framework.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information


                                                                     Page 11 of 12
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Stefania B. Abakerli B
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                       Date: 31-Aug-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Chaohua Zhang (PMGR)                          Date: 31-Aug-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 12 of 12
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
