                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA15047

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Romania                           Project ID:   P155594
                                                       Parent        P093775
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project - Additional Financing (P155594)
   Parent Project    Romania Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (P093775)
   Name:
   Task Team         Gayane Minasyan
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         08-Dec-2015                       Estimated   28-Mar-2016
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GEN03                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Solid waste management (27%), Wastewater Treatment and Disposal (22%),
                     General public administration sector (20%), General agricultu re, fishing and
                     forestry sector (18%), Sanitation (13%)
   Theme(s):         Environmental policies and institutions (25%), Pollution management and
                     environmental health (25%), Water resource management (24%), Land
                     administration and management (13%), Rural services and infrastructure (13%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      53.95           Total Bank Financing:                51.70
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     Borrower                                                                                  2.25
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    51.70
     Total                                                                                    53.95
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:




                                             Page 1 of 8
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To support the Government of Romania to meet the EU Nitrates Directive requirements by (a)
   reducing nutrient discharges to water bodies, (b) promoting behavioral change at the commune
   level, and (c) strengthening institutional and regulatory capacity.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   The overall development objective of the project is to support the Government of Romania
   towards meeting EU Nitrate Directive requirements at national scale.
3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing would finance the costs associated with the scale-up of the
current Integrated Nutrient Pollution Control Project (INPCP) (P093775) nationwide. It will
comprise the following four components, which are largely the same as in the INPCP with slight
modifications:
•        Component 1 - Local Commune Investment Fund:
This component will provide support for effective investments and management practices to reduce
nutrient pollution from agricultural, livestock and human sources.
This component builds upon the experiences and lessons learned from the on-going INPCP and
include support for a menu of investments focusing on manure collection and composting facilities,
manure management, biogas production from animal waste and adoption of code of good agricultural
practices in about 100 communes highly vulnerable to nitrate pollution in all 11 river basins in
Romania.
The financial support provided within the Additional Financing will be demand-driven supported on
competitive grounds, based on the beneficiary communities’ requests and eligibility. The communes
will propose sub-projects selected from a menu of investments based on agreed eligibility criteria and
having the main objective to reduce water pollution with nutrients. The selection and approval of
sub-projects will be done on a competitive basis, for eligible activities and applicants. A detailed
Applicants’ Guidelines for the Competitive Investment Program will be also developed to provide
guiding principles and rules for its implementation at the local, regional and national levels,
describing in detail the eligibility criteria, selection and award procedure. This component will
support investments and management practices to reduce nutrient pollution from agricultural,
livestock and human sources, such as:
 - Building manure storage facilities;
 - Building composting/biomass/pelleting stations;
 - Providing necessary equipment for the manure storage/composting facilities;
 - Building small scale sewage networks and wastewater treatment plants for communities that
already implemented measures to mitigate the pollution with nutrients originating from agriculture,
but where this is still imminent due to the households having non-septic tanks from which effluent
leaks directly into the groundwater;
 - Buffer zones, pastures rehabilitation, tree planting and afforestation to improve the protection of
water bodies.
A menu of customized eligible investments for nutrient pollution reduction will be available,
including facilities for anaerobic digestion as co-generation installations/biogas stations using the


                                             Page 2 of 8
animal waste as main source of energy.

•        Component 2 - Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building:
This component will support activities that aim to strengthen institutional capacity and coordination
within relevant national and local governments, institutions, agencies and stakeholders for regulating,
implementing, monitoring and reporting the EU Nitrate Directive requirements.
The project will contribute to building capacity by providing equipment, other required facilities and
specialized training for MEWF, ANAR, MARD, Agriculture Payments and Intervention Agencies,
National Environment Protection Agencies, Environmental Guard and Public Health Directorates,
and selected Research Stations and County Offices for Soils and Agri-Chemistry. The project will
support ANAR to increase the number of monitoring stations to meet the EU requirements to cover
the entire national territory.
The local (county) Environmental Protection Agencies and local Public Health Directorates need
training and equipment for fast and affordable testing of the nutrients’ concentration in public wells
that are used as drinking water source. This will help inform the concerned communities regarding
their water supply quality and enforce restriction measures in case of polluted waters.
The Agriculture Payments and Intervention Agency and Environmental Guard need better
procedures, regulating framework and training to report on the compliance by farmers of the Nitrate
Directive requirements.
Support will be provided for the development of eight national knowledge and training hubs (one in
each development region), as well as support for on-farm demonstrations, to improve compliance,
adoption and control of code of good agricultural practices to reduce nutrient pollution.

•        Component 3 - Public Awareness, Training and Technical Assistance:
The continuity of the awareness campaign and its replication in other areas of the country is
necessary. None of the activities proposed are new or different in their nature from those currently
being implemented under INPCP. In addition to information provision under the public awareness
campaign, the AF will provide some channels for direct citizen engagement (e.g., PMU contact
information, Facebook, twitter). The opportunities for providing feedback, the analysis of such
feedback and the report back to communities on its results, will be strengthened under the Additional
Financing. The public awareness campaign and associated activities will reflect the needs and
interests of different groups, such as Roma communities and gender groups. The surveys on
knowledge, attitudes and behavior will be expanded to allow for qualitative data collection and the
consolidated results of the surveys will be shared with participating communities in a user friendly
format. Participating municipalities will be requested to provide summaries of public consultation,
including the feedback received and the responses provided.
One objective of this component will be to promote the financial instruments that will be available
within the AF to potential beneficiaries. This objective will be reached through face-to-face
meetings, where the beneficiaries will find out about the Calls for Proposals sessions and will be
taught how to prepare their proposals in order to be eligible.

•       Component 4 - Project Management:
The Additional Financing Project will be implemented by the existing PMU located within the
MEWF, enhanced with specialists in evaluation and selection of sub-projects proposals. While the
beneficiaries will have a more active role in the sub-projects proposals and implementations, the
PMU will have an extended role in providing information regarding the project and monitoring all
project’s activities, as well as ensuring the coordination of all interventions aimed at implementing
the Nitrates Directive. This will involve a revision of the PMU procedures for clarifying the
coordination mechanism between PMU, the beneficiaries and other institutions involved in the

                                             Page 3 of 8
implementation of the ND.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed AF would finance the costs associated with the scale-up of the current project
nationwide, and mainly through Component 1 will provide support for effective investments and
management practices to reduce nutrient pollution from agricultural, livestock and human sources.
Approximately additional 100 communes highly vulnerable to nitrate pollution in all 11 river basins
in Romania will be covered. The entire territory of Romania is located within the Black/Sea Danube
Basin and therefore all water bodies are tributary to international waters. In addition, Romania agreed
in 2013 to cover the entire territory under Water Framework Directive and Nitrate Directive
compliance, thus posing additional challenges for the responsible authorities. Targeted communes
are located in highly vulnerable to nitrate pollution areas, and many of these are near waterways or
have shallow groundwater tables. Therefore, the project activities aim to demonstrate practices which
can improve local water quality.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Cesar Niculescu (GENDR)
Rebecca Emilie Anne Lacroix (GSURR)

 6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental              Yes            Effective measures have been put in place under the
 Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     INPCP to address and closely monitor the safeguards
                                           issues. The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) from
                                           the original project (INPCP) proved to be acceptable and
                                           will be used for the AF as well. Required mitigation
                                           measures for the project activities are standard and widely
                                           used in construction practices. They are already well
                                           prescribed in the EMP, which was prepared for the
                                           original project. Since the new project will support the
                                           same types of activities as under the original project it is
                                           proposed that the exiting EMP is updated and applied also
                                           for the AF. The updated EMP will be re-disclosed both
                                           locally and on the Bank's InfoShop.
                                           The EMP stipulates all contracts for construction works
                                           will include requirements for implementation of the
                                           specific measures as per EMP provisions and good
                                           construction practices.
                                           In addition to the overall project EMP which identifies the
                                           range of issues expected, all sub-investments will require
                                           an environmental approval from the local (county)
                                           environmental protection agency.
                                           The Project is expected to have limited negative
                                           environmental and social impacts, as physical works will
                                           be undertaken to only construct local, small-scale
                                           facilities.
                                           The long-term environmental impacts anticipated are
                                           positive and linked to the overall project development



                                             Page 4 of 8
                                  objective to reduce nutrients in surface and ground water
                                  bodies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

Pest Management OP 4.09 No

Physical Cultural           No    Although this safeguard will not be triggered, the
Resources OP/BP 4.11              environmental screening process will screen for the
                                  presence of physical cultural resources. In addition,
                                  chance find procedures will be included in all works
                                  contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No       The proposed investments will continue to take place
OP/BP 4.12                        exclusively on municipally owned land. Robust screening
                                  mechanisms are in place to avoid impacts covered under
                                  OP 4.12 pertaining to formal or informal users. The Guide
                                  for Applicants, Concept Note and Full Applications to be
                                  used by participating municipalities include a description
                                  of status and current uses of the land (including for tree
                                  planting) to ensure impacts covered under OP 4.12 are
                                  avoided.
Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
4.37
Projects on International   Yes   The project will support activities that take place on trans-
Waterways OP/BP 7.50              boundary waterways as defined in OP 7.50. (i.e. the whole
                                  territory of Romania drains into the Black Sea and
                                  Danube River Basins). It is anticipated that investments
                                  will not (i) cause appreciable harm to the other riparian as
                                  it will not adversely change the quality or quantity of
                                  water flows, and (ii) it will not be appreciably harmed by
                                  the other riparian possible water use. The Project will
                                  serve existing populations that are already consuming
                                  water from the same river basins. There will be no
                                  increase in water abstraction or consumption, no new
                                  agro-processing facilities which may involve intake of
                                  water from the Danube River or its tributaries funded
                                  under the Project. . Exception to the notification
                                  requirements of OP 7.50 has been granted because the
                                  proposed activities do not attempt to modify waterways
                                  nor significantly increase water abstraction volumes,
                                  leaving the water rights of other riparian countries
                                  unaffected. On the contrary, in terms of the “potential
                                  pollution” issue, the project activities are designed to a


                                   Page 5 of 8
                                               betterment of the quality of their waters. Also, in terms of
                                               the “use of” issue, the project investments will involve
                                               separating, proper storing and recycling of animal waste
                                               so that its discharge into the water bodies that drain into
                                               the Danube River or the Danube River itself is reduced.
                                               Animal waste treatment facilities funded under the project
                                               will not involve any intake of river water.
   Projects in Disputed         No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The project has no significant and/or irreversible impact. Its only minor impact will be temporary
     nuisances resulting from construction activities, and may include: (i) increased pollution due to
     construction waste; (ii) generation of dust, noise, and vibration due to the movement of
     construction vehicles and machinery; (iii) associated risks due to improper disposal of construction
     waste, or minor operational or accidental spills of fuel and lubricants from the construction
     machinery; (iv) improper reinstatement of construction sites upon completion of works. All these
     potential environmental impacts are readily identifiable, small in scale, and minimal in impact and
     can be effectively prevented, minimized, or mitigated by including into the work contracts specific
     measures to be taken by contractors. The project design aims to have a positive effect on the
     environment as measured by improved water quality.

     Since the project supported activities will take place on transboundary waterways, OP 7.50, will be
     triggered. However, project interventions are not expected to adversely affect water quality or
     quantity to downstream riparian states. It is anticipated that activities will not (i) cause appreciable
     harm to the other riparian states as it will not adversely change the quality or quantity of water
     flows, and (ii) will not be appreciably harmed by other riparian states possible water use.
     Exception to the notification requirements of OP 7.50 has been granted, because the proposed
     activities do not attempt to modify waterways nor significantly increase water abstraction
     volumes, leaving the water rights of other riparian countries unaffected.
   2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
     in the project area:
     Anticipated long-term environmental impacts would be positive and are linked to the overall goad
     of reducing nutrients in surface and ground water bodies.
   3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
     impacts.
     N.A.
   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
     assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
     Similar to the original project, the actual project is qualified as Category B, and triggers the same
     safeguards: OP 4.01 (Environmental assessment), and OP 7.50 (Projects on International
     Waterways). The required mitigation measures for the project activities are standard and widely
     used in construction practices. They are already well prescribed in the Environmental Management

                                                 Page 6 of 8
  Plan (EMP), which was prepared for the initial project. Since the new project will support the
  same types of activities as under the initial project it is proposed that the exiting EMP is updated
  and applied also for the Additional Financing. The EMP stipulates that all contracts for
  construction works include requirements for implementation of specific measures as per EMP
  provisions and good construction practices.

  Environmental issues including mitigation measures would be supervised periodically by the PMU
  M&E Staff supported by the technical support staff located in each of the Water Basin
  Directorates, and by specialized consultants. The local (county) environmental protection agency
  and water inspectorate would also be involved in supervision of construction works and
  operations. The project will rely on the Romanian laws (fully aligned with the EU environmental
  acquis) governing the process for environmental permitting and review.

  The implementing agency (Ministry of Environment, Waters and Forests through the Project
  Management Unit (PMU) is responsible for project preparation and implementation. The PMU has
  built a positive track record in safeguards monitoring and compliance throughout implementation
  of the original project. The PMU will carry out project implementation in close cooperation with
  participating communes and key counterparts and will be responsible for managing the
  implementation of the project, including continuous monitoring and evaluation, control of
  safeguards compliance, as well as routine communications with the World Bank.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders are commune residents/farmers, local commune administrations, and county
  administrations who are responsible for the promotion of investments to help improve
  environmental conditions and raising awareness of the local population on behavior change.
  During sub-projects preparation consultations will be conducted in the respective participating
  communes. In addition, the PMU will carry out public consultations with groups that may be
  impacted by subprojects before finalization of site-specific EMP. These groups are usually
  represented by those who live near construction site, as well as by representatives of local NGOs,
  and other stakeholders. PMU will conduct at least one public consultation with groups affected by
  the activity prior to completion of the individual, site-specific EMPs.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Nov-2015
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   07-Dec-2015
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Romania                                                          04-Dec-2015
  Comments: Disclosed on the MEWF-INPCP website
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                             Page 7 of 8
  C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
   OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
    Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    report?
    If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
    Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the credit/loan?
   OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
    Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
    Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gayane Minasyan
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                              Date: 04-Dec-2015
   Practice Manager/    Name: Kulsum Ahmed (PMGR)                            Date: 06-Dec-2015
   Manager:




                                              Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
