                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC17987

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Vietnam                         Project ID:       P160118
                            Project Name:        VN PFM AAA Program_MOF Executed Trust Fund
                            Team Leader(s):      Quyen Hoang Vu
                            Estimated Date       15-Jul-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGO14                           Lending           IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3                               Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              CA- Dept of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Devlp (former
                                                                                                                             0.266
                              CIDA)
                              Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs                                                   2.734
                            Environment         C - Not Required
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objectives of this Program are to: (i) support strengthening the capacity of
                           executive bodies to make, implement, and monitor policies to improve budget planning and
                           execution in a transparent, accountable, and sustainable manner; and (ii) provideempirical analysis of
                           the effectiveness and efficiency of major public finance reforms at both the central and local levels of
                           government.
                           C. Project Description
                           The World Bank has established a Multi-Donor Trust Fund (TFP #2045 approved on December 2,
                           2015) with other Development Partners, namely the Swiss State Secretariat for Economic Affairs
                           (SECO) and the Department of Foreign Affairs, Trade and Development of Canada (DFATD) to
                           provide Technical Assistance (TA) to Vietnamese counterparts through a Public Financial
                           Management (PFM) Analytical and Advisory Assistance (AAA) Program during 2016-2020. The
                           Program will provide support both at national (the Ministry of Finance) and sub-national (Da Nang
                           City) levels, with the possibility of extending to work with other sub-national governments (e.g. Ho
                           Chi Minh City) and the National Assembly in the future.
                         This Recipient-Executed Trust Fund (RETF) focuses on the support to the Ministry of Finance,
                         which is the largest component of the Multi-Donor Trust Fund (MDTF). This component covers
                         activities at central level but it is also expected that its outcomes and results will have impact at sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         national levels given the unitary budget system in Vietnam. This RETF therefore shares the overall
                         objectives of the umbrella MDTF.

                         As mentioned above, the PEFA rating exercise carried out in Vietnam reflected the considerable
                         progress that has already been made in improving PFM systems. The above areas of vulnerability
                         cover only 8 of the 27 performance indicators in the PEFA framework. But they have a common
                         characteristic in that they all relate to the results achieved from public expenditures. The
                         Government's FDS is focused on improving these results through:

                         (i)    better linkages between plans and budgets set in a medium term context;
                         (ii)   more effective implementation of those budgets through improved management and
                         monitoring of quality and progress;
                         (iii)  information that supports both budget managers and those charged with holding them
                         accountable; and
                         (iv)   the identification and management of the inevitable risks to which a fast growing economy is
                         exposed.

                         Tackling these areas for improvement will not, of itself, guarantee the better effectiveness of public
                         expenditure that the Government is aiming for as there are policy dimensions that will also need to
                         be addressed. However, it is clear that addressing these areas is an important stepping stone to
                         achieving the important objective of improved service delivery and the better use of public resources.

                         The Government led the PEFA rating exercise using the objective criteria reflected in the rating
                         framework of PEFA and has embraced the results and their implications. Ministry of Finance
                         Departments have been active in identifying proposals for achieving improvements in the 4 groups of
                         problem areas set out above. They have made their proposals linked not just to the technical activity,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         but also by improving the performance measures that will be used to measure the impact in achieving
                         better quality of expenditures. The basis of the program of support now proposed is to both help them
                         implement their proposals while maintaining a focus on the impact on expenditure effectiveness.

                         The support to the MOF therefore encompasses four technical components and the project
                         management operation. The four main components are (i) improving linkages between plans and
                         budgets, (ii) improving effectiveness of budget execution controls, (iii) improving production and
                         supply of quality fiscal information and (iv) improved systems for fiscal stability and risk
                         management. These outcomes align with the four components of the Program support to The
                         Ministry of Finance.

                         The key activities proposed by the counterparts to be supported include: (1) Developing medium-
                         term fiscal and budget plans; and Improving the linkage between new investment planning process
                         and realistic budget plans; (2) Using the Public Expenditure Review now being undertaken to
                         develop proposals on the formulation of annual and medium term indicative budget ceilings; and
                         Undertaking public expenditure review(s) and other TA support activities to improve the linkage
                         between investment budget and fiscal resource envelope;(3) Developing a road map and management
                         framework for strengthening empowerment of Service Delivery Units; (4) Assessing and improving
                         mechanism of commitment management and control and developing the system of commitment
                         reporting; (5) Improving cash management including (i) strengthening cash flow forecasting and (ii)
                           developing techniques to manage fluctuations in cash availability; (6) Improving the system of
                           budget classification and reporting of execution; (7) Strengthening the presentation and analysis of
                           budget data in the form of international best practices; (8) Improving production of high quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                           financial information and utilization of the information by wider groups of data users through further
                           upgrading and enhancing the national fiscal data warehouse; (9) Developing accounting standards/
                           guidelines on the basis of international public sector accounting standards (IPSAS) with adaptation to
                           local conditions; and Defining and improving form of financial statements that meet international
                           standards for public sector entities; (10) Producing whole-of-Government consolidated financial
                           statements; (11) Conducting analysis and developing strategy to manage overarching fiscal risks of
                           public sector finances as a whole; (12) Producing consolidated review of SOE financial position
                           including forward-looking risk analysis; (13) Developing a consolidated report for policy makers on
                           risks arising at sub-national level.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           This is a TA program with planned activities mostly taking place in Hanoi, with occasional capacity
                           building in other cities of Vietnam.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           N/A

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No               The policy is not triggered as the project will
                           BP 4.01                                              not finance any civil works and not fund any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                upstream studies or feasibility study that may
                                                                                lead to future investments.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
                           Projects on International           No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP    No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Quyen Hoang Vu
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Surhid P. Gautam (SA)                                        Date: 14-Jul-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Nicola J. Smithers (PMGR)                                    Date: 15-Jul-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
