INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA13469
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Afghanistan               Project ID:  P152975
Parent       P111943
Project ID:
Project Name: Afghanistan Power System Development Project Additional Financing
(P 152975)
Parent Project Afghanistan Power System Development Project (P111943)
Name:
Task Team       Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius,Jie Li
Leader(s):
Estimated       22-Jun-2015               Estimated    06-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (910%), Public administration-
Energy and mining (9%)
Theme(s):       Urban services and housing for the poor (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     15.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   0.00
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                      15.00
Total                                                                     15.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 6


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The development objective of the project is to support : Increasing access to grid power and the
quantity of available power to the consumers in the target areas of the urban centers at Pul-e-
Khumri, Charikar, Gulbahar and Jabul-Seraj.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
The development objective of the project is to increase the number of electricity connections for
the urban centers of Charikar, Gulbahar and Jabul-es-Seraj and Pul-e-Khumri in an institutionally
efficient way.
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
The development objective of the project is to increase the number of electricity connections for
the urban centers of Charikar, Gulbahar and Jabul-es-Seraj and Pul-e-Khumri and to improve the
availability of power from Naghlu and Mahipar switchyards.
3. Project Description
The proposed additional loan would help finance the costs associated with (a) the supply of meter
boxes and drop-lines to the houses for the rehabilitation of distribution networks at Charikar,
Gulbahar and Jabul-es-Seraj and Pul-e-Khumri; (b) support to the implementing agency, Da
Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat (DABS, the electricity utility) to supervise the rehabilitation of the
switchyard at Naghlu; and (c) remaining cost of the rehabilitation of the switchyards at Naghlu and
Mahipar hydropower plant. Under the AF the responsibility for implementing the project will be
moved from the Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) to the state-owned power utility company,
DABS.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The additional financing will be used to fund goods for installation of the service drops to connect
the distribution networks rehabilitated under the project to households in the areas of Charikar,
Gulbahar, Jabul Saraj and Pul-e-Khumri. Also, the proposed AF will finance the cost for installation
of Naghlu switchyard.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
James Orehmie Monday (GENDR)
Mohammad Yasin Noori (GSURR)
Obaidullah Hidayat (GENDR)
Sayed Mujtaba Shobair (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is triggered due to
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                some adverse environmental and social impacts from the
civil works planned under the proposed AF and assigned
EA category "B." The project provides additional
financing to support the completion of the parent project
under which the rehabilitation of distribution networks in
Charikar, Gulbahar and Jabul-es-Seraj and Pul-e-Khumri
areas was planned. Adverse environmental impacts are
Page 2 of 6


﻿related to rehabilitation of Naghlu switchyard. Although
these activities do not pose any irreversible impact to the
environment, they may cause disruption of day to day life
during the project implementation phase. To avoid and
minimize the negative impact of the activities under this
project, a site specific EMP will be prepared for the
switchyard at Naghlu. DABS will ensure the proper
implementation of recommended mitigation measures to
avoid or minimize any adverse impact. These
requirements are stipulated in the ESMF for the original
project. The ESMF has been updated to reflect the change
in implementation arrangements and has been disclosed to
InfoShop on 22 June 2015.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           This policy is not triggered, because the project
4.04                                 components are not expected to be in the area of any
natural habitat or will not have any impact on it.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project activities do not impact forests in any way, as
defined by the policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will neither finance pesticides nor will they be
used in the project.
Physical Cultural       No           OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered because there is no indication
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 of presence of physical cultural resources within the
selected sites for the additional financing. However, the
updated ESMF includes guidelines for the "Chance Find
Procedure" to be applied according to National Afghan
Law.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           This policy is not triggered as there are no Indigenous
BP 4.10                              Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP 4.10 within the
project area that could potentially benefit or be adversely
affected by the Project's activities.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The activities under the additional financing are not
OP/BP 4.12                           expected to involve land acquisition impacts. However,
the WB's operational policy on Involuntary Resettlement
(OP 4.12) is triggered as a precautionary measure. Based
on the experience of the parent project, the rehabilitation
and extension of distribution activities had caused some
limited land/asset impacts such as impacts to crops,
business and very limited land acquisition for pole
location and indoor, or out-door transformer stations. The
client agency had adopted appropriate measures to avoid
land/assets impacts. The reports to date indicate, the
installation of distribution activities mostly took place
within the available right of way. The records on land
acquisition also show that the affected families requested
no compensation due to minor land/asset impacts. The
updated ESMF includes guidelines for land/asset
Page 3 of 6


﻿acquisition entitlements and compensation, which would
be followed in the event they were needed. Since DABS
is to take over the implementation responsibilities from
MEW under the proposed additional financing, the ESMF
developed and agreed upon with Ministry of Energy and
Water (MEW) has been revised and re-disclosed through
InfoShop on 22 June 2015 and in-country through DABS'
website. DABS has assigned a safeguards specialist to
oversee compliance of social safeguards.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not have any activity involving dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        The project does not involve any activity that will affect
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project does not involve any activity in any known
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     disputed area.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant or long lasting potential or irreversible impacts associated with activities
to be undertaken under the project. Although there is some construction work associated with the
project which involves the rehabilitation of Naghlu switchyard, they are deemed as temporary and
the negative impact will be avoided or minimized by proper implementation of the EMP, which
will be prepared for Naghlu switchyard.
An important aspect to be considered in all work sites is the strict follow up of health and safety
measures to be undertaken for workers onsite. The additional financing activities are not expected
to involve land acquisition impacts, because the installation of the service drops to connect the
distribution networks to households will take place within the existing right of way. And the
installation of Naghlu switchyard will be conducted within the premises of DABS. However the
updated ESMF includes guidelines for land, asset acquisition entitlements and compensation in
case any activity were to involve land acquisition.
Overall, the social impacts of the AF activities are expected to be minor.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Overall, the project would reduce losses, thus dependency on thermal fuels; significantly reduce
the use of inefficient and polluting small local diesel generators of the consumers. The project is
expected to have limited adverse environmental impacts, and has been rated as environmental
category "B." The ESMF of the original project was updated to reflect the transfer of the project to
DABS. The contractor will be asked to nominate one focal person to supervise and report
implementation of environment and social safeguards. The overall impact of the project is
expected to be significantly positive to the environment.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Since the proposed additional financing is towards the excess costs of an existing contract for
Page 4 of 6


﻿installation of Naghlu switchyard on DABS premises no alternatives were considered.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The responsibility for implementation is to be transferred from the current implementing agency,
the Ministry of Energy and Water (MEW) to Afghanistan's power utility Da Afghanistan Breshna
Sherkat (DABS). DABS, as an independent and autonomous company, has dedicated
environmental and social safeguards team and has already assigned one of their safeguards experts
to oversee compliance of social and environmental safeguards under the APSDP's additional
financing. .
DABS has the experience of working with Bank policies previously under NHRP. And the
safeguards team has benefited from several training events organized by the Bank office in Kabul,
including training in management of land acquisition, resettlement and rehabilitation organized
jointly by BRAC University and the World Bank. The DABS safeguards focal point will take
responsibility for overseeing the implementation of this project's ESMF provisions during
preparation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of all installation activities under the
additional financing.
The Chief Operating Officer (COO) of DABS will have overall responsibility for ensuring
compliance with the requirements set out in the revised ESMF for the additional financing.
The current findings from NHRP show the NHRP's safeguards capacity to implement the ESMF
properly for the additional financing activities is fully adequate.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The major stakeholders are MEW, DABS, relevant NGOs, relevant private sector entities, and
particularly the relevant local communities and customers of DABS. The safeguards focal officer
will be responsible for undertaking meaningful consultations with the relevant stakeholders,
including communities as necessary.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                22-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             22-Jun-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Afghanistan                                                22-Jun-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                22-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             22-Jun-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Afghanistan                                                22-Jun-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 5 of 6


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius,Jie Li
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Sheoli Pargal (PMGR)                 Date: 22-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


