                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA12446
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Apr-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Apr-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Uganda                             Project ID:    P149965
                            Project Name:     Third Northern Uganda Social Action Fund (NUSAF 3) (P149965)
                            Task Team         Endashaw Tadesse Gossa
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         13-Apr-2015                        Estimated   27-May-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSPDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (75%), Other social
                                              protection and risk management (15%), Gender (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     130.00           Total Bank Financing:                130.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                             130.00
                              Total                                                                                   130.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is “to provide income support to and build the resilience
                           of poor and vulnerable households in Northern Uganda.”
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed project will have four components. The first component contains two sub-components

                                                                      Page 1 of 11
                         ‒ Labor Intensive Public Works (LIPW) and Disaster Risk Financing (DRF) ‒ that will both provide
                         temporary/seasonal employment opportunities for poor and vulnerable households and will be
                         capable of being scaled up in response to disasters in selected pilot areas. The second component ‒
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Livelihood Investment Support (LIS) provides livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households
                         to enable them increase their productive assets and incomes. The third component ‒ Transparency,
                         Accountability and Anti-Corruption (TAAC) ‒ will cover activities implemented by the Inspectorate
                         of Government (IG) to improve transparency, accountability, and anti-corruption efforts in northern
                         Uganda. The fourth component ‒ Safety Net Mechanisms and Project Management ‒ will provide
                         institutional support to implement the new project and help to develop the social protection system
                         that is envisioned in the draft Uganda Social Protection Policy (USPP).

                         Component 1: Labor-intensive Public Works and Disaster Risk Financing
                         LIPW will provide beneficiaries from poor and vulnerable households with a seasonal transfer for
                         multiple years in return for their participation in LIPW. Following disasters, the DRF sub-
                         component will be activated in order to scale up the LIPW activities temporarily and rapidly to
                         provide additional support to core LIPW clients and/or to extend coverage to new beneficiaries. The
                         ability to rapidly scale up LIPW is expected to prevent household consumption from dropping after
                         climatic disasters and to protect their livelihoods and assets, leading to a more rapid post-crisis
                         recovery. While the core LIPW sub-component will be implemented throughout Northern Uganda,
                         the DRF sub-component will be piloted in selected districts to generate adequate evidence on which
                         to base the design of a possible extension of the program to other areas after the midterm review.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Labor-intensive Public Works. This sub-component will provide beneficiaries
                         from poor and vulnerable households with a seasonal transfer in return for their participation in
                         LIPW that will enable them to sustain and increase their assets and smooth their consumption during
                         lean seasons. This sub-component will also result in the creation of physical assets of value to the
                         local communities. This component will finance: (i) the wages/transfers for the beneficiaries
                         participating in the public works activities; (ii) the equipment, materials, and semi-skilled labor and
                         other inputs necessary to implement the selected LIPW up to the required quality; and (iii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         administrative costs such as the hiring of community facilitators, training and planning workshops. It
                         will also finance unconditional transfers to those targeted poor and vulnerable households that have
                         no adult able-bodied members to participate in LIPW. The LIPW will consist of a variety of labor-
                         intensive sub-projects to create important community assets. These might include rural access roads,
                         tree nurseries, afforestation, the construction of different soil and water conservation (SWC)
                         measures and flood control structures, small-scale irrigation, hand-dug wells, valley tanks,
                         community pond construction, and the construction or rehabilitation of market places. The
                         productive assets created by the LIPW must be designed not only to help poor households but also to
                         benefit the entire community. These assets will help the communities to respond to and build
                         resilience against the negative effects of climate change by helping them to diversify risk, enhance
                         their incomes, and build their skills and assets. For example, SWC activities increase land
                         productivity and income, and building roads, market shelters, and pavements will make markets and
                         social services more accessible, while valley tanks, hand-dug wells, and spring development will
                         increase the potable water supply and improve hygiene and sanitation.

                         The design and implementation of this component differs significantly from the public works
                         component of NUSAF 2. Key enhancements will include: (i) effective targeting of households
                         according to clear agreed criteria related to poverty and vulnerability implemented using a
                         participatory and transparent community targeting approach; (ii) improved participatory LIPW
                         planning based on multi-year watershed planning principles and conducted according to a clearly

                                                                      Page 2 of 11
                         defined timeframe that will enable the timely implementation of sub-projects; (iii) more labor-
                         intensive sub-projects, with the result that at least 70 percent of the budget allocated to this sub-
                         component will be spent on wages (transfers) to participants; and (iv) increased flexibility in making
Public Disclosure Copy




                         payments to allow for both daily wages (for tasks such as nursery management) or piece rates (for
                         tasks such as road construction). The multi-year watershed plan will provide a roadmap for
                         systematic and sustainable natural resources management and development. Each year the annual
                         LIPW plan will be drawn from the multi-year watershed plan, which will continue to consolidate and
                         build on the preceding year’s development efforts. In addition to the activities that will comprise the
                         annual LIPW plans, the multi-year watershed plan will include activities that can be scaled up rapidly
                         funded by DRF resources in the event of a shock.

                         The LIPW component takes into account the special needs of women and requires that at least 40
                         percent of LIPW participants are women. To achieve this target, the project will ensure that some of
                         the selected LIPW activities are located close to villages and appropriately meet the needs of women.
                         Through their representation on the community committees, women will also be fully involved in the
                         decision-making, including in selecting the types of public works activities to be adopted and their
                         locations. The beneficiaries of this component will be selected using a two-step process, in which
                         geographic targeting will be used to identify the poorest sub-counties and then community-based
                         targeting will be used to select the poorest and most vulnerable households within those
                         communities. A Public Works Beneficiary Registry and Verification Mechanism will be created with
                         a management information system that will ensure that payments are made to eligible beneficiaries.
                         Spot checks by the district supervision teams and technical support teams, third party verification,
                         and community score cards will also be used to monitor the integrity of the implementation process,
                         especially the accuracy and timeliness of payments to beneficiaries.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Disaster Risk Financing. This sub-component aims to develop a mechanism for
                         scaling up assistance to poor and vulnerable households immediately following disaster events and a
                         system to cover the costs of this expansion. The sub-component will take a sequenced approach to
                         the provision of disaster assistance in Northern Uganda, initially focusing on the risk of drought in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Karamoja. This gradual approach is needed because of the heterogeneity of risks in Uganda, the
                         detailed technical analysis required, and the need to build technical, operational, and institutional
                         capacity in Uganda to develop a scalable system of disaster relief. Drought will be the first risk on
                         the agenda because it can impact as much as 80 percent of the population, it affects large
                         geographical areas, and it is very costly for the government to finance. The poorest sub-region,
                         Karamoja, is particularly prone to weather shocks, which in turn contribute to the area’s high levels
                         of poverty, thus making it an appropriate initial geographical focus. Karamoja also has the advantage
                         of having significant operational and practical experience in implementing direct income support
                         programs and labor-intensive public works.

                         Component 2: Livelihood Investment Support
                         The Livelihood Investment Support component will support the government’s aim to extend
                         livelihood support to poor and vulnerable households and, by doing so, increase their productive
                         assets and incomes. The LIS component is comprised of an Improved Household Income Support
                         Program (IHISP) and a Sustainable Livelihoods Pilot (SLP).

                         Sub-Component 2.1: Improved Household Income Support Program. The IHISP will build on
                         NUSAF 2 experience but will seek to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of the approach. The
                         objective of the IHISP is to improve the livelihoods and increase the incomes of targeted households
                         in Northern Uganda by providing them with comprehensive skills development training, livelihood

                                                                      Page 3 of 11
                         grants, and mentoring support. The IHISP will be implemented in 55 districts of Northern Uganda.
                         Participating groups (with 10 to 15 members per group) may apply for grants up to a maximum cap
                         of US$5,000. IHISP is expected to benefit around 115,000 households in five years. The IHSIP will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         target poor and vulnerable groups such as women, youths, female-headed households, people with
                         disabilities, orphans, and disarmed Karamojong youths. Priority will be given to women and youths,
                         with the expectation that at least 50 percent of beneficiaries will be women and 50 percent will be
                         young people. The LIS component will be targeted using the same two-step process that is used for
                         the LIPW, in which geographic targeting will be used to identify the poorest sub-counties and then
                         community-based targeting will be used to select the poorest and most vulnerable households within
                         those communities. Although the approach used will be the same, the criteria used will be slightly
                         different. The LIPW beneficiaries are expected to be the poorest of the poor, whereas LIS
                         beneficiaries, in addition to be poor, must be willing and able to invest in livelihood opportunities.
                         The LIS beneficiaries must also be willing to form CIGs, must be able to undertake livelihood
                         activities, and must commit themselves to meeting certain key co-responsibilities. Whenever possible
                         (in other words, wh en LIS and LIPW components are being rolled-out in the same communities at
                         the same time), the targeting of both components will take place at the same time.

                         Sub-Component 2.2: Sustainable Livelihoods Pilot. The Sustainable Livelihoods Pilot (SLP) aims to
                         gen erate lessons and develop evidence to inform more significant changes to livelihood support in
                         the future. It includes three main shifts in approach: (i) a focus on the creation of community
                         institutions that can support household livelihood investments in the longer term; (ii) a greater focus
                         on self-help and the use of revolving village funds as opposed to grants; and (iii) universal coverage
                         of poor households in target villages. The proposed pilot will operate in 40 villages in four districts
                         of Northern Uganda. Villages participating in the pilot will not be eligible for the IHISP component.
                         Social mobilization and targeting in the target villages will be conducted in a participatory manner
                         with the aim of providing universal coverage to the poor. Through this process, existing savings/self-
                         help groups will be identified in the target villages. Any poor households who not currently members
                         of existing savings/self-help groups will also be identified and supported to form their savings
                         groups. The existing and new savings groups will be given training in: (i) group management; (ii)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         group saving and lending; (iii) financial literacy; and (iv) record keeping. These groups will also be
                         required to practice five core principles to ensure the sustainability of the group ‒ regular meetings,
                         regular savings, regular inter-lending, timely repayments, and keeping up-to-date books of accounts.
                         Those groups that follow the five core principles for six months will graduate to become NUSAF
                         Self-help Groups (NUSAF SHGs) and will go on to form a Village Livelihood Improvement
                         Committee (VLIC).

                         Component 3: Strengthening Transparency, Accountability, and Anti-Corruption (TAAC)
                         Under NUSAF 3, the TAAC component will be tailored in such a way as to contribute to the
                         government’s commitment to increasing transparency and accountability in public service delivery as
                         enshrined in Vision 2040, the NDP, and the Accountability Sector Strategic Investment Plan
                         (ASSIP). The strengthened TAAC will enhance the effectiveness of transparency, accountability, and
                         anti-corruption processes in project areas by:
                         •        Introducing social accountability tools in a more systematic manner to enable citizens to
                         participate in monitoring and to provide feedback on project activities and the delivery of other
                         services in the project area. Social accountability tools were implemented under NUSAF 1 and 2, but
                         their implementation was ad hoc and the lessons learned were not systematically used. In NUSAF 3,
                         a community scorecard will be issued to beneficiaries at the start, in the middle, and at the end of the
                         project to gather feedback. The findings from this exercise will be used to strengthen the project’s
                         ongoing implementation and adjust its design if needed.

                                                                      Page 4 of 11
                         •        Strengthening existing systems and tools for grievance management at the community level.
                         While a grievance mechanism was introduced under NUSAF 2, it did little more than register and
                         resolve cases. The existing system will be strengthened to increase the timeliness with which
Public Disclosure Copy




                         complaints and appeals are handled and resolved.
                         •        Upgrading and enhancing the functionality of community-level committees to support the
                         achievement of the component and project objectives. The mandate, operation, and composition of
                         the Community Monitoring Groups (CMGs) have been revised under the new project to reflect the
                         need to increase their effectiveness. The members of the CMGs will now undergo comprehensive
                         training and will receive recognition and support from the IG.
                         •        Introducing a simple monitoring tool that enables the IG to collect information on the key
                         component performance indicators. The tool will be developed and validated before project
                         effectiveness. The tool will make it possible to collect other selected information on the project’s
                         performance in the TAAC area.

                         Component 4: Safety Net Mechanisms and Project Management.
                         Sub-component 4.1 Safety Net Mechanism. This sub-component aims to lay the foundation for a
                         social safety net system as envisioned in the draft Uganda Social Protection Policy (USPP). The
                         component will support the MGLSD in establishing and strengthening systems to promote the
                         harmonization of the direct income support elements of the social protection sector. For example, it
                         will support the development of National Labor-intensive Public Works Guidelines and of
                         mechanisms such as a single registry of beneficiaries that will make it possible to prevent the same
                         households from receiving benefits from similar types of interventions. This component will also
                         support the establishment of payment mechanisms for labor-intensive public works to ensure that
                         beneficiaries receive their transfers in a timely and secure manner. It will explore the possibility of
                         using private sector payment service providers (such as mobile money providers) and test these
                         modalities in the areas where they can operate. Concurrently, this component will support the
                         establishment of the systems and procedures required to deliver the LIPW and the LIS activities.
                         These systems and procedures that will be developed under NUSAF 3 can also be used by other
                         similar social protection interventions and will form the foundation of a social protection system.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Among the key systems that will be supported are the overall project monitoring system and the
                         management information systems (MIS) that will be developed to support overall project
                         management and decision-making. The MIS will include modules for: (i) the registration of
                         beneficiaries; (ii) data on key socioeconomic indicators; (iii) information on public works payments;
                         (iv) the location of sub-projects and their status (approved, financed, or completed); (v) monitoring
                         of compliance with program; (vi) monitoring of program implementation; (vii) grievances; and (viii)
                         the preparation of reports.

                         Sub-component 4.2: Project Management. This sub-component will support the operational
                         expenditures related to the management and the monitoring and evaluation of the project. Its support
                         will strengthen the planning and coordination of activities supported by the project, as well as the
                         monitoring of their implementation. Project coordination and the accountability for project resources
                         are both the responsibility of the Permanent Secretary in the Office of the Prime Minister with the
                         support of the established NUSAF technical support team (TST). To ensure effective project
                         implementation, this sub-component will support the OPM, relevant sector ministries, and local
                         government staff in coordinating and performing routine monitoring of the project activities.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will provide support in a limited number of districts, prioritizing the 55 districts in the


                                                                       Page 5 of 11
                         north and east of the country that participated in the NUSAF 2. It will also coordinate with the WFP-
                         implemented Cash/Food for Assets program to minimize overlap in these areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will support interventions designed to improve livelihoods and access to basic socio-
                         economic services in selected districts. The salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard
                         analysis relate to project Component 1: Labor-Intensive Public Works and Disaster Risk Financing
                         and Component 2: Livelihood Investment Support. Component 1 involves public works which will
                         focus on a variety of asset creation activities, including rural access roads, tree nurseries,
                         afforestation, construction of different soil and water conservation measures, and flood control
                         structures, rainwater harvesting, rehabilitation and construction of market shelters, among others.
                         Component 2 will support livelihood investments which may involve Value-addition to existing
                         family-based small income generating activities.

                         The overall environmental and social impacts of the project is expected to be positive through
                         alleviating pressures on the poor that lead to unsustainable exploitation of natural resources and
                         environmental degradation. The community sub-projects may involve limited land acquisition and
                         displacement of land-uses and/or livelihoods. Therefore, by their nature, project components 1 and 2
                         may have limited and localized negative environmental and social impacts. For this reason, the
                         project is rated as EA category B. The project ties in the twin goals of the World Bank group of
                         alleviating poverty and promoting shared prosperity.

                         The potential environmental and social impacts can be adequately managed by integrating
                         environmental and social due diligence into the sub-project cycle. Since the multiple CDD sub-
                         projects and locations are not yet known at this time, Environmental and Social Management
                         Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared and disclosed
                         both in-country and at infoshop before project appraisal.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Herbert Oule (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            Because of the public works and livelihoods support
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      projects there are likely negative environmental and social
                                                                    impacts to be generated, though localized and readily
                                                                    manageable. Since the specific multiple sub-projects and
                                                                    their locations are not yet known, an Environmental and
                                                                    Social Management Framework has been prepared to
                                                                    guide implementation of the environmental and social
                                                                    aspects. The ESMF has been prepared in a consultative
                                                                    manner, and disclosed both in-country and at info-shop
                                                                    before project appraisal. Specific safeguard instruments
                                                                    (ESIA, ESMPs) shall be prepared during project
                                                                    implementation following guidance in the ESMF.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             The project shall not support any activities that affect
                         4.04                                       natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             The policy is not triggered because NUSAF-3 supported



                                                                     Page 6 of 11
                                                                       activities will not have any direct impacts on the health
                                                                       and quality of forests, or on the health and safety of
                                                                       people who depend on forests. There is no intention to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       change the management, protection, or utilization of
                                                                       forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes                Under project Component 2 Livelihoods Support, the
                                                                       project may support CDDs that involve small scale use of
                                                                       pesticides that may be applied to veterinary care of
                                                                       animals. A Pest Management Plan has been included in
                                                                       the ESMF.
                            Physical Cultural           Yes            The civil works involved in Component 1 of Public
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       Works may impact on known and/or unknown PCRs and
                                                                       therefore a Chance Finds Procedure has been included in
                                                                       the ESMF.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             OP/BP 4.10 is not triggered because there are no
                            BP 4.10                                    Indigenous Peoples in the project area. However, the
                                                                       project is focusing on the North, North-East and Eastern
                                                                       regions of Uganda where there is an overwhelming
                                                                       majority of vulnerable and marginalized populations. For
                                                                       this reason, the project will pay careful attention to
                                                                       ensuring that these groups are extensively consulted and
                                                                       their needs specifically addressed.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               Because of the likely small scale land acquisition and
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 impact on the livelihood of communities, this Policy is
                                                                       triggered. Since the multiple CDDs are not yet known
                                                                       including their location, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                       has been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed both in-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       country and at infoshop before project appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project involves the construction of flood control
                            4.37                                       structures and ponds for rain water harvesting, but these
                                                                       do not pose dam safety risks. However, the construction
                                                                       of these works will be guided by the Small Dam
                                                                       Guidelines prepared for Uganda and the FAO Manual on
                                                                       small Earth Dams. The project is not supporting the
                                                                       construction of dams.
                            Projects on International   No             The project will not be implemented in International
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       Waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             N/A because the project will not support any activity in
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The salient physical characteristics relevant to safeguard analysis relate to project Component 1:
                              Labor-Intensive Public Works and Component 2: Livelihood Investment Support.

                                                                        Page 7 of 11
                          Components 1 & 2 may generate among others the following environmental and social impacts:
                          Health and safety issues: The civil works and use of pesticides will pose health and safety issues.
                          These shall be addressed first and foremost by providing and ensuring use of appropriate PPE. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                          addition, workers and farmers shall be sensitized and/or trained on the importance and use of PPE
                          in civil works and use of pesticides; Vegetation clearance and soil erosion: The likely
                          environmental and social impacts of community access roads rehabilitation are expected to be
                          minor given the low mechanized road works that will be involved. Where loses of vegetation are
                          inevitable, compensation measures shall be instituted as per approved Government rates and as
                          outlined in the RPF for NUSAF 3; Impacts on PCRs – There may be graves or other physical
                          cultural resources along proposed community access routes. The subsequent environmental and
                          social assessments should take into account specific measures to address mitigations for such
                          resources during project implementation. As for this ESMF, it is proposed that, the design stages
                          should propose alignments that avoid graveyards. In addition, measures outlined in the Chance
                          Finds Procedures should be operationalized as well; Waste Management – One critical issue
                          observed during NUSAF 2 was waste management especially hazardous waste. The NUSAF 3
                          Waste Management Plan (WMP) has been prepared to address waste management issues
                          associated with the NUSAF3 project in line with legal and regulatory requirements as detailed in
                          Annex 5 of the ESMF.

                          Component 2 may involve use of pesticides and other veterinary chemicals or result in their
                          increased usage through Livelihoods Investments support and triggers OP 4.09 on pest
                          management. The subprojects are expected to have only minor use for nationally approved
                          pesticides; otherwise there will not be significant pesticide use in subprojects. Where pesticide use
                          will be required, District and sub-county extension staff (agricultural and veterinary officers/
                          assistants) will train farmers on appropriate use, storage and disposal of pesticides.

                           There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts associated with the
                           project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           None
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           None
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Since the exact location of the CDDs is not known at this stage, a framework approach was
                           adopted. The borrower has prepared ESMF and RPF which were both cleared by IDA and
                           disclosed both in-country and at infoshop before project appraisal. The ESMF gives a step by step
                           guidance on how to screen, identify, assess, mitigate and manage any environmental and social
                           impacts that the project may pose, including monitoring and reporting. Where necessary and based
                           on the screening outcome as guided in the ESMF, site specific ESIAs/ESMPs shall be prepared
                           during implementation. Similarly the RPF gives a step by step guidance of how to screen, identify,
                           assess, mitigate and manage social impacts including involuntary resettlement issues. It gives
                           guidance on how consultations and compensation are undertaken, including preparation of RAPs
                           where deemed necessary. The client has committed to undertake any arising compensation in line
                           with OP 4.12. Both the ESMF and RPF provide guidance on establishment and operation of a


                                                                     Page 8 of 11
                          Grievance Redress Mechanism to address any complaints that the project may generate. The
                          ESMF has also provided guidance/Pest Management Plan (PMP) on the use and management of
                          pesticides under sub-component 2. It gives basic guidance on the procurement, transportation,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          storage, handling and application of pesticides, including disposal of the empty pesticides
                          containers. This guidance shall later be part of the Project Operations Manual. The purpose of the
                          PMP is to describe a Plan by which the project can promote and support safe, effective, and
                          environmentally sound pest management.

                          The institutional arrangement which has been used to implement the NUSAF 2 project will be
                          used to implement NUSAF3 project. The Office of the Prime Minster (OPM) will be the
                          implementing agency of the project and will work with a wide range of institutions at central,
                          district and sub-county levels to deliver the project. The OPM will continue to be supported by a
                          Technical Support Team headed by a Project Coordinator and staffed by relevant technical
                          experts. The exact composition and number of staff will be reviewed following further elaboration
                          of the design but it is expected that the team will have a cost effective structure and more practical
                          presence. OPM will consolidate and review monthly reports submitted by the different agencies.
                          At the district level, the District Environment Officer (DEO) and Community Development
                          Officer (CDO) will monitor environmental and social issues respectively.

                           NUSAF-TST has a qualified Environment and Social Specialist and Technical Support Team.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders consulted include the Inspectorate of Government Office, Ministry of Water
                           and Environment, Ministry of Education and Sports, Ministry of Health, Ministry pf Gender
                           Labour and Social Development, Ministry for Karamoja Affairs, NUSAF District Desk Officers,
                           District Environment Officers, District Health Officers, NUSAF2 beneficiary communities and
                           groups, general communities, etc. More stakeholder and community consultations shall be
                           undertaken as part of project implementation, as dictated by the nature of the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          The consultations were undertaken through focused group discussions, questionnaire
                          administration, community meetings organized through the local leaders. The national level
                          meetings were undertaken through individual appointments and face to face talks guided by
                          interview schedule.

                          The ESMF and RPF have been disclosed both in-country and at infoshop. In-country disclosure
                          was undertaken through a disclosure notice in the daily newspapers, through the websites of OPM-
                          NUSAF, and MGLSD.

                          Consultation process will go on during the construction and operation phases of the project. To
                          this effect, OPM will be required to maintain long term and mutually beneficial open dialogue
                          with local authorities and the public through its Social and Environmental Safeguards Specialists
                          and Officers during implementation. The majority of the target beneficiaries include Internally
                          Displaced Persons (IDP) returnees, widows, Orphans, People living with HIV/Aids, Ex-
                          combatants, former abductees, female headed households, child mothers, unskilled and
                          unemployed youth, disarmed Karamojong, youth, Elderly, Child head families, Persons with
                          disability and Landmine victims. Interest in the NUSAF3 will therefore vary among different
                          vulnerable groups (and individuals) in the community, and they may be affected differently. It will
                          be important to keep this in mind during the consultation process, and in some cases it may be


                                                                     Page 9 of 11
                           more appropriate to consider the needs and priorities of sub-communities rather than those of a
                           whole village. The required consultations during implementation are well elaborated in the ESMF
                           and shall be followed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Mar-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Apr-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           14-Apr-2015
                           Comments: The Uganda newspapers "New Vision" page 28 and Daily Monitor page 25
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Mar-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Apr-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           14-Apr-2015
                           Comments: The Uganda newspapers "New Vision" page 28 and Daily Monitor page 25
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Mar-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Apr-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           14-Apr-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: The Uganda newspapers "New Vision" page 28 and Daily Monitor page 25
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         NA
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?

                                                                   Page 10 of 11
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Endashaw Tadesse Gossa
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)                        Date: 15-Apr-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Peter Ivanov Pojarski (PMGR)                     Date: 15-Apr-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 11 of 11
