INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13100
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Sep-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Indonesia                 Project ID:  P144269
Project Name: PROMOTING SUSTAINABLE CBNRM AND INSTITUTIONAL
DEVELOPMENT (P144269)
Task Team       Diji Chandrasekharan Behr
Leader(s):
Estimated       21-Sep-2015               Estimated    08-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN02                      Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):       Other human development (20%), Other environment and natural resources
management (60%), Participation and civic engagement (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     23.50            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.50
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   0.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                              17.00
DENMARK Danish Intl. Dev. Assistance (DANIDA)                              6.00
Total                                                                     23.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to build institutions and local capacity to enhance partnerships
and improve the decentralized management of forests
Page 1 of 17


﻿3. Project Description
The project supports and strengthens the national effort to decentralize forest management through
the operationalization of KPHs. The project focuses on three elements - the national and subnational
legal, policy and institutional context, capacity building for all relevant stakeholders, and learning
from implementation of forest management planning and practice in 10 KPHs areas. The project will
help create the enabling environment and generate insights and lessons for scaling up the
operationalization of KPHs.
Component 1: Strengthen legislation, policy, and institutional capacity in decentralized forest
management
Operationalization of KPHs has been constrained by unclear and conflicting laws and regulations,
lack of consistent information, and limited ownership of the approach. This component address these
constraints by (i) building the ownership and commitment to the KPH program, (ii) assisting with
drafting revisions and amendments of forest sector policy and legislation, clarifying KPH
implementation requirements, and (iii) facilitating the institutional partnerships and capacity building
of government entities.
Subcomponent 1.1: Forest policy and legislation development, revision and amendment
This subcomponent will provide technical assistance to local government and technical units,
facilitate dialogue among key ministries and with stakeholders, and implement an awareness-raising
and commitment-building communication campaign in order to build political will and support for
KPHs. The aim is to develop a broad consensus amongst government institutions, and subsequently
non-government stakeholders, on how to effectively support the operationalization of KPHs, the
gazettement of KPH forest boundaries in a manner that recognizes different claims and rights to
forest lands, and enforcement of KPHs' participatory forest land use plans. This will be augmented
with technical assistance to draft necessary policies and legislations. The activities will involve
working with the relevant DGs in MOEF and ministries, and subnational government entities to
augment their involvement, facilitate coordination, and provide necessary technical assistance,
including to draft amendments to regulations that are unclear or contradictory with respect to roles,
responsibilities and procedures. Technical assistance will also be provided to develop methodologies
and standard operating procedures (SOPs) for engaging with local communities, Adat community,
and local governments.
Subcomponent 1.2: Institutional development and capacity building.
This subcomponent will help build needed capacity in MOEF, other relevant ministries, local
government/Dinas and head of KPH. The activity will start by assessing capacity gaps. It is
anticipated that the capacity needs will be in participatory mapping, gazettement and land use
planning, stakeholder engagement, conflict mediation, development of forest management plans and
facilitating inter-ministerial dialogues, and managing personnel. The capacity building on spatial
planning will focus on mainstreaming KPH area planning in local government spatial planning
processes (RTRWP/K) including the regional development planning (RPJMD) process. Support will
be provided to MOEF's Center for Education and Training (PUSDIKLAT) to build the needed
capacity. Support will also be provided to develop needed methodologies and guidelines for use at
the subnational level and by KPHs. The funds will primarily support consultancies.
Component 2: Knowledge Platform Development
Decentralized forest management will require a range of supporting information, institutional, policy,
and investment activities. This component addresses the need to build capacity of a broad range of
Page 2 of 17


﻿stakeholders and put in place an effective modem knowledge platform that facilitates information use
and knowledge exchange and learning from practice.
Subcomponent 2.1: Knowledge Management and Information System (KMIS)
Q)        This subcomponent will involve establishing a multi-level KMIS that is accessible to national and
subnational government and non-government stakeholders, and local communities. The activities
will include making available electronically existing information on socioeconomic, institutional,
biophysical and environmental parameters including legacy data and information that is only
available in hardcopies of relevant reports, and as necessary digitizing maps. In addition the KMIS
will support mechanisms to develop a range of knowledge products (e.g. Atlases, Status reports),
online services, portals and Apps that will facilitate the use of data and information as well as
accessing knowledge. The online services would include services for generating maps and other
relevant visualizations to support spatial planning, service delivery, and benchmarking. The overall
system will build on existing systems in MOEF, and also be established in a manner that makes it
usable at the national, subnational (province and district), and KPH level. The funds for this
subcomponent will primarily cover the cost of the associated consultancies the cost of works
associated with refurbishing existing office space at the national and subnational level to
accommodate a knowledge resource center.
Subcomponent 2.2: Capacity-building and Knowledge Exchange
This subcomponent will make available several effective and affordable online capacity building and
knowledge exchange services through helpdesk services, clinics, forums, training activities including
e-leaming/ distance learning, and competitions. The types of capacity building exercises will include
curriculum development, e-leaming, face-to-face training (e.g. training of trainers courses), change
management activities, intemships/visiting experts, forums, and support for specialized training.
Professional development will also be facilitated through membership to professional organizations,
events, virtual networking, and access to professional publications. This subcomponent will also
facilitate competitive collaboration including an innovation and technology marketplace, Appathons
and other events that will also involve academia, CSOs, and local communities. This subcomponent
will largely support consultancies and training.
Component 3: Improve forest management practices in 10 KPH areas
This component supports 10 KPH facing challenges in becoming operational, specifically with
a        respect to institutional capacity, supporting communities, and sustainable utilization of forest
products (timber and non-timber). The selection of the 10 KPHs will be done through a systematic
screening process that captures key criteria ranging from readiness to representativeness to carbon
sequestration potential (see Annex 2). The support provided by the project funds will complement
the funding KPHs are expected to receive from the national and regional sources of financing. The
activities in this component will, where appropriate, coordinate with efforts being carried out with
the Dedicated Grant Mechanism (DGM) for Indonesia on mapping rights and supporting local
communities.
Subcomponent 3.1: Advance KPH Operationalization
KPHs are responsible for carrying out functions spanning from super vising existing concessions to
directly manage certain forest areas where there are no other licenses, to develop partnerships with
private entities and communities to manage such areas and to generate their own revenue. This
subcomponent provides technical assistance to 10 KPHs to advance their operationalization. The
assistance will be on, inter alia, legal issues, preparation of management plans, conflict mediation,
communication and outreach, legal recognition as an institution, establishing partnerships, drafting
Page 3 of 17


﻿and implementing business plans, and securing financing.
Subcomponent 3.2: Community empowerment in 10 KPH areas.
This subcomponent will provide support to the same 10 KPHs to implement community level
O
U activities to enable the local communities to generate monetary and non-monetary benefits from
activities identified during the forest management planning process. The support will help convert
community empowerment aspirations specified in the plans to reality while working with the initial
conditions in the 10 KPHs. The menu of activities associated with this subcomponent will range from
support for processes (e.g., mapping of land claims) to support for sustainable management and
utilization of forest resources (e.g., value addition to non-timber forest products).
Subcomponent 3.3: KPH-Based Knowledge Exchange Centers
A subset of the 10 KPHs will be selected based on specific criteria to become living knowledge
resource centers for other KPHs in the region. Currently a couple of well performing KPHs, as part
of their business model, provide training to other KPHs. This model will be adapted and replicated
through the activities in this subcomponent. In addition, KPHs wishing to receive training from these
resource centers will be eligible to do so by applying for financial support through component 2. The
resources associated with this subcomponent will include some goods, works (refurbishing existing
office spaces and small buildings) and consultancy services.
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Reporting
This component will support project management and oversight, and implementation of the project
monitoring and reporting system. The activities to be financed include project coordination, financial
management, procurement management, equipment and supplies, and monitoring and evaluation
(M&E). The M&E system will measure progress on the indicators that are provided in the Results
Framework and on the overall FIP program's carbon benefit target.
Progress towards achievement of the project development objectives, outputs, outcomes, and impacts
will be measured through the project's M&E system. This will measure progress on the indicators
that are provided in the Results Framework (Annex 1) and on the overall FIP program's carbon
benefit target. The PMU will be responsible for the implementation of the M&E system, including
the finalization of indicator baselines and targets. Program performance and results will be reported
to the World Bank during supervision missions and to the FIP Steering Committee. Besides
a        providing feedback on the FIP program, the M&E system will be an important vehicle for scaling up
the program's impact as it will be integrated into Component 2, with the aim of strengthening
national KPH standards and policies. The main components of the M&E system are an annual
household survey for measuring the program's impacts on beneficiaries, a tool for measuring client
satisfaction, and the analysis of land use change within the ten KPHs.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
There will be field level activities in 10 KPHs. There will be three types of support provided to these
10 KPHs. One is technical assistance and capacity building for all stakeholders engaged in the KPH
activities (referred to as indirect support to KPHs). The second is direct support for
operationalization of ten KPHs, including support for obtaining BLU-D status. The third is
community empowerment activities for communities living in and around the 10 KPH. The selection
of the 10 KPHs receiving direct support will be based on the following selection criteria:
*      The key constraints to the KPH is one or more of the following issues: utilization of forest
products - timber and non-timber, community access, and weak institutional capacity;
Page 4 of 17


﻿*      Type of institution (whether they are registered as a Local Government Unit of Work
(SKPD) or a Regional Technical Implementation Unit (UPTD));
*      Degree of operationalization (e.g., whether the KPH has a 10 year forest management plan.);
*     Opportunities for synergies with other technical assistance support;
)         *      Potential for GHG emission reduction or carbon stock enhancement potential;
*     Willingness, on behalf of KPH leaders to adhere to ESMF, financial management and
procurement policy requirements in order to receive support from project;
*      KPH is registered with provincial government (this criteria is added in recognition that a
recent law transfers subnational authority over forests from the districts to provincial government);
* Dominant forest functional class in the KPH; and
* Ecosystem typology (highland forest, lowland forest, and peatland forest).
The application of the criteria to identify ten sites will be done during the first year of the project
using information available from the KPH database, application of EXACT to assess potential for
GHG emission reduction, expert opinion, and existing forest management plans. Implementation of
field level activities in the 10 KPHs will be done in a phased manner. During the first year, activities
will be launched in a few KPHs and activities will be launched in year two in the remaining KPHs.
This will enable the project to assess the level of support required to facilitate implementation, and
improve the delivery of support for the remaining KPHs.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Flavio Chaves (GWADR)
Indira Dharmapatni (GSURR)
Juan Martinez (GSURR)
Rambat Sakwan (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         All components of the project will have indirect and direct
o         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environmental and social impacts.
Component 1 involves the formulation of regulations and
standard operating procedures (SOPs) related to KPH
implementation. Component 2 will include technical
services (training, surveying, digitization of maps,
information sharing) for all stakeholders associated with
KPH implementation. These activities are likely to have
positive social and environmental impacts. These
activities, however, may have down-stream impacts.
World Bank support and advice for components 1 and 2
will be done in accordance with the Bank's safeguards
policies. Accordingly, the integrated ESMF will establish
procedures to promote transparency through stakeholder
participation and public information disclosure. Such
procedures will ensure that stakeholder's social and
environmental concerns are adequately addressed, in
particular in the preparation of studies, analyses and other
documents and processes that could have downstream
Page 5 of 17


﻿impacts. Furthermore, the project promotes participatory
policy formulation process through broad inter-
institutional consultations at central, local and community
levels to ensure all issues and appropriate mitigation
measures are considered.
Component 3 will have direct environmental and social
impacts resulting from the direct interventions in KPHs.
Any unintended negative impact are considered to be
minimal, localized, with no adverse, sensitive or
irreversible environmental impacts. Component 3
supports modest investments in technical assistance and
support for community empowerment respectively. They
may have some minor social and environmental impacts
that are for the most part site-specific; few if any of them
will be irreversible; and in most cases mitigation
measures can be designed and readily implemented.
In component 3, the investments and technical assistance
on agroforestry, conflict resolution, processing of non-
timber forest products, and so on are anticipated to have
positive social and environmental impacts, and where
unintended consequences arise, MoEF will implement the
ESMF.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes           The project will not fund activities associated with
4.04                                   operationalizing KPHs that may impact critical natural
habitats. The project will enhance the quality of the FMU
management ensuring that these critical ecosystems are
safeguarded against conversion and fragmentation in
FMU management plans preparation and implementation
(landscape approach). The ESMF provides guidance on
avoiding or mitigating impacts on natural habitats.
o         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes           The proposed project will assist GOI's efforts to harness
the potential of forests to reduce poverty in a sustainable
manner, integrate forests effectively into sustainable
economic development, and protect the vital local and
global environmental services and values of forests,
notably in regard to GHG sequestration. The project aims
to bring about positive changes in the management,
protection, or utilization of natural forests or plantations.
It may affect the rights and welfare of people and their
level of dependence upon or interaction with forests. The
project will contribute to the development of legal and
regulatory frameworks, financial incentives and capacity
building activities to undertake SFM planning at the
national, provincial and local levels. KPHs will prepare a
forest management plans in collaboration with local
Page 6 of 17


﻿communities during the project implementation phase.
Requirements of this Operational Policy will be addressed
with the use of Environmental and Social Assessments
(ESA) and Environmental Management and Monitoring
Plans (EMMP). Those instruments will ensure, through
screening and social and environmental impact
management measures, that: i) no forest resources
exploitation activities takes place in critical natural
habitats and critical forest areas, such as ancient primary
forests; ii) communities and affected people are involved
in the planning and use and benefit sharing of forest
resources; ii) no conversion or degradation of critical
natural habitats, (including adjacent or downstream
critical natural habitats) will take place for plantation
establishment.
If plantations are supported by the KPH, such projects
will sit on unforested sites or lands already converted
(excluding any lands that have been converted in
anticipation of the project).
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            Some pest management applications may occur as part of
community activities that involve agroforestry. OP 4.09
on Integrated Pest Control will potentially be needed by
some KPHs that are planning to establish small scale
timber plantations and develop agroforests. Pest
management and consequent pesticide use may also occur
in establishing nurseries, planting, weeding, etc. Under
such circumstances, proper pesticide acquisition, handing
and disposal procedures will be followed as proposed in
the ESMF.
Physical Cultural        Yes          It is not anticipated that the project will have negative
a         Resources OP/BP 4.11                  impacts on Physical Cultural Resources given the types of
project activities, which for the most do not involve
earthworks or activities near culturally important sites.
The ESMF provides guidance on how to manage chance
finds or impacts on movable or immovable objects, sites,
structures, groups of structures, and natural features and
landscapes that have archaeological, paleontological,
historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic, or other
cultural significance in accordance with this OP and GOI
regulations.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes           The project may finance activities where there is a
BP 4.10                               presence of Adat communities. Adat communities in
Indonesia are covered by the Bank's policy on Indigenous
Peoples, that generally classified in two categories:
Page 7 of 17


﻿(a)    Masyarakat Adat (MA)/Masyarakat Hukum Adat
(MHA)-Adat communities/customary law communities,
which are based on lineage or locality and are bound to
customary law;
(b)    Komunitas Adat Terpencil (KAT)/Isolated and
Vulnerable communities (IVPs). This is a government-
designated category of customary law communities that
live in isolated areas.
Characteristics attributed to each category are specified in
the IPPF in the ESMF.
It is anticipated that the project will have positive impacts
for these communities by strengthening access to and
control over forest resources, clarifying community
boundaries in selected areas, and ensuring communities
that manage forest resources receive a share of revenue
from forest. Particular attention will be paid at the
community level to ensure priorities and preferences of
the communities are identified and included in forest
management and village development planning and
implementation. Communities will also choose whether or
not they wish to engage in participatory management of
the forests. Furthermore, any potential impacts under
components 1 and 2 will be assessed with consideration of
potential impacts on these communities and will be
subject to consultations with the communities and
organizations.
The 10 KPHs will be selected during the first year of
project implementation. At this point, it is known that
these 10 KPHs could be located in the following seven
provinces, i.e., North Sumatera, South Sumatera, Central
Sulawesi, West Nusa Tenggara, East Kalimantan, Central
Kalimantan and Papua. Based on the EGI Map-
Strengthening IPs Screening in Indonesia (2010) prepared
by the World Bank, all IPs are present in these seven
provinces.
Once the KPHs are selected during the first year of
project implementation, the Project Management Unit
(PMU) will have to screen the geographical presence of
the IPs using the EGI Map. Based on this, each of the
KPH team should undertake further verification to
confirm the presence of IPs and impacts of the project on
them during the consultation process (see reference to the
Community Participation Framework (CPF)) with all
stakeholders including communities who use, have access
and benefit from the forests. Characteristics attributed to
Page 8 of 17


﻿each category that are specified in the IPPF should also be
used as reference in confirming the presence of Adat
communities. During this verification, KPH team should
also seek information and guidance from local NGOs and
universities who are knowledgeable and experienced in
working with IPs in the area.
As part of the ESMF, a Community Participation
Framework (CPF) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework (IPPF) have been developed based on the OP
4.10. The framework sets out processes and procedures to
ensure that free, prior and informed consultations are
conducted with project affected people. The framework
approach proposed that Adat communities will work
together with KPH team to develop community plans for
sustainable natural resources management and improved
livelihoods.
In the case that IPs communities are affected by the
implementation of the KPH's business plan but they are
not part of its main beneficiaries, the KPH team needs to
prepare an Indigenous Planning Plan (IPP) in accordance
with the requirements specified in the IPPF. The IPP will
be approved by the PMU and the Bank, be disclosed in
the KPHs' local offices, as well as in the MOEF's
website.
The principles, procedures, requirements and guidance
associated with the CPF and IPPF will also be part of the
project operational manual.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        Participating communities includes persons and
OP/BP 4.12                          communities (including IPs) who use, have access, and
benefit from KPHs. Participating communities may
include "squatters" as classified by MOEF, - i.e., people
living in plantation areas and in natural forests, with
access to the forest being part of their livelihood. The
national and regional laws and regulations for handling
squatters in forest area is not comprehensive; and largely
involves eviction.
As per the current design of the project, it is expected that
no significant physical relocation will be necessary. The
project would not support KPH that plans to involve
involuntary relocation or has done recent involuntary
relocation. However, if during consultations carried out
according to the requirements of the CPF and LARPF (in
the ESMF), involuntary relocation (including "squatters")
Page 9 of 17


﻿is unavoidable as agreed by all parties involved, the KPH
team will have to prepare a Land Acquisition and
Resettlement Plan (LARAP) in accordance with the
LARPF in the ESMF. The LARPF applies for all project
affected persons, including "squatters".
The PMU has to carry out a due diligence for the KPH
that has done involuntary land acquisition and/or
resettlement in the past and request the KPH to prepare a
Corrective Action Plan (CAP) to address the impacts. The
CAP could be part of the LARAP in the case the KPH
needs to prepare this instrument for addressing
involuntary land acquisition and/or resettlement that will
take place due to the project.
Preliminary assessment of potential negative
environmental and social impacts suggested that
involuntary land acquisition and resettlement may take
place due to (1) land-based forest management activities
(plantation and reforestation, agroforestry, establishment
of farms, nurseries, demo plots, etc.) that take place on the
land currently being used; (b) construction of structures
such as processing facilities and knowledge resource
centers. If this is the case, the KPH team will have to
prepare a Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plan
in accordance with the LARPF in the ESMF. Potential
impacts that may arise due to the results of Component 1
and 2 and measures to address them are explained in
Section II.A.1,2, and 4.
In the case that the project involves involuntary restriction
to access to the community's sources of livelihood from
the forests due to the establishment of the Business Plans,
confirmation of the demarcation of the KPH, etc., the
KPH team will prepare a Plan of Action (PA) describing
specific measures to be undertaken to restore or ensure
alternatives livelihoods and to assist the affected persons
and specify the implementation arrangements to
implement such measures. The PA will be developed in
reference to the Process Framework (PF) in the ESMF.
In the case that relocation and restriction to access to the
livelihood resources involve IPs, in addition to following
the principles, procedures and guidance specified in the
PF, KPH team should also consider the principles and
procedures for IPs management as required in the CPF
and IPPF.
Page 10 of 17


﻿PA and LARAP will have to be approved by the PMU
and the Bank, and be disclosed in the KPHs' local offices,
and in the MOEF's website.
The principles, procedures, requirements and guidance
associated with the LARPF and PF will be part of the
project operational manual.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project will not support any activities involving the
4.37                                construction of new dams nor support activities that will
rely on the performance of an existing dam or a dam
under construction.
Projects on International  No       The project will not support any hydroelectric, irrigation,
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                flood control, navigation, drainage, water and sewerage,
industrial, and similar projects that involve the use or
potential pollution of an international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No          The project will not support any activities in Disputed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    Areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Given the objective of the project and its focus on reducing challenges to REDD+ implementation
at the sub-national level and building capacity in REDD+ and SFM, it is expected that most
activities will not create a large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative environment and
social impacts. Where unintended negative consequences may arise, the client will implement
O
)           safeguards instruments in accordance with the WB Operations Policies and pursuant to
Indonesia's laws and regulations.
A preliminary assessment of potential environmental and social impacts has been identified.
Potential, negative, social impacts can be categorized into: (1) direct impacts; and (2) indirect
impacts. Criteria being used in assessing social impacts are (1) the local or customary
community's improved or poorer access to forests (in area unit or number of households); (2) an
increase or a decrease in the unemployment rate; (3) an increase or a decrease in community
members' incomes; (4) more-severe or reduced poverty among the community; (5) increased or
reduced food insecurity and health; (6) the community's strengthened or weakened cultural ties to
the forest; and (7) an increase or a decrease in the number of forest tenure conflicts.
The Project activities which may have unintended negative, environmental and social impacts are
activities associated with Component 3. The activities include activities for operationalizing KPHs
and community empowerment activities. Community empowerment activities supported by the
project will be identified during the process of KPH Business Plan formulation in the 10 KPHs
where the project will directly intervene, and include those involving the members of the
communities within/adjacent to the KPH as well as external investors.
Page 11 of 17


﻿All proposed KPH Business Plans must go through a screening process against the environmental
and social safeguards. Screening of Business Plan Proposal against environmental and social
safeguards is done with a view to identifying subproject/activities with potential negative impacts.
Screening against environmental and social safeguards will be conducted for all KPH Business
O
Q)          Plans in two stages:
1.     Screening of Business Plan Proposal against the negative list of the FIP-KPH project; and
2.      Screening of Business Plan Proposal against a checklist of environmental and social
risks/impacts.
The negative list will include, among other things,
1)     Every activity that will carry out conversion of natural forest, be it a state forest
functioning as a conservation, protection, or production forest, in an KPH area into a non-forest
area (e.g. a cropland, plantation, or housing settlement), except for necessary infrastructure
development of minimum scale (e.g. a road, irrigation system, or a secretariat office);
2)     Every activity that will significantly reduce the quality of biodiversity or a forest
ecosystem or damage a forest habitat in an KPH area;
3)     Every activity that will carry out population relocation of the households residing in the
KPH and/or a surrounding community
4)     Every activity that will destroy or damage a local cultural site or a site that has historical
value to a wider community (the sub-national, national, or even international community);
5)     Every activity that will affect human health
6)     Activities that leads to human right violations.
The main issues that will need attention are:
*      Land and asset acquisition.
*      Restriction of the communities' current access to the forest resources
*      Indigenous people presence
*      High value conservation area
*      Protected plant and wildlife species preservation and utilization
*      The use of pesticides
*      Historical objects and other physical resources
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project is anticipated to have indirect and long-term positive impacts by creating the enabling
conditions, institutional arrangements and capacities for effective implementation of decentralized
management of forests. In the context of KPHs, this will including improving their ability to
resolve forest resource management, use, and access issues while directly strengthening their
ability to enforce sustainable management of forests at the site level. In the long term,
strengthening the KPH system will contribute to reducing unplanned deforestation and forest
degradation. It also will support Indonesia in a transformative process toward good forest
governance and subnational REDD+ readiness. Accordingly, it should result in improved
opportunities for investments in SFM, community based forest management (CBFM), and REDD
+. This also could augment environmentally conscientious private sector confidence to invest in
sustainable forest management and leverage funding managed by the MOEF. In the long term this
project will contribute to the achievement of higher objective in reducing greenhouse gas
emissions and enhance carbon stocks while generating livelihood co-benefits.
Planned activities under Component 1 and 2, if implemented without due engagement of
Page 12 of 17


﻿stakeholders, could, however, have indirect negative environmental and social impacts that require
further analysis. For example regulations and SOPs influencing the implementation of forest
demarcation and governance may modify communities' access to forests. This, as noted above,
could have implications for the well-being and livelihoods of the community.
o
Measures are indicated within the ESMF on assessing ex ante potential consequences of
interventions such as those found in Component 1 and 2.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
n/a
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
According to the nature, scope and scale of the project, the WB has classified it under Category B,
triggering six safeguards as mentioned on the table above. In order to fulfil the aforementioned
safeguard requirement, the MOEF has prepared an integrated Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), to guide the project in identifying, screening and assessing
location-specific, environmental and social safeguards related issues emerging from any of the
components in the project (components 1,2, and 3). The ESMF explains the management and
mitigation actions to be taken by a project implementer, and a management plan that the project
implementer must prepare before sub-project implementation. The ESMF guides the project
implementer regarding the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESMF also
incorporates the Process Framework, the Community Participation Framework (CPF) and Land
Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF). It, therefore, will guide the preparation
of the Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and the Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plan
(LARAP).
Based on the capacity assessment that was done at both national and sub-national level, it was
noted that at the national level there are existing units at the Ministry of Environment and Forestry
(MOEF) who are capable of assessing environmental and social risks in relation to the proposed
project intervention (including those under Component 1 and 2), mitigating negative impacts and
monitoring the implementation of safeguards actions. While at the sub-national level, the relevant
agencies have never had experience handling safeguards related documents in relation to KPH-
supported activities. While the specific KPHs in which the project activities will be implemented
remain to be selected and the exact capacity needs can only be specified once these sites are
known, the ESMF already includes adequate provisions for capacity strengthening for safeguards
implementation. They include:
*      Including a full-time safeguard specialist in the Project Management Unit. S/he will
coordinate with the Environmental and Climate Change Units in the Planning Directorate of the
MOEF, provincial Dinas and KPHs to ensure that all the environmental and social safeguard
requirements under the project will be fully met. S/he should also train safeguard focal points at
project Dinas and KPHs level on relevant environmental laws and regulations, the safeguard
instruments, and any additional requirements under the project.
*      At subnational level, the following capacity building actions are priorities:
a.     Building overall awareness on environmental safeguards requirements among subnational
level stakeholders: this would involve clarity in terms of actions and responsibilities by within
BLHD on environmental permits for KPH-supported activities, and KPH staff's good
understanding on the requirements.
Page 13 of 17


﻿b.     In addition, the roles of provincial Dinas, especially how they liaise with BLHD and
KPHs for the preparation and approval of KLHS need to be clearly understood. It is advisable that
provincial Dinas with KPHs supported under the project will assign somebody who will act as
safeguard focal point under the project.
c.     Strengthening capacities within KPH on environmental safeguard action planning and
implementation: this would include in the short run KPHs developing a network of resource
persons/agencies who can prepare necessary inputs to apply for and obtain a permit from BLHD;
at the same time building its own human resources basis to handle environmental safeguard
actions; and strengthening their coordination with BLHD and other stakeholders involved. It is
suggested that in all project supported KPHs, one staff will be appointed as a safeguard focal point
under the project.
*      Using qualified facilitators to promote community engagement to address social safeguard
issues at all stages of implementation. These facilitators could be from civil society organizations
with experienced in community development. In order to ensure its transparency and impartiality,
the process has to be accompanied by the efforts to keep good records (i.e. minutes of consultation
meetings) and disclose them
In addition, to further strengthen capacity building for safeguard implementation the project will
link safeguard initiatives across the multiple projects being supported by the Forest Investment
Program, such as the FIP financed project titled Community Focused Investments to Address
Deforestation and Forest Degradation. The implementing agencies of these projects will assign
staff to safeguard coordination and oversight roles in the project management unit at both the
national and sub-national level, create a cadre of professionals who will focus on ensuring the
projects comply with their safeguard obligations.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders include those affected directly or indirectly by the project, including provincial and
district government and national government agencies that are relevant to the project, KPHs, local
communities (including women and marginalized people, forest farmer groups) and Adat
communities, academician, NGOs/CSOs, private sector, research organization.
O
The preparation of safeguards document has gone through several rounds of focus group
discussion (FGD) and public consultations conducted in a manner that was in compliance with the
national requirements and following the procedures established by the National Forestry Council
(DKN). The public consultations were coordinated by Kemitraan and led by the MOEF with
intensive multi-stakeholder involvement at national and regional level. Prior to the consultation,
the Bahasa version of the draft ESMF document was distributed and disclosed in order to give
stakeholders who participated enough time to read and provide feedback on the instrument. The
public consultations at national level was conducted to finalize the integrated ESMF document.
The response and feedbacks from the participants are incorporated and presented in the final
integrated ESMF document.
During the course of implementation, consultation will be carried out as per the requirement of the
instruments mentioned in the integrated ESMF. Moving forward, the comprehensive
communication strategy will be developed to support the communication, outreach and
dissemination and disclosure of information and of outputs produced by the project
B. Disclosure Requirements
Page 14 of 17


﻿Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Aug-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           28-Aug-2015
O
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Indonesia                                                04-Aug-2015
Comments: Earlier versions of the Integrated Draft ESMF were shared with stakeholders during
public consultations at the regional and national level. The revised draft ESMF has
taken on board as many of these comments as possible. As the documet is an
integrated ESMF, it also includes the Process Framework, Community Participation
Framework, Resettlement Action Framework, and Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework and Guidance on the Pest Management Plan. The current version of the
ESMF on the website is in English and is being translated into Bahasa. Once
translated, the Bahasa version will be posted as well.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Aug-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           11I-S ep-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Indonesia                                                04-Aug-2015
Comments: See comment above
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Aug-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           11I-S ep-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Indonesia                                                04-Aug-2015
Comments: See comment above
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           NA
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop                           //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
The sites for the activities will be finalized in year one of the project. Following this all necessary
plans including, when necessary, the pest management plan will be prepared and disclosed.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Page 15 of 17


﻿OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues? Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[   ] No[X]       NA[    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Ifthe whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Page 16 of 17


﻿Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
a          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X] No[     ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
o          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
a          the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Diji Chandrasekharan Behr
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                   Date: 14-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: lain G. Shuker (PMGR)                Date: 14-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 17 of 17


