                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA16399
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                             Project ID:   P150801
                            Project Name:      Nepal Health Sector Management Project (P150801)
                            Task Team          Preeti Kudesia,Vikram Menon
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          04-Apr-2016                       Estimated   16-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GHN06                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (50%), Public administration- Health (30%), Non-compulsory health
                                              finance (10%), Compulsory health finance (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Health system performance (50%), Public expenditure, financial management
                                              and procurement (25%), Managing for development results (2 5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     150.00           Total Bank Financing:                150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               150.00
                              Total                                                                                     150.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to improve efficiency in public resource management systems of the
                           health sector in Nepal.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         This project will support improved systemic efficiencies in the public resource management system
                         in the health sector through the following components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improve Public Financial Management and Procurement in the Health Sector (US$
                         115 million).

                         Component 1 will have two sub-components:

                         A. Improving Public Procurement (US$ 65 million): The structural and institutional arrangements for
                         managing health sector procurement are weak which impacts the quality and timely availability of
                         drugs. The aim of this sub-component is to support the Government's reform plan for system and
                         supply chain improvements in order to improve efficiency and transparency. Enabling proper
                         planning, budgeting and execution of procurement, and quality assurance would lead to reductions in
                         drug stock outs and enable the timely availability of the basic package of drugs at all health facilities
                         and to all populations.

                         B. Improving Public Financial Management (PFM) (US$ 55 million): This sub-component focuses
                         on reforms to improve the entire cycle of planning, budgeting, expenditure execution and monitoring.
                         Improved PFM in the health sector will reduce existing inefficiencies in public expenditure planning
                         and spending, and thereby facilitate better redistribution of resources through more evidence-based
                         resource allocation to ensure that affordable and appropriate health services are available to the
                         Nepali population, particularly the disadvantaged.

                         Component 2: Improve Reporting and Information Sharing for Enhanced Accountability and
                         Transparency (US$ 35 million).

                         Component 2 will improve reporting and information sharing. Public resources are not necessarily
                         targeted to populations and geographic areas with the poorest health outcomes. Robust disaggregated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         data (based on income, ethnicity, gender and geographical location) is not available on a regular
                         basis, and is definitely not presented to, or used by, policy makers for decision making. At the same
                         time there is no system/mechanism in place to provide reliable and timely information to citizens that
                         would enable them to hold the health system accountable for accessibility, affordability and quality
                         of service delivery. This component will support NHSS to design and strengthen systems for regular
                         data capture and monitoring of disaggregated data. Mechanisms for public access to information in
                         keeping with the GESI Strategy and Nepal’s Right to Information Act will also be developed.
                         Strengthened citizen engagement can improve access by providing citizens with the information and
                         capabilities they need to access a given service; and capturing information from citizens, via voice
                         and feedback, to improve state responsiveness in addressing access constraints. Improved
                         accountability can help ensure that service providers ‘supply’ the service as agreed, thus ensuring
                         that affordable access is provided and maintained. At present, there is no formal mechanism in the
                         health sector in Nepal that enables this process. International experience shows that to establish such
                         processes, particularly in fragile and unstable countries, this endeavor is unlikely to be
                         institutionalized during the short life of a project. However, this should not hinder initiating the
                         establishment of such systems. This will include, citizen feedback mechanisms for key areas such as
                         availability of drugs and health care providers as well as appropriate citizen grievance redress
                         processes.

                         A series of disbursement linked indicators (DLIs) within each of the components will form the basis


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         of disbursement against eligible expenditures.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As the project supports supply and demand-side interventions to improve public resource
                         management in the health sector, project related activities will potentially be carried out across all the
                         75 districts of Nepal. The geographical contexts of these 75 districts range from the mountainous
                         areas to foothills and flood plains of the Terai region of Nepal. However, to meet the project's stated
                         objectives, IDA financing would be used by the government for institutional system strengthening by
                         improving the accountability and efficiency of public sector management and better measurement
                         and monitoring of inequity in access to health services. The project does not envisage direct support
                         to activities relating to infrastructure development and as such, negative environmental and social
                         impacts are not anticipated.

                         The project has been categorized as “Category B” with no impact on the environment, and no
                         provisions for land acquisition. However, the project triggers OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous People
                         because there are means to include indigenous peoples and other vulnerable groups’ concerns in the
                         overall project design and also enhance citizen engagement. As a result, a Vulnerable Community
                         Development Plan (VCDP) and a Social Management Plan has been prepared and disclosed. Since
                         the Bank's OP/BP 4.01 EA is an umbrella safeguards policy (including OP 4.10), the policy is
                         triggered.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Annu Rajbhandari (GENDR)
                         Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes             As OP/BP4.01 EA is the umbrella policy which also
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       covers the social impacts/aspects, the policy is triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      The project is classified as “Category B” project.
                                                                      However, the project will have no adverse environmental
                                                                      impact. There are no safeguard documents relating to
                                                                      environment that need to be triggered or complied with.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                          Physical Cultural           No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes             The project triggers OP4.10 on Indigenous Peoples
                          BP 4.10                                     because there are means to include indigenous people’s
                                                                      concerns and views in the overall project design.
                                                                      Therefore, a Vulnerable Communities Development Plan
                                                                      (VCDP) and Social Management Plan (SMP) have been
                                                                      prepared. NHSS will report on disaggregated data on



                                                                       Page 3 of 6
                                                                       access by different population groups in order to plan
                                                                       more effectively for their needs. The project will also
                                                                       support demand side accountability through citizen
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       outreach including exploring multi-channel feedback
                                                                       loops.
                            Involuntary Resettlement No                The project will not involve any form of land acquisition
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 or cause any involuntary resettlement as defined in the
                                                                       Bank’s OP 4.12. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will only finance specific results linked to improvement of supply and demand side
                              governance, public financial management and procurement processes. There are no potential large
                              scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. On the contrary, the focus on equality will mean that
                              the positive impacts on human populations, including indigenous people and other vulnerable
                              groups, will be significant.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Not applicable.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              A Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP) and Social Management Plan (SMP) have
                              been developed. The objective of the VCDP and the SMP are to serve as a practical tool that will
                              help support the Government's Nepal Health Sector Strategy to respect the dignity, human rights,
                              economies and cultures of vulnerable groups, including the Indigenous Peoples (also known as
                              Adivasi Janajatis in Nepal). The VCDP and SMP detail agreed principles, guidelines and
                              procedures to be integrated into project implementation that would ensure compliance with the
                              applicable Nepali laws relating to indigenous peoples and other marginalized groups, and the
                              relevant World Bank safeguard policies and objectives relating to Indigenous Peoples. The VCDP
                              includes plans for consultation and participation; monitoring; institutional arrangements for
                              implementation; and capacity building. Much of these are also included in the NHSS document as
                              well as the Gender Equality and Social Inclusion Strategy (GESI) of the Ministry of Health
                              (MoH).
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure

                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include the MoH team at the Center and health managers at the decentralized
                           levels including staff responsible for implementation of components of the GESI strategy. Users of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           health facilities including vulnerable and disadvantaged groups will be beneficiaries of the project.
                           The VCDP and SMP includes plans for consultation and participation; monitoring; institutional
                           arrangements for implementation and capacity building.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Apr-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            12-Apr-2016
                           Comments: Disclosed on Ministry of Health website: http://www.mohp.gov.np/
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   12-Apr-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Nepal                                                            12-Apr-2016
                           Comments: Disclosed on Ministry of Health website: http://www.mohp.gov.np/
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?

                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Preeti Kudesia,Vikram Menon
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                       Date: 12-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Rekha Menon (PMGR)                            Date: 12-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
