INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR13708
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                      Project ID:  P099979
Project Name: Capacity Building for Urban Development Project (P099979)
Task Team       Vasudha Thawakar
Leader(s):
Estimated       24-Feb-2011                Estimated    21-Jul-2011
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Technical Assistance Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Sub-national government administration (83%), Central government
administration (17%)
Theme:          Municipal finance (34%), Municipal governance and institution building (33%),
Other urban development (33%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
O
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      60.00            Total Bank Financing:   60.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     60.00
Total                                                           60.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The development objective of the project would be to assist selected ULBs to institutionalize key
urban reforms mandated under the GOI?s JNNURM program.
Page 1 of4


﻿Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The development objective of the project would be to assist selected ULBs to institutionalize key
urban reforms mandated under the GOI?s JNNURM program.
0
3. Project Description
The Project will have two components:
(1) Capacity Building Component: Capacity building will focus on support for roll out of national
programs, developing policies, programs and procedures, improving systems and building skills. The
project will mainly support these activities in ULBs. Participating entities would be able to self-select
activities for funding from any of four focus areas on the basis of city-specific needs assessments.
The focus areas are defined as (i) Financial and Financial Management Reform; (ii) Service
Delivery; (iii) Framework for Planning; (iv) Framework for Governance.
(2) Project Management Unit
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
All India in scope. Description of salient physical characteristics of locations is not applicable, given
this is a Technical Assistance.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GENDR)
I. U. B. Reddy (GSURR)
Satya N. Mishra (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
*         Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
Page 2 of 4


﻿II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
)           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This is a demand driven TA project which does not trigger environment and social safeguard
issues, and therefore, no activities in this respect have been proposed or visualized. However, if
any ULB requests for support to build/enhance its capacity to address safeguards issues, such
request can be considered within the broad scope of the TA.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The proposed/visualized activities under the TA do not have safeguard implications under the
above stated (Section 6) safeguard policies, since no physical activities are planned. However, one
of the focus areas of the TA is "planning framework". Under this, certain ULBs may request for
TA to develop improved planning techniques, or plans for restructuring the existing city plans in
part or whole. In such cases, the need for addressing the environmental and social safeguards in
the plans may be looked into.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The TA project, as explained in para II-A-1, does not trigger any adverse impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The TA does not trigger safeguard issues as explained in para II-A-1, hence no measures to
address safeguard issues is necessary. However, the ULBs, that stand to receive support under this
project, have varying capacity to address safeguard issues, which to enhance assistance can be
provided under this project if requested. This would have the potential to ameliorate issues
associated with lack of integrated land use planning, and citizen awareness. Realistic assessment
of any ULB's capacity to address safeguard issues will be done, if required, as a part of extending
such support for enhancing ULBs' capacity to address safeguard issues.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
0            Key primary stakeholders include ULBs and states, and consultations have been held with them
in the course of project preparation.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Technical Assistance Project
For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
Not applicable
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Not applicable
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Page 3 of 4


﻿The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  No        NA   X
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Vasudha Thawakar
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Peter D. Ellis (PMGR)                Date: 17-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 4 of 4


