                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA13618
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Cambodia                          Project ID:    P146160
                            Project Name:     Voice and Action: Social Accountability for Improved Service Delivery
                                              (P146160)
                            Task Team         Janelle Plummer
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       31-Aug-2015                         Estimated   15-Oct-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSURR                                Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (40%), Primary education (30%),
                                              Health (30%)
                            Theme(s):         Decentralization (20%), Other social development (20%), Education for all
                                              (20%), Health system performance (20%), Rural services and infrastructure
                                              (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              Japan Social Development Fund                                                             5.00
                              Total                                                                                     5.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to support the improvement of service delivery in schools, health centers and communes,
                           for rural households in selected districts. This will be achieved by local government and service

                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                         providers engaging with communities in the ISAF process (access to information, open budgets,
                         citizen monitoring) to improve performance and responsiveness.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed grant will support the development and implementation of an innovative approach to
                         social accountability to improve local level services and functions in Cambodia. The Social
                         Accountability Framework, which the proposed grant will implement and test, links together demand
                         side activity (that will be carried out by civil society) and supply side activity (that will be carried out
                         by national and local government) around three substantive strategies that have the possibility of
                         transforming local governance processes:

                         ‒        Access to information on rights, standards, targets and performance. Entirely new
                         information flows to communities will be executed by government through “information for
                         citizens” (I4C) packs generated nationally and locally. Public display materials on rights and
                         standards, together with guidelines are all complete. The simplification of templates to post
                         performance information is complete and the instructions for districts to generate data locally are in
                         place. Then ISAF, rightly, allocates the task of information generation and display to government
                         but the awareness building to civil society. The grant will finance all the I4C awareness building
                         activities for citizens (men, women and youth) to access and use information. It will also finance
                         local level capacity building facilitating joint state – non-state capacity development and dialogue.
                         ‒        Open local budgets. The ISAF intends that budgets and expenditures in communes/districts,
                         schools and health centers will be systematically published and posted by government. In 2014, the
                         processes were developed and tested by government to start roll-out in 2015. The grant will facilitate
                         the processes of budget literacy and strengthening inquiry of these budgets and expenditures with
                         regards to service delivery needs.
                         ‒        Citizen monitoring and action plans. Citizen monitoring builds on the previous stages that
                         have informed and empowered citizens with information on service standards and rights, and
                         introduces a facilitated citizen monitoring mechanism to obtain grass-roots feedback from women,
                         children, youth as well as men and village leadership, in three areas –health centers, schools and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communes. The citizen monitoring process in the ISAF is a community scorecard, which will result
                         in a Joint Accountability Action Plan. The grant will finance local NGO partners to facilitate these
                         processes including the development of a cadre of 4-6 community accountability facilitators in each
                         commune (60% women).

                         Component A: Access to Information and Budgets, Citizen Monitoring

                         Component A of the proposed Voice and Action Project aims to provide support to local civil society
                         to implement the defined information, budget and citizen monitoring activities in 59 districts in ten
                         target provinces. The IAs will initiate the proposed grant with local CSO and CBO partners through
                         community engagement and mobilization strategies that emphasize the roles of women, and children/
                         youth and pays attention to ethnic minorities where applicable. Local staff and CSO partners will
                         lead activities which support: (i) the awareness building of Information for Citizens (I4C) –
                         promoting the understanding and use of local information sets to empower citizens, and promoting
                         budget literacy in relation to communes, health centers and schools; (ii) the citizen monitoring, a
                         facilitated process of participatory monitoring on communes, health centers and schools, to be
                         undertaken through a community scorecard process; and (iii) action planning with councilors, service
                         providers and line ministry officials through the development and dissemination of results and joint
                         accountability action plans (JAAPs) for community, service provider, commune and district
                         department action. Implementation of these activities becomes an integral part of the commune/


                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         district calendar and service delivery planning and budgeting cycles.

                         For effective engagement, citizens require information on government policy, on standards of service
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and governance they can expect, on budgets and annual expenditures, on targets for services being
                         provided, and on the actual performance achieved. Information for citizen packs provides this
                         information for sectors of priority interest to citizens at the local level (i.e. communes, health services
                         delivered by local health centers and primary schools). The I4Cs present data in a simplified way
                         which is easy for citizens to understand and which facilitates discussion and action on performance
                         and service delivery improvement. Community Accountability Facilitators (CAFs) supported and
                         mentored by local CSO partners, ensure that I4C data is publicly posted in each service center in
                         each target commune. They review and validate the data included in I4C packs and conduct outreach
                         activities at village and commune level to help community members understand and use the
                         information.

                         Armed with the awareness built and the information contained in the I4C packs, citizens are then
                         invited to participate in a process of assessing local services and planning actions for improvement.
                         In the context of a well-defined process (based on a community scorecard methodology), service
                         providers and service users each conduct their own assessment of the performance of priority local
                         services (i.e. health centers, primary schools, communes), and prioritize actions for improvement.
                         Service user and providers then come together in an interface meeting to share their respective
                         assessments and to agree a common set of priority actions. In a final multi-sector interface meeting,
                         priorities from these sectors are agreed in a commune-level Joint Accountability Action Plan (JAAP).
                         Local stakeholders can jointly expand the sector focus from this core set.

                         The process is linked in with the Government cycle of decision-making and budgeting. JAAPs are
                         subsequently disseminated at village and district level (and presented at the District Integration
                         Workshop). A joint JAAP Committee (comprised of local officials, service providers and community
                         representatives) supports and monitors the implementation of the JAAP. Each step of the citizen
                         monitoring and joint action-planning process is guided and facilitated by local CSO partners and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         CAFs, using tried and tested techniques to ensure constructive dialogue, manage conflict and
                         promote equitable participation and democratic decision-making. Underpinning these processes, is
                         the capacity development of all concerned stakeholders and, in particular, a cadre of Community
                         Accountability Facilitators.



                         Component B: Capacity Building and Facilitation

                         The I-SAF, which the proposed grants will implement, recognizes that in order to successfully
                         implement the activities outlined under Component A, there is a need to strengthen the capacity and
                         skills of all stakeholders involved in the process – from implementing partners, to local officials,
                         community leaders and ordinary citizens. Component B aims to enhance the capacity and
                         empowerment of local level (state and non-state) stakeholders to support and implement processes of
                         social accountability. Specifically, the grants will: (i) create a cadre of trained local community
                         accountability facilitators; (ii) build the capacity of local civil society partners to mentor and coach
                         the community facilitators to carry out the planned information, budget, citizen monitoring and
                         action-planning activities; and, (iii) provide a platform and defined process and guidelines for
                         ongoing dialogue between government service providers and citizens, mediated by commune
                         councils, local CSOs and community facilitators.

                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                         The overall approach to capacity building is guided by the I-SAF supply and demand-side operation
                         manuals which detail the Annual Cycle of I-SAF Activities. A Capacity Building Framework for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         I-SAF (I-SAF-CB Framework) further sets out the scope and nature of the mechanisms and processes
                         needed to build capacity and awareness of the I-SAF and provides an overall framework for capacity
                         building to achieve project objectives.

                         Community accountability facilitators (CAFs) and local CSO partners are supported and trained to be
                         “brokers” of social accountability processes, including citizen monitoring and action-planning. A
                         key element of the I-SAF is the training and mentoring of a critical mass of these volunteers to
                         support and implement social accountability activities at community level. Under the I-SAF, four
                         volunteer Community Accountability Facilitators (CAFs) from each target commune are identified
                         by local CSO partners in collaboration with community-based organizations. CAFs are trained,
                         mentored and reimbursed for expenses incurred in carrying out I-SAF activities.

                         CAFs receive a total of 16 days of workshop training (four 4-day modules) and conduct “learning by
                         doing” days for each module, during which they are supported and mentored by the local CSO
                         partner. These activities include: mobilising community support for the I-SAF, conducting outreach
                         to explain I4Cs and open budgets to community members, supporting and facilitating the citizen
                         monitoring process and helping to disseminate and implement the JAAP. CAFs who complete the
                         full annual cycle receive certification and are encouraged to continue to support the implementation
                         of the SAF on an on-going basis, supported by a national Community of Practice.

                         A key principle of the SAF which draws on lessons learnt for effective citizen engagement is that
                         capacity building processes should be joint. Accordingly, selected local level officials and service
                         providers (from communes, health centers and primary schools) are also invited to participate in the
                         training – allowing them to learn about I-SAF principles and practices and to develop working
                         relationships with CAFs and local CSO partners.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component C: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge Dissemination

                         The V&A project will be managed and implemented by two international NGOs working with local
                         NGO partners or local offices. The two IAs will each be responsible for management, coordination
                         and implementation of the program, including procurement, disbursement and financial management.
                         The Implementing Agencies have agreed a set of 22 districts for the first year of implementation,
                         based on existing capacities of governments and local NGO partners to initiate and undertake the I-
                         SAF processes. The project will then be extended to the remaining 31 districts in the second and
                         third years/cycles (plus six Control districts), for a total of 59 districts. The latter years will
                         incorporate the learning of the previous years and refine approaches and tools. Ongoing support for
                         the cycle of activities will continue for each participating district/commune for the remaining
                         duration of the project. All civil society activities will be carefully coordinated with supply-side I-
                         SAF activities

                         Through local NGO partners, CBOs and local offices, the grant will build awareness and capacity of
                         the selected communities to engage with /conduct the SAF processes: local information, open
                         budgets and citizen monitoring including facilitation support for the implementation of community
                         scorecards and community action planning.. Each local partner or office has on-the-ground
                         experience and presence and understanding of their local communities.



                                                                      Page 4 of 8
                         While recognizing that time is needed for outcome level change through enhanced accountability, the
                         approaches focus on results. The M&E plan consists of three primary elements: (i) An Impact
                         evaluation which will measure performance improvement and citizen empowerment and voice, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will separately report results for poor citizens; and a qualitative Empowerment and Capability study.
                         (ii) Regular Monitoring. Intermediate results will be tracked for the three key activity sets
                         (information awareness building, budget literacy, citizen scorecard actions, and facilitation capacity).
                         (iii) Process audits will be conducted annually to contribute to better understanding of the
                         fundamental elements of the demand-side ISAF processes (e.g. participation, inclusion, facilitation,
                         joint action), through (a) multi-stakeholder learning forums and (b) qualitative technical process
                         evaluations. All data will be gender disaggregated.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is located in 10 provinces of Cambodia, and two of these provinces (Stung Treng and
                         Kratie) will involve the implementing agencies working to develop the capacity of indigenous
                         peoples to engage as citizens in processes intended to improve local governance and local service
                         delivery in communes, health centers and schools. In the provinces of Stung Treng and Kratie, 11%
                         and 16%, respectively of the population belong to ethnic minorities. In Stung Treng, the population is
                         approximately 3% each of the Kuy, Kavet, and Cham groups. In Kratie, the Cham are the largest
                         group at 4.3%, as well as 3.9% Phnong, and 2.7% of both Kuy and Stieng people. These indigenous
                         and ethnic minorities count for 64,431 people or approximately 1.6% of the targeted beneficiaries in
                         this project. Ethnic minorities are physically, socially and economically marginalized from the rest of
                         Cambodia. The project objectives coincide with the IP policy (see section 22 , items c, d, and f) as it
                         is inclusive, it addresses gender and intergenerational issues, including special needs of women, and
                         strengthens the capacity of IP communities to prepare, implement, monitor, and evaluate local
                         services and development. To satisfy the requirements of OP 4.10, the Task Team will incorporate
                         the elements of the IP policy in the project documents (PAD) by including a specific engagement
                         protocol to be used in consultations and subsequent activities in indigenous communities which
                         explicitly meets the key requirements of the IP policy. The detailed tables showing target areas by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         district are available in the Project Paper.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
                         Sybounheung Phandanouvong (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No             This policy is not triggered because the proposed program
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      will not finance any civil work or activities, which may
                                                                     result in potential environmental impacts. The program’s
                                                                     interventions are essentially consultative measures and
                                                                     organizational actions taken to improve local service
                                                                     delivery to communities.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             The program will not be implemented in an area of
                          4.04                                       natural habitats. Hence, this safeguard policy is not
                                                                     applicable.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             Similarly, this policy is not triggered as the program will
                                                                     not be implemented in any forest area.



                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                This policy is not triggered as the program will not
                                                                      finance any activities related to the pesticides.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural           No            As mentioned above, the program will not support any
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                      work that may affect any types of local physical cultural
                                                                      resources.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes           Two of the project target provinces (Stoeung and Treng
                            BP 4.10                                   Kratie) are home to indigenous minorities. Approximately
                                                                      11% and 16%, respectively of the provincial populations
                                                                      belong to ethnic minorities. In Stung Treng, the
                                                                      population is approximately 3% each of the Kuy, Kavet,
                                                                      and Cham groups. In Kratie, the Cham are the largest
                                                                      group at 4.3%, as well as 3.9% Phnong, and 2.7% of both
                                                                      Kuy and Stieng people. These indigenous and ethnic
                                                                      minorities count for 64,431 people or approximately 1.6%
                                                                      of the targeted beneficiaries in this project. Each has their
                                                                      own cultural uniqueness and non-Khmer languages. The
                                                                      program’s objectives coincide with the IP policy (see
                                                                      section 22 , items c, d, and f) as it is inclusive, it addresses
                                                                      gender and intergenerational issues, including special
                                                                      needs of women, and strengthens the capacity of IP
                                                                      communities to prepare, implement, monitor, and evaluate
                                                                      development programs. To satisfy the requirements of OP
                                                                      4.10, the Task Team will incorporate the elements of the
                                                                      IP policy in the project documents (PAD) by including a
                                                                      specific engagement protocol to be used in consultations
                                                                      and subsequent activities in indigenous communities
                                                                      which explicitly meets the key requirements of the IP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      policy. The IP Engagement Policy is available in Khmer.
                            Involuntary Resettlement No               As the proposed program activities will not require
                            OP/BP 4.12                                resettlement and land acquisition, this safeguard policy is
                                                                      not triggered.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            This policy is not triggered as the program will not
                            4.37                                      finance any dam or irrigation schemes.
                            Projects on International   No            No activities under this program will affect international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      water resources and waterways. Hence this policy is not
                                                                      triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The project is not being implemented in disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No major safeguard issues are anticipated from the proposed grant as it will not finance any civil
                              works or activities that could potentially result in environmental and social impacts. The program
                              will support the development and implementation of an innovative approach to social

                                                                        Page 6 of 8
                           accountability to improve local level services and functions in the above listed 10 provinces of
                           Cambodia. Two of the project target provinces (Stoeung and Treng Kratie) are home to indigenous
                           minorities. Approximately 11% and 16%, respectively of the provincial populations belong to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ethnic minorities among them Tampuan, Kuy, Jaria, Phnong, Kreung, Kavaet, Brou, Stieng, Lun
                           and others.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The program interventions are expected to bring about long term positive impacts, which will
                           result in IP communities that are empowered to prepare, implement, monitor, and evaluate local
                           services and development. This could in turn contribute to enhanced social accountability and
                           transparency as well as sustainability of the local services delivery and development investments.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The program’s objectives coincide with the IP policy (see section 22 , items c, d, and f in the
                           PAD) as it is inclusive, it addresses gender and intergenerational issues, including special needs of
                           women, and strengthens the capacity of IP communities to prepare, implement, monitor, and
                           evaluate development programs. A specific IP engagement protocol has been developed to be used
                           in consultations and subsequent activities in indigenous communities which explicitly meets the
                           key requirements of the IP policy. The process and activities outlined in the protocol will enable
                           meaningful consultation with and participation of IPs in the project area. The capacity of the grant
                           recipients to apply and adhere to the bank safeguard policies is high. Save the Children (the IA
                           working in the areas populated by IPs) is an implementing agency with a sound reputation, and
                           track record in working with indigenous groups. The IP Engagement Protocol in the PAD sets out
                           the process and activities that will be undertaken to adapt the social accountability framework to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           local languages and build awareness among non-Khmer speaking groups. Save the Children will
                           recruit ethnic staff to help with effective communication and consultation with ethnic people.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The IP Engagement Protocol will be disclosed in the Infoshop on approval. It is also available in
                           both Khmer and English languages in the country and on the website of Save the Children. The
                           protocol will be used in consultation with ethnic communities in a free,prior and informed consent
                           manner in order to establish community board support for the program. It will be also used for
                           implementation of subsequent activities under the program.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     24-Jun-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  30-Jun-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cambodia                                                        30-Jun-2015
                           Comments: As this is a category C project, the instrument developed is an IP Engagement
                                         Protocol.



                                                                      Page 7 of 8
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            not applicable
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Janelle Plummer
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                Date: 24-Jun-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Jan Weetjens (PMGR)                              Date: 24-Jun-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 8 of 8
