                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA13509
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Apr-2015, 01-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Egypt, Arab Republic of             Project ID:    P153487
                            Project Name:     Equal Access and Simplified Environment for Investment (EASE) in Egypt
                                              (P153487)
                            Task Team         Sherif Bahig Hamdy,Nabila Assaf
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       01-Apr-2015                           Estimated   25-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GTCDR                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Industry and trade (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Regulation and competition policy (40%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
                                              support (40%), Managing for development results (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                  0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              MENA Transition Fund - IBRD as Implementing Agency                                        5.00
                              Total                                                                                     5.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve the regulatory environment for investors through simplified licensing and transparent
                           industrial land allocation processes.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                        Page 1 of 5
                         The project aims to provide technical assistance and systems to enable GAFI to implement its
                         mandate based on the newly issued Investment Law, and streamlining IDA’s licensing and land
                         allocation processes, making them more predictable and transparent. The project will support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         deployment of these reforms through GAFI’s OSSs by providing technical assistance, systems and
                         capacity building. The project will also provide technical assistance and capacity building to the
                         ERRADA regulatory governance program. Full detailed project description in available in Annex 2
                         of PAD.

                         Component 1: Facilitating accessible and transparent investor services (GAFI)
                         The Project aims to support GAFI become the national platform facilitating business entry, licensing,
                         and access to investor information at the sub-national level through its One Stop Shops and GAFI
                         Information Portal. This would entail addressing GAFI’s processes and interfaces with all the
                         involved regulators, including primarily IDA, but also other line ministries and local authorities
                         involved in licensing, developing an IT system to deliver business entry, licensing services, and
                         investor information, and capacity building and technical assistance to enable and support GAFI in
                         this enhanced client-facing role, particularly of its OSSs. This component will also include
                         supporting GAFI in developing the necessary implementation instruments and action plan that would
                         enable it to carry out its mandate in light of the new Investment Law. This component will also
                         include project management activities to be undertaken by the Project Management and the Project
                         Implementation Units as defined under Section IV “Implementation”.

                         Component 2: Industrial Sector Regulatory Reform (IDA)
                         The Project aims to support IDA in focusing on its strategic roles of regulation and development and
                         transform its approach to implement risk based regulation principles. This component will focus on
                         the two primary functions of IDA, industrial licensing and industrial land allocation. The IDA is
                         currently engaged in mapping its industrial licensing processes in collaboration with ERRADA and
                         with World Bank Group support. The project will build on this work by supporting a fundamental
                         restructuring of the IDA’s role in industrial licensing as well as the reengineering of underlying
Public Disclosure Copy




                         processes for administering the industrial license. The redesigned process will then be deployed in
                         IDA branches and GAFI OSSs. On industrial land allocation the project will support developing a
                         “wholesale” model of land development (through reforming the developer concession agreements)
                         and developing and deploying an online industrial land allocation system. This component will also
                         finance IDA staff training, workshops, and ICT upgrading needed to implement these activities.

                         Component 3: Capacity building for managing regulatory reforms (ERRADA)
                         The Project aims to strengthen the capacity of the GoE regulatory reform program (ERRADA). The
                         project will focus on supporting ERRADA around a set of “horizontal” (cross-cutting) reforms that
                         target constraints affecting firms in all sectors of the economy. It will in particular focus on reforms
                         that promote transparency and predictability of the regulatory environment. It will also support
                         “vertical” reforms in priority areas like industrial licensing and land allocation that complement
                         components 1 and 2. Within the horizontal reforms, the project will support ERRADA in:
                         -        completing a comprehensive inventory of business related formalities/administrative
                         procedures;
                         -        process mapping and re-engineering of the most relevant/frequent formalities/administrative
                         procedures with the objective of streamlining and simplifying them;
                         -        establishing an informational portal of business related administrative procedures rendering
                         all information related to the requirements of these procedures accessible to the general public in a
                         simple and comprehensive manner;


                                                                       Page 2 of 5
                           -        putting in place a public consultation and review mechanism to secure that all business
                           related legislative proposals are properly reviewed and consulted with the stakeholders, including the
                           private sector.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The aim of the project is to reform key investment processes and services, as well as enhance the
                           Government of Egypt’s capabilities to implement these services, which would be achieved primarily
                           through analytical and advisory services. The project will be implemented both in Cairo and
                           throughout Egypt, particularly since Component 3 will involve TA to the GAFI One Stop Shops
                           which are located in governorates outside Cairo. World Bank safeguard policies are not triggered as a
                           result of proposed activities under the components. The project will not include the construction of
                           physical infrastructure or civil works. Increased business activity that may indirectly result from the
                           project is not expected to have adverse environmental impacts as beneficiaries are expected to largely
                           be SMEs in less capital intensive sectors.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous (GSURR)
                           Banu Setlur (GENDR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               No
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                        Page 3 of 5
                              There are no safeguards issues or impacts associated with the proposed project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Not Applicable
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sherif Bahig Hamdy,Nabila Assaf
                            Approved By


                                                                      Page 4 of 5
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Najy Benhassine (PMGR)   Date: 01-Jun-2015
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 5 of 5
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
