INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14662
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Afghanistan                Project ID:  P132944
Project Name: Naghlu Hydropower Rehabilitation Project (P132944)
Task Team       Abedalrazq F. Khalil,Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius
Leader(s):
Estimated       08-Dec-2015                Estimated    25-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE06                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Hydropower (70%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (30%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (90%), Other environment
and natural resources management (5%), Other social development (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      83.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                      83.00
Total                                                                      83.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve dam safety and to increase the supply of
electricity at the Naghlu Hydropower Plant.
3. Project Description
The proposed Naghlu Hydropower Rehabilitation Project (NHRP) is estimated to cost a total of USD
Page 1 of 13


﻿83 million, and comprises three main components as follows:
Component 1: Mechanical, Electrical, and Electromechanical Work (US$30.0 million). This
component complements the rehabilitation of the electrical and electromechanical parts of the plant
previously undertaken and ensures their sustainable operation. It consists of two subcomponents as
O
follows:
Subcomponent 1(a): Rehabilitation of Unit 1 and Balance of Plant. This includes the completion of
electromechanical rehabilitation work focused on Unit 1, particularly (i) testing of the existing bent
rotor shaft followed by repair if possible or replacement if not; and (ii) completion of rehabilitation
of the existing plant.
Subcomponent 1(b): Enhancing Maintenance of the Powerhouse. Other units of the power house are
in need of regular maintenance. This subcomponent will particularly support provision of spare parts
and consumables for three to five years to ensure the sustainable operation and normal maintenance
of the existing plant. This will include Unit 3 overhaul. Unit 3 has been running for over 20,000
hours and should have been overhauled at 7,000 hours of operation. Similarly, pipes, valves, and
pumps for inlet valve control have been in service for over 45 years and need immediate attention.
Under Component 3 supervision routines for NHPP will also be developed/updated to include
management of spare parts and consumables.
Component 2: Dam Safety and Power Generation Capacity Improvement (US$33 million). This
component aims to ensure the safe operation of the dam through the two subcomponents as follows:
Subcomponent 2(a): Dam Safety Audit and Safety Improvement Measures. This component will
finance technical assistance and studies including (i) audit of the dam's structural and operational
safety; (ii) preparation of plans and bidding documents for works to improve safety to acceptable
standards, focused on reactivating the bottom outlet, adequacy of auxiliary power and other systems,
improvements to the head gates closing system, installation of instrumentation, and clearance of the
Unexploded Ordnances (UXOS) from the dam structure; (iii) studies on structural and operational
safety considering updated hydrological and seismic data and following relevant international/
national standards/guidelines; and (iv) flood routing through Naghlu Dam to Surobi Dam, including
adequacy of its spilling arrangements.
The dam safety audit will identify required remedial measures, covering immediate, mid-term, and
long-term ones, to ensure and improve dam safety to be implemented before the completion of the
dam safety audit. Specifically, this will focus on supporting Da Afghanistan Breshna Sherkat
(DABS) in introducing modern dam safety measures that do not require major structural changes,
a        particularly (i) setting up a procedure and staffing for independent dam safety inspections; (ii)
preparation of dam safety plans including operations, maintenance, and surveillance manuals for civil
works, emergency preparedness plans, and post-earthquake response plans; (iii) revision of operating
manuals for the electrical and electromechanical works; (iv) detailed maintenance planning for
equipment; (v) training of dam operational staff; (vi) reactivation of the low-level outlet; (vii)
introduction of independent operation of the power intake gates; (viii) installation of standby
generator for emergency opening of the spillway gates and closing of the power intake gates; and (ix)
installation of essential instrumentation for dam safety monitoring.
Experts indicate that the UXOS present are not expected to pose major structural risk to the body of
the dam. However, UXOS will present risks to the sediment cleanup of the dam possibly including
nearby area of the bottom outlet. The study will assess the different options to conduct sediment
cleanup and the procedures to treat the present UXOS. This will be covered by Construction
Supervision & Quality Assurance (CSQA) Plan for undertaking required dam safety improvement
and rehabilitation works.
Subcomponent 2(b): Optimization of Power Generation. This component aims to examine the
potential for increasing power generation at NHPP. This would identify options for sustainable
Page 2 of 13


﻿sediment management and for increasing the amount of electricity produced by the dam. It consists
of the following two activities:
Feasibility study. This study examines the feasibility of various options to increase power generation,
including but not limited to (i) appropriate dam operation and improved management; (ii) additional
O
storage upstream of the dam; (iii) additional siphon spillway/floating barge mechanism for controlled
flushing of sediments; (iv) raising the dam crest for increased storage; and (v) catchment area
conservation.
Detailed design. This supports the preparation of detailed designs should the feasibility study return a
positive result, and will be closely guided by the findings of Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA), land acquisition, resettlement and livelihoods restoration plans, environment and
social management plans, health, and other related action plans. Construction Supervision and
Quality Assurance (CSQA) Plan and Instrumentation Plan will also be prepared.
Component 3: Environmental and Social Sustainability, Project Management Support, and Future
Project Preparation (US$20.0 million).
This component includes two subcomponents.
Subcomponent 3(a): Environmental and Social Sustainability. This subcomponent aims to ensure the
environmental and social sustainability of the dam through:
Local development assistance. Partly in support of benefit sharing with local communities, this
subcomponent will support (i) electrification in the project area and (ii) improved access to skills and
training to enable local people gain employment at the plant and elsewhere. Other activities
identified by local development communities that aim to improve the communities' livelihood
surrounding the dam will also be financed under this subcomponent such as road development. This
will insure continued community support for the dam and the proposed rehabilitation.
Supporting environmental and social management. This will support (i) updating the existing
environmental and social guidelines through preparation, implementation and monitoring of an
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) for Component 1; (ii) the preparation, implementation, and
independent monitoring of an ESMP, Resettlement Action Plan ( as required), and Livelihoods
Restoration Plan for Subcomponent 2a and 2b; (iii) the preparation of an ESMP for Component 3A.
Subcomponent 3(b): Project Management Support and Future Project Preparation. This
subcomponent aims to ensure that DABS receives advice on good international practices. It will
consist of:
1)     This subcomponent will finance the training programs, development of operational manuals
a        for generation, distribution planning, operation and maintenance, and translation of management and
control software and technical documents into Pashto and Dari to ensure adequate capacity for the
safe and sustained operation of the existing plant.
2)     Consulting services to support implementation of the project which include technical
(hydropower specific), environmental, social, technical, procurement, financial management, and
monitoring and evaluation aspects.
3)     Financing support for an Environmental and Social Advisory Panel (ESAP) and a Project
Technical Advisory Panel (PTAP).
4)     Future projects identified for hydropower development and management may also be
pursued under this component to support DABS expanding domestically generated power.
In sum, Components 1-2 focus on addressing the technical issues related to electromechanical
rehabilitation of the NHPP and improving safety and power supply from the NHPP, while
Component 3 focuses on ensuring sustainability of hydropower through improved social and
environmental management as well as building institutional and managerial capacity.
Page 3 of 13


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is located on the confluence of the Panjshir and Kabul Rivers in Kabul Provinces
approximately 40 kilometers east of Kabul. The dam was originally constructed with Soviet
assistance, and was completed in 1967. The dam is served by an access road from the main Kabul to
Jalalabad highway, and there is also a road that runs up the eastern side of the reservoir which may
have been part of the original construction work. Six villages were resettled at the time of
construction to various areas including Jalalabad, Kabul and some new sites near to the dam. A
number of communities are currently located in the project area (reservoir and downstream). There is
some agricultural production in the project area, and some pastoral activity. Consultation with local
communities confirm presence of graves and villages that are likely to be affected should a decision
be made to raise the height of the dam. Approximately six kilometers downstream of the dam, the
tail of the reservoir for the Surobi dam starts, with the dam located two kilometers further
downstream.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Asta Olesen (GSURR)
James Orehmie Monday (GENDR)
Mohammad Yasin Noori (GSURR)
Obaidullah Hidayat (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The proposed project is assigned an EA Category A, as
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Component 2 activities may have significant and
widespread environmental impacts potentially requiring
detailed mitigation measures to manage them. These
activities include; (i) the need to address sedimentation at
the dam site, including the disposal of potentially large
volumes of sediment that must be removed and (ii)
optimization of power generation options may include
raising the height of the dam, which would increase the
size and volume of the reservoir under component 2(b).
Other the key issues to be addressed are: (i) downstream
and upstream impacts on water quality, hydrology, health,
fish and fisheries; (ii) construction related impacts
including management of construction work, safety and
EHS issue and impacts of ancillary facilities; (iii)
Complementary infrastructure including the transmission
line and; (iv) cumulative impact on natural resources.
Component 1 related impacts will be managed through
the application of a revised version of the existing
Environmental and Social Safeguard Guidelines.
Whereas, Component 2 related impacts will be managed
through the application of an Environment and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), including a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), given that actual
Page 4 of 13


﻿studies identify the exact nature and details of works will
become known only during implementation of proposed
project. Therefore, the ESMF and RPF have been
prepared by DABS with support from international
consultants. The ESMF specifies that a separate and
standalone detailed Environment and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) and their corresponding
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will
each be prepared, for Sub component 2a the dam safety
improvement activities, based on the findings of the dam
safety audit, and (ii) for Sub Component (2b) for the
power optimization activities to be carried out in parallel
with the technical feasibility study for this sub
component.
Both ESIA's will include an assessment of the cumulative
impacts on the Kabul River Basin, and of the downstream
impacts.
An Environment and Social Advisory Panel (ESAP) of
international experts has been formed, and financed from
the proposed project preparation grant.
Component 3a activities to manage household
connections will lead only to very minor impacts, if any at
all, and will be manage through the application of basic
and simple Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP).
 Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes       Early environmental scoping based on desk reviews and
4.04                                from field visits do not indicate the presence of
endangered fauna or flora species or any significant
natural habitat concerns. On the contrary, the evidence
points to an already severely degraded landscape in the
project area and with little or no vegetative cover at all.
Notwithstanding, the activities being considered under
Component 2b Power Optimization may lead to an
increase in the volume and surface area of the reservoir,
which means additional land beyond the present
boundaries of the reservoir may become flooded.
Therefore, the proposed Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) will examine in detail the project
influence area for potential impact of protected and
unprotected habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No          No forests in project area.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No         Not applicable due to type of project.
Page 5 of 13


﻿Physical Cultural       Yes         This policy is triggered because consultations at local
Resources OP/BP 4.11                level confirm presence of graves/shrines in villages which
are likely to be displaced should the decision be made to
raise the height of the dam and in the event of chance
finds during project implementation. The impacts on
cultural properties will be assessed as part of the ESIA
and there will also be a Cultural Heritage Management
Plan (CHMP) developed by the consultant.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          Through consultations with communities it has been
BP 4.10                             determined that there are no indigenous people as defined
by the OP 4.10 in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The activities to improve dam safety are not expected to
OP/BP 4.12                          require any relocation of people, but there may be some
land losses to create temporary or permanent roads for
removal of sediment, and there may be impacts which
affect the livelihoods of people living downstream of the
dam. These impacts will be assessed as part of the ESIA
following the dam safety audit. Mitigation plans will also
be developed based on the findings of the ESIA.
Similarly, mitigation plans for resettlement will be
prepared based on the ESIA to assess and mitigate the
impacts of raising the dam crest.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes         An Engineering Advisory Panel (EAP) has been
4.37                                established during project preparation, financed from the
proposed project preparation grant. The EAP's duties will
encompass the requirements of OP 4.37 for a dam safety
review panel. Two frameworks for O&M and Emergency
Preparedness Plans (EPP) have been developed and
agreed with the Bank.
Full-fledged O&M Plan and EPP will be prepared during
project implementation. Construction Supervision and
Quality Assurance Plan and Instrumentation Plan will also
be prepared during preparation of detailed design for
required dam safety improvement and rehabilitation
works.
Projects on International  Yes      The Kabul and Panjshir Rivers rise in Afghanistan and
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                meet at Naghlu. The Kabul River then flows eastwards,
forming the border between Afghanistan and Pakistan for
a short distance before entering Pakistan north-west of
Peshawar. It then empties into the Indus River
about 150km from the border. There is no existing
agreement or treaty between Afghanistan and Pakistan on
the Kabul River. In accordance with this policy, the Bank,
on behalf of the government of Afghanistan, issued on
April 14, 2015 the required notification to the government
of Pakistan. The notification process concluded on
Page 6 of 13


﻿October 9, 2015. Additionally, any impact of changed
flows resulting from any changes in operation of the
Naghlu plant as a result of this project (bearing in mind
the downstream regulating capacity of Sarobi) and of
possible raising of the dam crest will be notified to
Pakistan as required under the policy.
Projects in Disputed    No           Not applicable.
o         Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to have significant and widespread impacts mostly due to the scope and
type of physical investments being proposed for financing under Component 2a and preparatory
studies for future investments under Component 2b. Therefore, the severity and intensity of
potential environmental and social impacts during implementation will vary according the
components of the project.
Component 1 - impacts will be associated with the electro-mechanical works taking place in the
power house only and the works related to rehabilitation of Unit 1 and will be associated with
managing removal, storage, handling and disposal of used oil's and lubricants, petroleum products
and the removed parts as well as safety and EHS issue and impacts of ancillary facilities are also
deemed. Other impacts may be due to loud noises and dust. These impacts are expected to be
small, localized, short-lived and thus readily reversed or effectively managed with tangible
mitigation measures, and are not expected to have lasting effects.
Component 2a - impacts will most likely be associated with removal and disposal of sediment
material managing public safety concerns during the removal, handling and disposal of
unexploded ordinances, both from the reservoir area. Other concerns will include management of
large construction equipment and plant, possible expansion and heavier use of the road networks
in the area, including on access roads due to the movement of heavy construction vehicles plying
these roads during construction. Furthermore, there may be downstream impacts on aquatic
species and on downstream water users, such as sedimentation of irrigation facilities etc. These
impacts are likely to be of concern, and their intensity and scale will be evaluated in a full separate
and standalone Environmental and Social Impact Assessment.
Component 2b - The feasibility study) will explore options for optimizing power generation which
will include but not limited to additional storage upstream, additional spillways, more sediment
flushing, catchment area management and raising the height of the Dam. Therefore, the potential
impacts of this sub component will be potentially associated with these activities. These impacts
will result in flooding of marginally more land, affect water quality both upstream and
downstream, and therefore, may possibly further require enhanced water quality control measures
in the reservoir. Early environmental scoping (that is, based on desk review and filed visits) do not
indicate the presence of endangered fauna or flora species or any significant natural habitat
concerns. On the contrary, the evidence points to an already severely degraded landscape in the
project area and with little or no vegetative cover at all. However, there are ongoing concerns with
Page 7 of 13


﻿severe soil erosion, sediment transportation and deposition in the reservoir and downstream of the
dam, which will continually have to be effectively managed going forward. Therefore,
downstream impacts on aquatic species and irrigation facilities may be of some concern. The
severity of these potential impacts both in terms of their intensity and scale will also be evaluated
O
as part of the feasibility studies process in a separate and standalone Environmental and Social
Impact Assessment.
Component 3 - For the local development assistance under component 3(a), the impacts are likely
to be almost negligible as these will be mostly associated with distribution grid connections to
surrounding villages in the project area. For some villages, off-grid connections may be the only
feasible choice, and for these cases, the concerns there would be how to manage lead batteries that
may be used to store solar power during the day for use at night. These low scale impacts will be
managed in a stand-alone ESMP for this component to be prepared by the consulting group
carrying out the ESIA.
Potential social impacts during project implementation will vary from component to component.
Under component 2a, the process of removing sediment from the reservoir may result in
permanent asset loss and temporary land acquisition. Similarly under component 2b, a decision to
raise the height of the dam may result in the unavoidable resettlement of people, disruption of
community life and networks, permanent or temporary loss of land, assets and livelihoods and
communal social and cultural facilities, e.g. cemeteries, shrines, mosques and grazing land. DABS
has developed a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), based on the Afghan legal framework and
compliant with the requirements of OP.4.12, and cleared by the World Bank, which will be
applied to all project components where land acquisition/ asset loss and resettlement is
unavoidable. Under component 3(a) very small areas of land may be bought outright (willing
buyer- willing seller) to facilitate the siting of electricity poles and pylons.
The borrower has adopted a framework approach to address mitigation measures for the likely
environmental and social impacts of the construction sites, reservoir, and downstream of the
project site. An ESMF has been prepared, which also designates a comprehensive environmental
assessment including site-specific EMPs for the proposed project. The DABS has appointed an
ESAP, the ToR and composition agreed with the Bank, to provide advice on good international
practices, adapted to Afghanistan's circumstances, on managing the environment and social
a          impacts of the proposed project. In addition, the DABS has appointed a PTAP, whose ToR
includes dam safety advice in line with the requirements of OP 4.37.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Naghlu Dam has been present and in various forms of operation in the project area, since it was
built by the Soviet Union in the 1960's. As the proposed project is only rehabilitating the Dam and
optimizing power generation within the overall limits of the present parameters of the geographic
constraints, while the project itself will have potentially significant impacts, it is unlikely to lead to
additional indirect and long term impacts, beyond what has already occurred and caused by
original underlying project having been built decades ago. Notwithstanding, there might be some
indirect impacts related to sediment flushing to the downstream of the dam and might cause water
clogging and may temporarily impact the irrigation systems in the downstream areas. It may also
result in some livelihood impacts. These potential indirect and long term impacts will be examined
and addressed in the ESIA's for Components 2a and 2b and measures taken in the corresponding
ESMPs/RAPs to avoid or minimize the impacts. Similarly, should a decision be made to increase
Page 8 of 13


﻿the height of the dam, all consequent resettlement, land and asset loss will addressed through
relevant ESIA and RAP. Raising the height of the dam and/or increasing storage would make
more water available for the downstream users for irrigation purpose throughout the year,
especially in Nangarhar province. There are no anticipated direct and indirect impacts on the
O
Q)          natural habitat in the project area either during construction phase or operation phase but as a
precautionary measure the ESIA's will examine in detail the project influence area for potential
impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Under Component 2a, the various studies will examine various options for improving safety of
Dam, and many of these options will have social and environmental considerations which will be
examined in the ESIA for this component. Particularly, alternatives for removing and disposing of
the sediment material from the reservoir will be explored as this activity more than most is
expected to involve minor asset losses as temporary facilities are created. Therefore, the planned
ESIA will take into consideration alternative sites to avoid or minimize adverse impacts. There
will be alternative relocation sites considered, if a decision is made to raise the height of the dam,
which may result in the unavoidable resettlement of people. The implementing partner is
committed to undertake review of the resettlement alternatives presented and the choices made by
displaced persons regarding options available to them, including choices related to forms of
compensation and resettlement assistance, to relocating as individual families or as parts of pre-
existing communities or kinship groups, to sustaining existing patterns of group organization and
to retaining access to cultural property (e.g. places of worship, cemeteries).
Similarly, Component 2 (b) the feasibility study will examine a number of options to optimize
power generation and each of these options. The Feasibility Study and the ESIA will be conducted
simultaneously on parallel tracks to ensure the options being consider are informed by
environmental and social considerations.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The proposed project has adopted a framework approach to manage its environmental and social
impacts as the specific types and details of the activities in Component 2, beyond their general
description and location, are unknown at the time of project appraisal. The studies being planned
and financed by the proposed project will determine and design the activities during
implementation of the proposed project.
DABS has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to address the
environmental and social issues of the project. The ESMF prescribes guidelines and procedures
that would ensure the required ESIA's, RAPs and ESMPs for Component 2 are carried out
consistent with the regulatory requirements of Afghanistan and the World Bank's own safeguards
policies. Furthermore, the ESMF requires that the management measures to be carried out during
construction which will be contained in the ESMPs will be also be incorporated in the bidding
documents and contracts to ensure effective implementation throughout the pre-construction,
construction and operation phases of the project..
Additionally, the ESMF requires that for Component 1, the Environmental and Social Safeguards
Guideline document prepared for a previous/existing Bank project which is the Emergency
Rehabilitation Project (EPRP) is updated and used as the instrument to manage the impacts under
this component.
Page 9 of 13


﻿For impacts associated with land, given that the laws relating to land management and
expropriation and the land record system are less strong, DABs has prepared an RPF as part of the
ESMF. Based on the original experience at Naghlu, there is scope for improvement in
O
)           resettlement, compensation and livelihood restoration as well as sharing of project benefits. The
RPF, prepared as part of the ESMF for the NHRP, whilst taking account of the national legislation
on land management and expropriation reflects the Bank's policy on involuntary resettlement.
Central to the RPF is the need to avoid land acquisition and involuntary resettlement where
feasible, or minimize, exploring all viable alternatives. A fundamental principle of the RPF is the
need to ensure social justice and equity for those people directly affected by the project by making
certain that they are not impoverished by displacement and at the very least their livelihoods are
restored to their pre-project levels. This is considered to be especially important in the Naghlu
context where, almost fifty years after the hydropower plant was built, there remains a strong
perception among many upstream and downstream communities that they were seriously
disadvantaged under the resettlement program of the 1960s and have not benefited from the
Naghlu plant. The capacity of DABS for safeguards is assessed as weak although senior
management has demonstrated commitment to improving its capacity by initially recruiting two
safeguards specialists, who have worked with the Bank task team during project identification.
Furthermore it has already undertaken three public consultations on the proposals to carry out
further rehabilitation work on Naghlu as well as on the possibility of raising the height of the dam
crest.
The project will be used as an opportunity to improve these and other aspects of environmental
management, resettlement criteria and processes and consultation. During preparation, DABS and
the World Bank have agreed to work together using technical assistance funds and staff interaction
to improve these practices using the project as an example for scaling up hydropower development
in Afghanistan. DABS received a project preparation grant to help finance the costs of obtaining
international expertise in hydropower-related safeguards and an Environmental and Social
Consultant was hired in this regard.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
The key project stakeholders are the DABS, MEW, Kabul provincial authorities, local government
officials from Sarobi district, MPW, project affected people, representatives of men and women's
*           Community Development Councils (CDC)s, farmers, shopkeepers, local NGOs , NSP facilitating
partners in Sarobi and Tagab districts, and contractors.
The NHRP will further work to identify all direct and indirect stakeholders and will prioritize
stakeholder consultations to inform the design and decision making of the project, and thus
improve the effectiveness, relevance and sustainability of all project components.
Consultations on the draft ESMF were held in Kabul, on November 18, 2013 following which the
ESMF along with a RPF was disclosed through DABS's web site and consultations were held with
representatives from local communities located upstream and downstream of Naghlu Dam and
representatives of the relevant government agency and non-government agencies, to inform them
about the proposed project, and receive their comments and recommendations on social and
environmental issues related to it. A separate consultation with stakeholder, including community
members was undertaken on March 11, 2015 to share draft TOR for the ESIA for component 2 &
3.
Page 10 of 13


﻿An access to information and communication strategy, that builds on the earlier ESMF
consultation processes, will be put in place to ensure that local communities and other stakeholders
are consulted systematically on draft ESIAs and DABS related activities during the entire
O
Q)         implementation period. Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), if required, will be prepared, disclosed,
discussed with the affected communities, finalized, and implemented by the DABS's prior to
commencement of works.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Feb-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           11-Mar-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  23-Oct-2014
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Afghanistan                                              18-Nov-2013
Comments: This project is covered only by ESMF/RPF. The disclosure dates above are in
reference to the ESMF/RPF. The Executive Summary of the ESMF was shared with
Executive Directors.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Feb-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           11I-Mar-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Afghanistan                                              05-Jun-2014
Comments: This project is covered only by ESMF/RPF. The disclosure dates above are in
reference to the ESMF/RPF.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
0This project is covered by ESMF.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[X] No[  ]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Page 11 of 13


﻿If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes[X]  No[        NA
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X]  No[   ]   NA[    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                    Yes [  ] No [X]      NA [   ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [  ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [ ]   No [   ]   NA [ X]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 12 of 13


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[   NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[  NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
0          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[    NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Abedalrazq F. Khalil,Fanny Kathinka Missfeldt-Ringius
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                 Date: 05-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Julia Bucknall (PMGR)              Date: 05-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 13 of 13


