                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA12797
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jul-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Lesotho                            Project ID:    P151442
                            Project Name:     Social Assistance Project (P151442)
                            Task Team         Lucilla Maria Bruni
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         01-Jun-2015                        Estimated   29-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSP01                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (10%), Social Safety Nets/Social
                                              Assistance & Social Care Services (30%), Social Protectio n and Labor Policy &
                                              Systems (60%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      20.00           Total Bank Financing:                 20.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                         0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               20.00
                              IDA recommitted as a Credit                                                                0.00
                              Total                                                                                     20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the proposed project is to support the Government of Lesotho in improving the
                           efficiency and equity of selected social assistance programs.


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         To address key sector challenges and support the achievement of the PDO, the proposed project is a
                         USD$15 million, four-year Investment Project Financing (IPF), consisting of two inter-related
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components.
                         23.       The first component would support the results arising from improvements in selected social
                         assistance programs (CGP, OVC, PA and OAP). Under this component, project disbursements would
                         be: (a) linked to defined eligible expenditure line items (comprising the “Eligible Expenditure
                         Program” or EEP) within Lesotho’s social assistance programs; and (b) triggered by the verified
                         achievement of agreed specific results (“Disbursement-Linked Indicators” or DLIs) for improving
                         the administrative efficiency and equity of those programs. Under component 1, the project would
                         reimburse a portion of expenditures comprising the EEP. Within the Lesotho’s social assistance
                         programs, specific programs would be qualified for EEP. These criteria focus on safeguarding entry
                         into the pooled EEP to those programs with robust fiduciary arrangements and are described in detail
                         in Annex 3. By these criteria, one program qualifies for World Bank reimbursement at the start of the
                         proposed project, the CGP.
                         24.       The second component would finance select technical assistance to strengthen the
                         Government’s capacity for implementing such improvements and thereby achieving the results. This
                         component will follow standard World Bank procedures for investment financing.
                         25.       The choice of structuring the project around DLIs with a Technical Assistance package is
                         based on the existing plans of the GoL to reform the social protection sector, and stems from the
                         relatively high fiscal space already devoted to social assistance and the need to focus the attention on
                         results towards improving efficiency and equity of social assistance. It is envisaged that the approach
                         will help generate momentum for key policy reform actions to take place. This structure also allows
                         building on the support provided by other development partners that are very active in social
                         assistance, as result areas can be related to areas of technical or financial support by other
                         development partners.

                         Component 1 – Strengthening administrative efficiency and equity of social assistance programs
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (USD 12.5 million).
                         26.      The objective of this component is to support the results of implementation of improvements
                         in efficiency and equity of selected social assistance programs, in line with the NSPS and its
                         implementation framework.
                         27.      The results supported under this component are organized around two areas:
                         (a)      Result area 1: Improved administrative efficiency of social assistance programs
                         (b)      Result area 2: Improved equity of social assistance programs
                         28.      The underlying architecture of this component relies on the estimation that the achievements
                         under result area two in terms of efficiency will generate more than the necessary fiscal savings to
                         finance the results supported under area 2, especially in terms of expansion of coverage. A detailed
                         fiscal analysis of improvements supported by the proposed project is presented in the Economic and
                         Financial Analysis in Annex 5.
                         29.      The Results Framework (in PAD) shows how the intended Project Development Objective
                         Indicators (PDIs) would be achieved following a logical framework. Along these results chains,
                         some of the critical actions and outputs have been selected as Disbursement Linked Indicators
                         (DLIs). The selected DLIs are reported below, and are organized along the two results areas and
                         linked to PDIs.

                         Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) (in chronological order):
                         1. The Social Protection Policy Committee has been established and has met at least once over the


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         last 12 months
                         6. Key managerial positions of the Social Assistance Directorate have included in the MSD payroll
                         2. Post-Primary OVC Bursary was consolidated in the OVC Bursary Scheme
Public Disclosure Copy




                         7. Harmonized procedures of registration, payment and grievance and redress mechanism for CGP,
                         OVC and PA were enacted
                         12. An MSD Integrated MIS (IMIS) for the CGP, OVC and PA has been deployed and is fully
                         operative.
                         13. MSD deployed a unified payment system for CGP and PA
                         17. At least 75% of payments to CGP and PA are paid through the unified payment system
                         3. Data cross matching mechanism between the OAP and the Civil Service Pensions databases was
                         enacted
                         8. 100% of OAP beneficiaries found to be ineligible through the regular cross checks with Civil
                         Service Pensions databases are eliminated from the OAP roster
                         9. 50% of ineligible OAP recipients are eliminated as a result of the new OAP proof of life
                         verification requirements applied to all current beneficiaries
                         14. At least 50% of payments to OAP beneficiaries are paid through the new payment system
                         18. 100% of ineligible OAP recipients are eliminated as a result of the new OAP proof of life
                         verification requirements applied to all current beneficiaries
                         4. Harmonized targeting procedures for CGP, OVC, and PA are adopted
                         10. All new beneficiaries of CGP, PA and OVC entered in the calendar year were selected using the
                         harmonized targeting procedures
                         15. The coverage of NISSA-CBT registry covered 75% of Community Councils in the country
                         19. 100% of existing beneficiaries of OVC and PA at the beginning of the project were recertified
                         using a harmonized targeting procedure
                         5. Enrollment in CGP was expanded in 6,000 HH compared to the previous year
                         11. Enrollment in CGP was expanded in 6,000 HH compared to the previous year
                         16. Enrollment in CGP was expanded in 6,000 HH compared to the previous year
                         20. Enrollment in CGP was expanded in 6,000 HH compared to the previous year
Public Disclosure Copy




                         30.      Results Area 1: Improved administrative efficiency of social assistance programs. This
                         results area aims at improving the administrative efficiency of social assistance programs, by
                         supporting the achievements of results by the GoL in establishing sector coordination mechanisms,
                         strengthening the capacity of the MSD, harmonizing delivery processes of selected social assistance
                         programs, improving the operation and the detection and remediation of fraud and errors for OAP
                         (the results chain for this area is presented in Figure 2).
                         31.      Improved coordination of social assistance programs. In recognition of the high
                         fragmentation and multiple actors in the sector, the GoL is committed to establish a Social Protection
                         Policy Committee, comprising the MSD, Ministry of Labor and Employment (MLE), Ministry of
                         Finance (MF), Ministry of Planning (MP) and Ministry of Local Government (MLG) and one
                         representative of development partners, on a rotating basis. The Committee would discuss and
                         approve the main decision of six technical social sub-committees, one responsible for each stage of
                         the life-course (Pregnancy/Early Childhood, School age/Youth; Working age; Old Ag e, Disability
                         and chronic illness; and Shocks). Membership of these sub-committees would be limited to ten
                         representatives and would include key ministries, development partners and at least one relevant
                         NGO representative. The sub-committees would meet more frequently that the Policy Committee,
                         with focus on technical design and implementation aspects of programs and on improving
                         complementarities among them. The GoL has already developed ToRs for each committee and
                         defined their composition. Successful regularly meetings of the Policy Committee and School age/
                         Youth and Old Age Sub-committees will be critical to approve the reform path of selected social

                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         assistance. One indicator for improved coordination was selected as DLI to monitor the
                         establishment of the SP Policy Committee (DLI#1).
                         32.      Strengthened institutional capacity of MSD. The GoL is committed to improve the existing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         structure of the MSD by establishing a new Social Assistance Department and staffing its key
                         managerial positions. The adoption of a new ministerial structure would enhance the capacity of the
                         MSD to design, coordinate and monitor the social assistance policies and interventions. This results
                         would help to increase the effectiveness of the social assistance spending by helping the MSD
                         capacity to, inter alia: (i) improve planning and policy making; (ii) coordinate program design and
                         implementation; (iii) manage the development of an integrated management information system
                         (IMIS); (iv) monitor program implementation and progress, and (v) evaluate the impact of specific
                         interventions. The GoL has already approved the creation of the new Department, including the
                         definition of job descriptions of the key managerial staff. Successful launching of the new
                         Department will now require the recruitment and inclusion in the payroll of the key managerial staff;
                         these positions would be financed by GoL resources. One indicator was selected as DLI to monitor
                         the appointment of the key management staff (DLI #6).

                         33.       Harmonized delivery processes of social assistance programs of MSD. As discussed in
                         Section I, the three social assistance programs of MSD (CGP, OVC and PA) are delivered using
                         separate procedures, making the system prone to duplication, error, fraud and high administrative
                         cost. Harmonizing and rationalizing the procedures will increase the efficiency of each program,
                         allowing for significant savings while also rationalizing the use of scarce human and material
                         resources within MSD. The MSD is testing the harmonization of delivery mechanisms of its
                         programs through the Integrated Social Safety Nets pilot (ISSN), with support from EU and
                         UNICEF. This pilot seeks to test out the harmonization of critical delivery processes: registration,
                         payments, grievance and redress mechanism (in Lesotho referred to as case management) and
                         internal oversight for the MSD social assistance programs. By the end of the second year of the
                         project, the GoL is committed to approve a MSD resolution that establishes the foundations of the
                         harmonized delivery model, including an action plan for implementation at local level. One indicator
                         was selected as DLI to monitor the adoption of harmonized procedures (DLI#7).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         34.       At the basis of the harmonization of MSD programs lies the modernization and
                         automatization of their information management. As discussed in Section 1, except for some
                         processes of CGP, MSD social assistance programs are currently managed on paper-based or simple
                         computation procedures, which results in inefficiencies in eligibility verification and payment list
                         elaboration, lack of information on payments history and reduced capacity of internal oversight.
                         Based on some recent improvements in information management of CGP, the MSD is committed to
                         develop an integrated Management Information System (MIS) of the three programs, with inter-
                         related modules for registration, verification of eligibility, payments , monitoring and grievance.
                         Additionally, the integrated platform would be designed to allow cross-check with databases of
                         Home Affairs (National ID manager) and NISSA. The integrated platform will be coordinated by the
                         Social Assistance Department, but the specific program modules will remain under responsibility of
                         the programs coordination. One indicator was selected as DLI to monitor the deployment of the first
                         phase of the Integrated MIS (DLI #12).
                         35.       Increasing transparency and accountability of MSD social assistance programs require a
                         change in the existing payment systems. As presented in Section 1, CGP and PA are currently paid
                         using different payment systems and providers, creating inefficiencies related to lack economies of
                         scale and double contracting. Additionally, almost all payments are made by delivering cash at
                         physical pay points, even in urban areas.The MSD is committed to deploy a unified payment s ystem
                         for its social assistance transfers to beneficiaries. Two indicators were selected as DLIs to monitor
                         the deployment and the use of the unified payment system (DLIs #13 and 17).

                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                         36.      Consolidation of the OVC Post Primary Bursary and the OVC Bursary Scheme. The GoL
                         currently runs two very similar OVC Bursary programs: the OVC Bursary Scheme implemented by
                         the MSD, and the OVC Post Primary Bursary program, run by the Manpower Planning Secretariat in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Ministry of Development Planning. The two programs have the same goal (covering school fees
                         for vulnerable children), but they run in parallel and no coordination mechanisms have been put in
                         place to ensure synergies. Duplication of benefits is possible, as no database cross-match takes place.
                         Parallel selection and administration processes also duplicate efforts and result in an inefficient use
                         of scarce Government resources. Harmonizing these programs could reduce administrative costs and
                         allow for greater budget space for transfers. The process of harmonization would be initiated
                         supporting a cross-check the beneficiary databases to identify duplications and would finalize with
                         the consolidation of programs through a transfer of one program budget to the other program. One
                         indicator was selected as DLI to monitor the programs consolidation (DLI # 2).
                         37.      Improved administrative and delivery processes of the OAP. The OAP is by far the largest
                         social assistance program in Lesotho: it transfer budget equals 2.4% of GDP. The number of
                         beneficiaries of OAP has grown from about 65,000 when the pension was introduced in 2004 to
                         85,087 in January 2015 (about 4.4 percent of the population). Population projections for 2015
                         estimate there should be about 67,500 elderly persons above the age of 70 in Lesotho, and of these
                         about 7,000 receive a Civil Service pension, which should make them ineligible to receive the OAP.
                         These figures suggest that at roughly 29% of OAP beneficiaries might actually ineligible. Its manual
                         monthly payment system, which relies on the army, represents 50% of its administrative budget.
                         Improving the efficiency of the OAP is therefore paramount to improving the efficiency of social
                         assistance in Lesotho. This will require the strengthening the systems for preventing, detecting and
                         addressing fraud and errors and improving the payment system, in particular in relation to monitoring
                         whether beneficiaries are alive and detecting ineligible claims. The MoF has already deployed a new
                         MIS for the OAP that could provide the base for the automatization of delivery procedures. The latter
                         would allow the introduction of improvements in regular eligibility verification and internal
                         oversight. The MoF is committed to: (i) create the conditions for conducting regular financial audits;
                         (ii) adopt instruments and mechanism to introduce regular verification of eligibility of beneficiaries
                         through regular cross-matching databases with Home Affairs and Civil Service Pension and regular
Public Disclosure Copy




                         biometric proof of life verification; and (iii) implement of a new electronic payment system. Given
                         the importance of the OAP reform in the overall process, five indicators were selected as DLIs to
                         monitor the improvement in OAP delivery (DLI#3, 8, 9, 14 and 18).

                         38.     Results area 2: Increased equity of selected social assistance programs. This results area aims
                         at improving the equity of social assistance programs, by supporting the achievements of results by
                         the GoL in expanding the geographic coverage of the registry of poor households in NISSA,
                         improving the targeting performance of PA and OVC, and coverage expanding the geographic
                         coverage of the CGP to cover the whole country (the results chain for this area is presented in Figure
                         3).

                         39.      Expanding the registry of poor households through NISSA. The registry of poor households
                         is currently managed by MSD through the National Information System for Social Assistance
                         (NISSA) Program. The GoL is committed to increase the coverage of NISSA to all areas of the
                         country. After extensive evaluation of the current targeting methodology (a Proxy Means Test with
                         Community Validation) under NISSA, the GoL modified the targeting strategy. The new NISSA
                         Community Based Targeting (NISSA-CBT) will combine two steps: first, a community identification
                         of poor households, and second, the application of a proxy means test to selected households among
                         those identified by the community. In order to ensure the consistency of targeting across households,
                         the GoL will carry out the application of NISSA-CBT in all 67 community councils by the end of the

                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                         project, including those councils that had already been included in the registry with the previous
                         methodology. The GoL plans to start the rollout in 2016 and all 67 community councils will be
                         reached by 2018. One indicator was selected as DLI to monitor the expansion of the NISSA-CBT
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (DLI#15).
                         40.      Adoption of harmonized targeting based on NISSA-CBT for CGP, OVC and PA. MSD is
                         committed to create a harmonized targeting mechanism that combines the selection of poor
                         households based on NISSA-CBT and program specific categorical criteria for OVC and PA. The
                         CGP is currently the only program using the NISSA registry of the poor to identify beneficiaries.
                         Despite their poverty alleviation mandate, both OVC and PA do currently not have a clearly defined
                         poverty eligibility criteria. The use of commo n mechanism for selecting poor households based on
                         NISSA-CBT will be considered the MSD harmonized targeting procedure. After the adoption of the
                         MSD harmonized targeting procedure for OVC and PA, the MSD will initiate a processes of re-
                         certification of eligibility of existing beneficiaries of these two programs. Three indicators were
                         selected as DLIs to monitor and mark continuity of the improving targeting of OVC and PA (DLI# 4,
                         10 and 19).
                         41.      Expansion of the coverage of the CGP. The NSPS Strategy identifies the CGP as the flagship
                         program to alleviate poverty and increase the investment in health and education of children from
                         poor families in Lesotho. The CGP currently only covers 21 out of 67 community councils, or less
                         than a third of the country. Through the savings achieved by increasing efficiency in delivering the
                         selected social assistance programs, the GoL is committed to expand CGP coverage to all 67
                         community councils in the country, and increase the coverage of the program by 24,000 households
                         by the end of the project. Four indicators were selected as DLIs to monitor the increase in coverage
                         of the CGP (DLI# 5, 11, 16 and 20)

                         Component 2 – Implementation Support (USD 2.5 million).
                         42.      The objective of this component is to support the investment necessary to overcome the main
                         constrains in term of capacity, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of results supported by
                         Component 1.
                         43.      The technical assistance and investment financing activities supported by this component
Public Disclosure Copy




                         have been selected by the GoL and the World Bank team on the basis of: their strategic importance to
                         achieve the DLIs; absence of support by other development partners, and existence of the World
                         Bank’s comparative advantage and international experience on supervising the implementation of
                         those activities.
                         44.      The EU is investing significantly in strengthening the capacity of MSD to deliver social
                         assistance. Their assistance is mainly implemented through UNICEF and is focused on broad aspects
                         related to CGP, NISSA, ISSN and the CCT pilot under the CGP. The World Bank team and the EU/
                         UNICEF have been working closely to ensure complementarity and coherence in their respective
                         support programs and the activities supported by this component.. The proposed project is explicitly
                         designed to both build on and complement areas of support of the EU/UNICEF.
                         45.      Component 2 will be implemented through two sub-components: the first one (2.A) will
                         provide direct technical assistance and investment in support of achievement of the results (DLIs and
                         ultimately the PDIs) under Component 1; the second one (2.B) will support project implementation
                         capacity.

                         46.      Sub-Component 2A: Supporting the achievement of results in selected social assistance
                         programs. (US$ 1.10 million). In the PAD a description is available of the identified needs for inputs
                         and technical assistance (if any) for each of the key results areas and DLI groups, differentiating the
                         activities to be supported by this subcomponents and those that would be provided by other
                         development partners.

                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                         56.     Sub-Component 2B: Supporting the project management (US$ 1.40 million). Given the lack
                         of previous experience in implementing World Bank projects, the MSD will be supported in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of the proposed project by a Project Implementation Unit (PIU), to be hosted under
                         the Policy Planning and M&E Directorate of the MSD (for details see section on Implementation
                         arrangements and Annex 3). Specifically, the PIU would include a Project coordinator for day to day
                         management, a procurement specialist, a financial management specialist and two specialists
                         responsible for the coordination of activities within MSD and MoF. Additionally, the sub-component
                         would finance the cost of the yearly external financial audits and some additional operating cost.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is national in scope, though some activities will specifically target the poorest areas of
                         the country.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Kristine Schwebach (GSURR)
                         Melissa C. Landesz (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No             Because this project relates to overall management
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      and efficiency of social protection programs at the
                                                                     central level, as well as expansion of certain cash
                                                                     transfer programs, no environmental issues and
                                                                     impacts are foreseen as a result of this project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             Because this project relates to overall management
                          4.04                                       and efficiency of social protection programs at the
                                                                     central level, as well as expansion of certain cash
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     transfer programs, no impacts are foreseen on natural
                                                                     habitats as a result of this project.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             Because this project relates to overall management
                                                                     and efficiency of social protection programs at the
                                                                     central level, as well as expansion of certain cash
                                                                     transfer programs, no impacts are foreseen on forests
                                                                     as a result of this project
                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 Because this project relates to overall management
                                                                     and efficiency of social protection programs at the
                                                                     central level, as well as expansion of certain cash
                                                                     transfer programs, no pesticides will be used in this
                                                                     project and no pest management issues are foreseen
                                                                     as a result of this project.
                          Physical Cultural           No             Because this project relates to overall management
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11                       and efficiency of social protection programs at the
                                                                     central level, as well as expansion of certain cash
                                                                     transfer programs, no impacts on physical cultural
                                                                     resources are foreseen as a result of this project.




                                                                       Page 7 of 9
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No                There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area
                            BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement No                Because this project relates to overall management
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 and efficiency of social protection programs at the
                                                                       central level, as well as expansion of certain cash
                                                                       transfer programs, no land acquisition leading to
                                                                       involuntary resettlement or restrictions of access to
                                                                       resources and livelihoods is foreseen as a result of
                                                                       this project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             N/A
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No             N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             N/A
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no known environmental issues and impacts related to this project and none of the
                              safeguards policies have been triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There are no known potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              related to this project and none of the safeguards policies have been triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              n/a
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              n/a
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Key stakeholders include: the central and district level staff of the Ministry of Social Development
                              and the Ministry of Finance, who manage the core social assistance programs; and existing and
                              future beneficiaries of transfer programs. During the course of the implementation of the proposed
                              reforms, all stakeholders and the public will be informed about the rationale for the proposed
                              reforms.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.


                                                                        Page 8 of 9
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Lucilla Maria Bruni
                            Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                       Date: 15-Jun-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Peter Ivanov Pojarski (PMGR)                  Date: 21-Jul-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
