                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC13580

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Latin America                  Project ID:       P155976
                            Project Name:         FCPF Capacity Building Program IPs (LCR)
                            Team Leader(s):       Kimberly Vilar
                            Estimated Date        30-Nov-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GSU04                          Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):            Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):             Participation and civic engagement (20%), Indigenous peoples (20%), Social
                                                  Inclusion (60%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.727609                       Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                                   0.727609
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the project is to build the capacity of the indigenous peoples of Central and South
                           America to enhance their knowledge and understanding of REDD+, thereby enabling them to expand
                           and enhance their participation in REDD+ processes at national and regional levels.

                           Specific Activities:

                           i.      Design and implement a regional training program for indigenous leaders and negotiators on
                           issues of REDD+ safeguards and the rights of indigenous peoples.

                           ii.     Facilitate the construction of cultural indicators, techniques and methodologies relating to
                           forest management by indigenous peoples.

                           iii.    Support the full and effective participation of indigenous leaders in negotiations and
                           dialogues on REDD+ at the national and regional levels.
                         iv.     Publish and disseminate information, through regional-level networks, on project activities,
                         good practices, and lessons learned to continue supporting the capacity-building needs of indigenous
                         peoples at all levels in the region, for their effective engagement in all aspects of REDD+.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The project will finance the following three main components:
                         Component 1: Capacity Building Activities (Approx. US $327,424). Preliminary proposals for
                         project activities have been submitted to the Bank. These were validated though a participatory
                         process led by Sotz’il with regional indigenous networks. They include the following three programs
                         that will make up the following three subcomponents.

                         a.      Component 1.1. Design and implement a regional training program for indigenous leaders
                         and negotiators on issues of REDD+ safeguards and the rights of indigenous peoples. This program
                         would include (i) Designing a module for graduate studies on REDD+ and indigenous peoples to be
                         developed and validated with indigenous networks; (ii) Developing a university-level diploma
                         program on REDD+ and indigenous peoples; (iii) Developing face-to-face training materials on
                         REDD+. All three capacity building activities will be developed and further validated with
                         indigenous networks during preparation and implementation of the project.
                         b.      Component 1.2. Facilitate the construction of cultural indicators, techniques and
                         methodologies relating to forest management by indigenous peoples. This program would develop
                         and publish a study on cultural indicators, forest management techniques and methodologies. The
                         study would provide qualitative and quantitative data to enhance indigenous proposals related to
                         REDD+ in different countries.
                         c.      Component 1.3. Support the full and effective participation of indigenous leaders in
                         negotiations and dialogues on REDD+ at the national and regional levels by supporting national
                         indigenous peoples-government dialogues on REDD+ and knowledge exchange events amongst
                         indigenous communities and organizations participating in REDD+ processes in Central and South
                         America.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Regional-Level Communication and Dissemination of Project Results (Approx. US
                         $327,424): This component will finance regional-level activities and the design and implementation
                         of a communication strategy to disseminate (at the country and regional level) the results of activities
                         carried out by the project, including the preparation of good practices and lessons learned, aimed at
                         addressing capacity building needs of indigenous peoples at all levels so as to foster their effective
                         engagement in REDD+. Activities under this component will finance dissemination of information,
                         regional level network forums on REDD+, and the publication of materials (produced in appropriate
                         indigenous languages, where necessary). Data on women and youth participation will be highlighted
                         at the regional level. Regional organizations and networks participating in the FCPF will be targeted.
                         Thus, the communication strategies to be employed will draw upon existing resources, relationships,
                         and networks, including regional learning and exchange forum to the maximum extent possible.


                         Component 3: Management and Administration (Approx. US $$72,761): This component will
                         support Sotz’il’s day-to-day project implementation and management costs, including the
                         incremental time of the project coordinator. Moreover, financial management and procurement
                         assessments (to be completed by appraisal), will determine whether more capacity is needed and
                         whether it will entail an increase in the time of the professionals associated to the project. This
                         would include the preparation of annual work plans, the financing of audit reports, and any other
                         incremental overhead costs incurred as a result of the implementation of the project.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The exact locations of the capacity building activities have not yet been defined, although options
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will be narrowed down during preparation of the project. In terms of physical characteristics, the
                           project will not have a physical footprint, as its activities will consist of training services, events and
                           online courses. However given that its target audience is specifically and exclusively the region’s
                           indigenous peoples, OP 4.10 will be triggered. Its operational manual will spell out (i) mechanisms
                           to ensure broad community support; (ii) the active participation of key stakeholders; and (iii) access
                           to grievance redress mechanisms, in order for the entire grant to abide by the principles of the policy.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Sotz’il has developed a process for participatory monitoring and technical assessment in order to
                           ensure that the rights of indigenous peoples be respected and implemented, particularly as related to
                           free, prior and informed consent, full and effective participation, strengthening forms of self-
                           organization, implementation and recognition of traditional knowledge which allows for responsible
                           use, management and conservation of forests on indigenous territories and the implementation of the
                           United Nations Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples, Convention ILO 169 on Indigenous
                           Peoples, and the Convention on Biological Diversity Article 8J.

                           Sotz’il generated biocultural monitoring baselines to establish the current state of forests and
                           biodiversity, in order to implement the systems and traditional knowledge of indigenous peoples for
                           the restoration and conservation of ecosystems as well as sustainable management. This focuses on
                           the verification of the states’ compliance with commitments towards collective rights of indigenous
                           peoples, such as the Special Rapporteur of the United Nations on the Rights of Indigenous Peoples’
                           Committee Recommendations on the Elimination of Racial Discrimination. In this process Sotz’il
                           has formulated and presented alternative reports to the UN bodies, ILO, CERD Commission.

                           Specifically on conflict resolution, Sotz’il has developed grievance redress mechanisms at local,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           national and international levels based on the principles of prior, free and informed dialogue,
                           consultation, and consent.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Kimberly Vilar (GSU04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                    Triggered?        Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/          No                Given the scope and scale of the Project, it is
                           BP 4.01                                                 not expected that significant and irreversible
                                                                                   environmental impacts and risks will be
                                                                                   generated. The operational manual for the
                                                                                   Project will not require screening and follow-up
                                                                                   procedures for the management of potential
                                                                                   environmental and social impacts for activities
                                                                                   to be implemented under the Project.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04           No                The fundamental purpose of the activities
                                                                                   financed by the Project is to strengthen forest-
                                                                                   dependent indigenous peoples’ organizations to
                                                                 contribute to their national REDD+ Readiness
                                                                 processes. No screening or follow up procedures
                                                                 will be required.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    Activities financed under the Project are
                                                                 expected to have eventual positive impacts on
                                                                 forest management by strengthening the
                                                                 capacity of forest-dependent indigenous
                                                                 peoples’ organizations to contribute to their
                                                                 national REDD+ Readiness processes. Since
                                                                 there are no direct and/or physical impacts on
                                                                 forests, no screening and follow up procedures
                                                                 are required.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    None of the activities that would be supported
                                                                 by the Project are expected to involve the
                                                                 procurement or a substantial increase in the use
                                                                 of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    This policy is not triggered because the Project
                         BP 4.11                                 is not expected to support any activities having
                                                                 an adverse impact on physical cultural
                                                                 resources. This would be specified in an
                                                                 exclusion list.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   OP/BP 4.10 is triggered as the project directly
                                                                 targets indigenous peoples. Furthermore, this
                                                                 will be treated as an indigenous peoples' project
                                                                 and no separate Indigenous Peoples Plan will be
                                                                 required, as per OP 4.10. The implementing
                                                                 agency has and continues to lead a participatory
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 process with regional indigenous networks to
                                                                 allow their meaningful participation and support
                                                                 in the selection of the activities. The capacity
                                                                 building activities to be supported were defined
                                                                 through an iterative and participatory process of
                                                                 dialogue that Sotz'il has led with indigenous
                                                                 networks themselves. They have also mapped
                                                                 the project stakeholders, led the discussion on
                                                                 cultural indicators and methodologies and
                                                                 determined priority activities, over the course of
                                                                 the last two years, through six indigenous
                                                                 peoples dialogue events with the FCPF, as well
                                                                 as through self-financed internal meetings and
                                                                 consultations. Moreover, a planning workshop
                                                                 will take place in November 2015 with
                                                                 indigenous representatives from the 17 FCPF
                                                                 member countries with the objective of
                                                                 selecting beneficiary organizations and
                                                                 validating activities. These mechanisms will be
                                                                              documented in the Project operational manual
                                                                              as well as measures such as: (i) mechanisms to
                                                                              ensure broad community support; (ii) the active
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              participation of key stakeholders; and (iii)
                                                                              access to culturally appropriate grievance
                                                                              redress mechanisms.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No             None of the activities that would be supported
                           4.12                                               by the Project are expected to involve physical
                                                                              displacement and resettlement. Nor are they
                                                                              expected to involve the involuntary restriction
                                                                              of community access to natural resources in
                                                                              legally designated parks or protected areas. This
                                                                              would be specified in an exclusion list.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No             None of the activities that would be supported
                                                                              by the Project are expected to involve the
                                                                              construction or operation of new or existing
                                                                              dams.
                           Projects on International           No             This policy is not triggered because the Project
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                               is not expected to support any activities having
                                                                              adverse impacts on the efficient utilization and
                                                                              protection of international waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                This policy is not triggered because the Project
                           7.60                                               will not support activities in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                  The project triggers one policy, OP4.10 Indigenous Peoples.
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  10-Nov-2015
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              No safeguard-related studies are foreseen.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):             Name: Kimberly Vilar
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                     Date: 22-Oct-2015
                           Practice Manager/           Name: Markus Kostner (PMGR)                       Date: 30-Oct-2015
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
