INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
SDate ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-May-2015
9 Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 8-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P148527
Project Name:   Urumqi Urban Transport (II) Project (P148527)
Task Team       Binyam Reja
Leader(s):
Estimated       15-Jun-2015                Estimated     15-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Urban Transport (90%), Information technology (10%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (70%), Climate change (20%),
State-owned enterprise restructuring and privatization (1 0%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    536.80            Total Bank Financing:   140.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
U
Financing Source                                             Amount
SBorrower                                                              396.80
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development         140.00
Total                                                         536.80
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed PDO is to improve Urumqi's public transport service quality and traffic flow
efficiency.
C. Project Description
Component 1 Bus Rapid Transit (BRT) Corridors (61% percent of total project cost). This
component will finance the development of three new BRT lines on existing road alignments,


﻿namely the proposed BRT 4, 6, and 6a. The activities include: (i) construction of 51.7 km of BRT
lines, including road rehabilitation and lane reconfiguration of existing lanes, installation of lane
segregation and pavement markings, and construction of BRT station platforms; (ii) procurement of
BRT equipment, including fare collection system, passenger information system, safety screen door
O
U       system, x-ray machine, BRT priority signal at intersections, power supply for BRT stations, software
and hardware for BRT dispatching center, and GPS-based onboard equipment for BRT vehicles; and
(iii) procurement of 152 articulated buses (1 8m) and 29 regular buses (1 2m).
Component 2 Comprehensive Transport Information Management System (16% of project cost).
This component will support the development of a city-wide Comprehensive Transport Information
Management System, including: (i) development of comprehensive transport information
management platform to collect and process transport data from various sources; (ii) installation of
fiber optic cable network between different data center, installation of traffic data collection
equipment along major roads in Urumqi, and the development of GIS-based transport data system;
and (iii) improvement of parking management system, upgrade of the existing smart card system,
installation of bus passenger counting system, and upgrade of existing GPS-based taxi onboard
equipment.
Component 3 Public Transport Infrastructure (21% of project cost). The component will finance (i)
construction of public transport hub at the South Square of the High Speed Rail Station; the hub
includes BRT terminal, regular bus terminal and public transport dispatching and information center;
(ii) construction of public transport terminals at Beijiao, Midong and North Square of High Speed
Rail Station; and (iii) construction of two public transport parking and maintenance facilities at
Sangong and Midong.
Component 4 Capacity Building (2% of project cost). This component comprises the development of
a series of strategic studies, capacity building and training activities, project management and
consulting services aimed at enhancing local capacities for planning, design, and operating urban
transport services. Some of the studies, carried out during the project preparation, were financed
using local funds. However the remaining studies and activities under this component will be
financed under IBRD loan.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is located in urban and suburb area of Urumqi City, within which there are minority
communities including Uyghur, Kazak, Hui and other ethnic minorities. Urumqi is the capital city of
Xinjiang Uygur Autonomous Region, in northwest of China with an arid to semi-arid climate and
average annual precipitation of less than 200mm.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Urumqi Urban Comprehensive Transport Project Research Centre (UCTPRC), which is under
the Municipal Construction Commission, will serve as the Project Management Office (PMO).
UCTPRC was established in 2005 as a successor to the Urumqi Outer Ring Road Construction
Executive Office, which served as the PMO for the first World Bank financed Urumqi Urban
Transport Project. As such, the PMO has gained experience with World Bank policies and
procedures. However, due to staff turnover, the new staff may not have adequate experience with
World Bank safeguard policies. In order to increase the capacity of the PMO in safeguards
management, the PMO has appointed dedicated staff responsible for social safeguard work and
arranged for training. In addition, the PMO has hired an experienced social consulting agency to


﻿assist it in the preparation of the social impact assessment and safeguard documents. Finally, training
on Bank safeguard policies and requirements will be provided on a continuous basis to enhance the
institutional capacity on preparing and implementing social safeguard work under the project.
O
U       Similarly, for Environmental Assessment (EA) preparation, the PMO has engaged a qualified and
experienced EA institute, which has experience with recent Bank-financed projects in the region,
including the Yining urban transport project approved in 2012.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Songling Yao (GSURR)
Xin Ren (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The component 1 on improvement of public
OP/BP 4.01                              transportation corridors will be undertaken within the
existing right-of-way. The component 3 on public
transport facilities involves construction and
rehabilitation of bus depots and terminals. The
environmental impacts will be mostly construction-
related, such as noise and dust, construction waste
disposal and temporary storage on-site, small
vegetation loss, soil erosion at water front work,
sewage discharge, traffic impact, social disturbance
and safety. Major impacts during operation include
air pollution, noise, road safety and wastewater from
bus depots etc built by the project. Social impacts
under OP 4.01 will also be assessed.
0
As per requirements of regulation in China and the
Bank safeguard policies, the impacts will be
analyzed comprehensively through EA process.
Based on the ESA, an Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP) will be prepared to
address these impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The screening for all sites carried out during the EA
process confirms that there is no natural habitat as
defined by this OP in the vicinity of project sites.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          Not applicable
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          Not applicable
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD        The systematic survey during the EA process so far
OP/BP 4.11                              verifies that no Physical Cultural Resources as
defined by this OP was found in any project sites and
the vicinity. Nevertheless, this will be confirmed at


﻿appraisal and chance find procedure and measures to
mitigate impacts on religious activities in mosques
will be developed as needed.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           The Ethnic Minority screening by the TT and the
4.10                                      draft SA found that ethnic minorities, mainly Uygur,
Kazak, and Hui are in urban Urumqi City, but they
are actually mainstreamed, and so the OP 4.10,
Indigenous People, will be not triggered.
However, in view of the complex ethnic composition
of the city, the project will include in the social
assessment potential project impacts and benefits of
the improved public transport system in order to
ensure that it serves all communities. Furthermore,
that construction phase disruptions and any
permanent access changes are not disproportionately
affecting certain communities.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The policy is triggered because of the fact that
BP 4.12                                   Components l and 3 are likely to generate land
acquisition and resettlement impacts. Specific
activities include:
Component 1: Construction of three BRT lines
possibly needs extension of existing road corridors,
especially in some sections of current lines, which
may cause land taking/structure demolition;
Component 3: i) Construction of two new bus
services hubs will need land acquisition; ii)
Construction of two parking depots will need land
acquisition; iii) Construction of two BRT terminal
stations will need land acquisition.
Linkage issues: some activities are linking to the
project, such as, i) existing BRT terminals; ii)
existing BRT lines: some BRT stations will be
updated; iii) existing land for the project, etc.
To address the above resettlement impacts, a
resettlement plan (RP) with due diligence review will
be prepared.
The possible resettlement impacts may cover
permanent acquisition of collective land, or state-
owned land reclamation; relocation of residential
houses, small shops, etc., at some terminals/hubs and
along the transport corridors.


﻿Other social impacts during construction period will
be addressed in the standalone social assessment.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           Not applicable
0
Projects on International    No           Not applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Not applicable
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-May-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Environment and social safeguard studies are ongoing following World Bank and Government
policies and procedures. The first draft reports will be available in end-May 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Binyam Reja
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 08-May-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                        Date: 11-May-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


