                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC14126

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Feb-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Armenia                         Project ID:     P156378
                            Project Name:        Social Investment and Local Development RETF
                            Team Leader(s):      Briana N. Wilson
                            Estimated Date       01-Jul-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSP03                           Lending         Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Decentralization (10%), Participation and civic engagement (9%), Other
                                                 human development (30%), Municipal governance and institution building
                                                 (21%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 2.39                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                      0
                              Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                                    2.39
                            Environment         B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed development objective is to increase the access of pilot municipalities in Syunik and
                           Vayots Dzor marzes to direct capital investments for improving sustainable public infrastructure and
                           services across multiple communities.
                           C. Project Description
                           This project complements the recently approved Armenia: Social Investment and Local Development
                           Project (SILD - P148836), financed by the World Bank. It provides additional resources to
                           complement Component 2 of the SILD Project in order to pilot new innovative inter-community
                           projects in two regions targeted by the larger SDC’s LSG program. It is being processed as a separate
                           project, rather than additional financing, as it is part of SDC’s larger engagement in Armenia to
                           strengthen accountability, effectiveness and efficiency of the local self-government system and thus
                           has narrower objectives specifically aligned to the SDC’s parent program. It will follow the
                           operational procedures developed for the SILD.
                         The Project will provide direct capital investments to facilitate tangible improvements in terms of
                         local development and public service provision. Pilot municipalities will have the opportunity to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         apply for grants to fund projects with the objective of meeting minimal public infrastructure
                         requirements (such requirements are defined on individual basis for each municipality by MTAES on
                         the basis of feasibility studies already conducted with the support of GIZ and participatory decision
                         making of targeted municipalities), thereby providing better services to citizens and supporting
                         economic activities through inter-communal cooperation. The pilot areas, identified by SDC in
                         consultation with the GOA, are located in Southern Armenia and include Shinuhair (Tatev), Goris,
                         Sarnakunk and Meghri in Syunik Marz and Zaritap, Vayk, Jermuk in Vayots Dzor Marz. These
                         municipalities will have the opportunity to apply for funding under the project selection procedures
                         for Component 2 of the SILD, which are currently under preparation. The phasing and logic of
                         distribution of funds across the two regions and across the above mentioned municipalities will
                         depend on the phasing of the reform and the quality of project proposals presented.

                         This funding will stimulate the municipalities to:
                         a) Improve effectiveness and efficiency of public services by introducing new models of service
                         provision through inter-municipal cooperation;
                         b) Invest into local economic development and strengthen the municipalities’ role in the provision of
                         transactional services for rural economic development through improving public infrastructure that,
                         in turn, can lead to the growth of local revenues.

                         Links of proposed capital investment projects to local and regional development plans and municipal
                         budgets through co-funding will be among the conditions for all project grants.

                         These pilots have the potential to generate experience and models that can be widely applied later by
                         ATDF throughout the country for stimulating more effective and efficient service provision and
                         regional economic development through inter-communal cooperation and inform the further rollout
                         of Component 2 of SILD.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Targeted Areas

                         Component 2 of the SILD project as well as direct capital investments planned by USAID and
                         regional development grants of the EU will be implemented nationwide, whereas this SDC-funded
                         RETF will be streamed specifically to two regions – Syunik and Vayots Dzor – where other SDC
                         projects are being implemented. This geographic focus is expected to yield reinforcing links between
                         SDC’s interventions in the field of local governance and economic development and employment
                         and, thus, greater impact.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This project will include activities in Southern Armenia, including Shinuhair (Tatev), Goris,
                         Sarnakunk and Meghri in Syunik Marz and Zaritap, Vayk, Jermuk in Vayots Dzor Marz.
                         Specific sub-projects and sub-project locations are not yet known.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The project will be implemented by ATDF - an agency with strong administrative capacity and
                         technical expertise with an operation history of 18 years. ATDF has a high capacity staff, sound
                         financial management and procurement systems and reporting mechanisms that are currently used
                           under the SILD Project. In terms of social safeguards, the SILD Project includes a legal covenant
                           requiring ATDF to retain qualified safeguards expertise to ensure compliance with OP/BP 4.12. As
                           of October 2015, a social safeguards specialist has been recruited by ATDF for this function. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                           specialist will also supervise safeguards compliance under this project.

                           ATDF has been using services of an environmental consultant for years. It is agreed between the
                           ATDF and the Bank that ATDF must retain present in-house capacity for environmental
                           management and also consider hiring an additional environmental person to cope with the
                           significantly expanding portfolio and workload.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Darejan Kapanadze (GEN03)
                           Sarah G. Michael (ECCU3)
                           Sophia V. Georgieva (GSU03)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes              The expected environmental and social risks
                           BP 4.01                                             from this project are identical to those identified
                                                                               for SILD Project and both operations are
                                                                               classified as environmental Category B. OP/BP
                                                                               4.01 was triggered for SILD Project and an
                                                                               Environmental and Social Management
                                                                               Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for it.
                                                                               Will be used for the purposes of SILD SDC
                                                                               RETF project as well.

                                                                               SILD Project's ESMF was disclosed in draft,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               discussed with stakeholders, finalized thereafter,
                                                                               and re-disclosed on October 31, 2014.

                                                                               ESMF provides detailed guidance on
                                                                               environmental and social screening and
                                                                               classification of the proposed activities,
                                                                               developing environmental and social
                                                                               management plans as required, and undertaking
                                                                               monitoring of safeguards application.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     Yes              As was the case for SILD Project, OP/BP 4.12
                           4.12                                                is triggered to facilitate implementation of any
                                                                               sub-projects which may trigger resettlement.
                                                                               The SILD Project's Resettlement Policy
                                                                               Framework (RPF) and Project Operations
                                                                               Manual (POM) procedures regarding safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               will also govern this project. The SILD RPF
                                                                               was consulted in country and in-country
                                                                               disclosure took place on October 31, 2014.

                                                                               If required, Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                                                                               will be developed for sub-projects following the
                                                                               guidance provided in the RPF. They will be
                                                                               disclosed, consulted with the sub-project-
                                                                               affected people, approved and implemented
                                                                               prior to commencement of works at a given site.

                                                                               The RPF includes clear grievance redress
                                                                               procedures to be maintained throughout the
                                                                               Project implementation period.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
                           Projects on International           Yes             Triggered under SILD Project, however
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                communication between the riparian states on
                                                                               the Project interventions is deemed unnecessary.
                                                                               An exception from the requirement for the
                                                                               notifying the other riparian states was obtained
                                                                               from World Bank Management on January 15,
                                                                               2015.

                                                                               Activities proposed for financing from SILD
                                                                               STC RETF will be screened alike those
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               suggested for SILD Project support to ensure
                                                                               that investments related to water, wastewater,
                                                                               and irrigation infrastructure (i) will not
                                                                               adversely change the quality or quantity of
                                                                               water flows to the other riparians; and (ii) will
                                                                               not be adversely affected by the other riparians’
                                                                               possible water use. Activities not meeting these
                                                                               requirements will be ineligible for SILD SDC
                                                                               RETF funding.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation

                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                 15-Mar-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              No environmental and/or social studies are required for the preparation of SILD SDC RETF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Framework safeguard documents prepared and used by ATDF for the implementation of SILD
                              Project will be updated to fully cover the new project needs. ESMF and RPF will be re-disclosed
                              upon revision prior to the appraisal of SILD SDC RETF.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Briana N. Wilson
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                           Date: 22-Feb-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Andrew D. Mason (PMGR)                                       Date: 23-Feb-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
