INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13053
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Angola                     Project ID:   P151224
Project Name:    Water Sector Institutional Development Project II (P151224)
Task Team        Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares
Leader(s):
Estimated        28-Jul-2016                Estimated     29-Sep-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO7                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Water supply (65%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
protection (35%)
Theme(s):        City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (90%), Water resource
management (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     380.00             Total Bank Financing:   300.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         80.00
o          International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          300.00
Total                                                           380.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the institutional capacity of water sector
agencies and increase water service coverage in target cities.
C. Project Description
The proposed project will finance strategic institutional development activities and priority water


﻿supply investments in targeted provincial cities of Kuito-Cunje, Huambo, Lubango, Namibe,
N'dalatando-Villa De Lucala, Malange, Uige, Dundo, and Luena (seven of these cities were included
under WSIDP I). The project seeks to harness the momentum created under WSIDP I and will
deepen and expand the development impacts of that project, using "Design and Build" contracts. The
O
WSIDP II will include activities designed to strengthen water sector institutions, including regulatory
capacity, utility operations and water resource management. The proposed institutional interventions
will be coupled with infrastructure investments to address key physical challenges and constraints.
Water supply infrastructure investments will focus on increasing the capacity of systems and expand
water service coverage, predominately in under-served, low-income peri-urban areas.
The proposed project has been designed in coordination with the Government's water sector
infrastructure investment program and is strategically aligned with AfDB's water sector projects.
The project is expected to include four components, as follows:
Component 1: Water Supply Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Development (US$55.0
million). The objective of this Component is to strengthen the institutional framework for the water
supply sub-sector at central and provincial levels. To achieve this objective the Component will
finance activities designed to support the PWSUs, the regulator, and the asset management entity -
supporting the creation of an enabling environment for sustainable water service delivery.
The World Bank will finance technical assistance (TA) to provide critical start-up support for the
recently created PWSUs. The intention of the TA is to establish effective organizational structures,
improve operating systems, and develop institutional capacity through the transfer of knowledge and
skills to enhance service delivery and improve efficiency. The proposed Component 1 will finance
technical assistance, management contracts, goods, capacity building/training, and equipment in the
project cities related to water supply and utility management.
Regulatory support will include creation and expansion of the sector regulatory framework for
oversight of water service quality and tariffs, particularly for the newly created PWSUs. In
particularly, the regulator will be supported to establish tariff application and review procedures and
appropriate mechanisms (i.e. social tariffs) to promote access, whilst maintaining a balance to ensure
affordability of water bills for low-income customers and financial sustainability of the PWSUs. This
a       Component will also provide goods, operational support, capacity building/training, and technical
assistance to the regulator.
This Component will finance activities to support institutional capacity development of INAS, the
asset management entity responsible for the assets of all urban water supply systems that involve
water treatment facilities on behalf of the GoA. This Component will finance activities designed to
improve the institutional capacity of INAS to fulfill its mandate, including to mobilize, plan, and
manage dedicated funds; plan and oversee the execution of investments; promote public-private
partnerships for the development and delivery of services; and strengthen performance-based
contracting systems. This Component will also provide goods, operational support, capacity building/
training, and technical assistance to INAS.
Component 2: Water Resource Management (US$12.5 million). The objective of this Component is
to support the strengthening of the institutional framework for water resources management. This
Component will focus on completing activities that will not be implemented as planned under
WSIDP I due to cost overruns. Key activities will include: (1) strengthening and support to INRH;


﻿(2) development of systems for water resource monitoring and management; and (3) finance for two
new river basin plans. Specific activities include analysis of infrastructure investment requirements;
preparation of two new river basin management plans; development of policy and monitoring
frameworks; and installation of hydrometric stations and monitoring systems. This Component will
Q       provide goods, works, operational support, capacity building/training, and technical assistance to the
INRH.
Component 3: Rehabilitation and Expansion of Water Supply Production and Distribution (US$274.0
million, including contingencies). The objective of this Component is to support the PWSUs in the
development of priority infrastructure to expand system capacity, increase service coverage and
service quality, and improve the operating efficiency of the production and distribution systems in
targeted cities. The proposed investments have been selected to build upon the works implemented
through the WSIDP I, and complement the Government's and AfDB's water sector investments.
Whilst improving utilities' operations is an important element of the WSIDP II, service coverage
within the selected systems is low (on average less than 34 percent), and therefore proposed
interventions under the project focus substantially on necessary infrastructure investments to expand
systems. Through project implementation, coverage is expected to increase to as high as 75 percent
in some of the project cities. A project baseline and specific targets for service coverage expansion
will be developed for each city during project preparation and closely monitored during
implementation. Specific activities to be financed are further defined below:
Sub-component 3a - Rehabilitation and Expansion of Production Facilities (US$65.5 million,
including contingencies). Investments will include civil, electrical and mechanical works to improve
water production in targeted cities where required to support expanding service coverage. Key
activities will include expansion and refurbishment of well fields and intake facilities and expansion
and refurbishment of water treatment facilities. Also, it will include construction of clear-water
storage tanks and the rehabilitation and expansion of transmission infrastructure, including new
pipelines, pump stations, telemetry/SCADA, and associated fittings.
Sub-component 3b - Rehabilitation and Expansion of Distribution Systems (US$208.5 million,
including contingencies). Investments under this sub-component will include the development of
priority infrastructure to increase service coverage and improve operational efficiency of the water
distribution systems in selected cities. Investments will include rehabilitation of existing and
a       construction of new distribution centers, including increasing storage with ground tanks and pressure
through elevated water towers , water supply network expansion and rehabilitation, installation of
district meters and pressure control valves within existing pipelines, telemetry, and approximately
155,000 new household meters and associated materials for connections (primarily for yardtaps) -
directly benefiting some 930,000 people. Network investments (estimated to be around 1,145 km of
pipeline) will be predominantly directed towards expanding coverage to underserved low-income
peri-urban areas (mostly with un-paved roads). These investments will have substantial development
impacts by providing services to the poor. In addition, they complement WSIDP I-supported network
rehabilitation of the urban centers in the targeted cities, which was critical for supporting
sustainability of services and economic growth and development within the provincial cities.
Component 4: Management and Engineering Support (US$38.5 million). This Component includes
support for engineering studies; design and supervision of works and performance contracts; project
management; project audits; project monitoring and evaluation; implementation of environmental
and social safeguards; economic and financial reviews of investments; support for community
consultation and communication activities; and development of various other technical studies such


﻿as the Luanda Water Master Plan. This Component will partially finance the operations of the
Ministry of Energy and Water (MINEA) Project Implementation Unit - the FCMU - which manages
implementation of all projects in the sector regardless of the financing source. A training budget will
also be provided to support capacity-building activities at the national and provincial levels. This
O
U       Component will verify the technical feasibility of integrating the existing "Sistema Integrado
Sectorial de Agua e Saneamento -SISAS" with IBNET.
O
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project investments will take place in nine provincial capital cities, as follows: Kuito-Cunje,
Huambo, Lubango, Namibe, N'dalatando-Villa De Lucala, Malange, Uige, Dundo, and Luena (seven
of these cities were included under WSIDP I). In addition, the project will finance the rehabilitation
of 110 hydrometric stations nationwide. The project will use extensively 'Design and Build"
contracts to reduce the liability during construction, experimented successfully under WSIDP I.
Given the nature, scale and scope of the infrastructure investments planned, the potential adverse
environmental and social impacts of the project are expected to be moderate, reversible and
temporary. The civil works will be carried out either on land already owed by the Government or
along existing roads right-of-way.
There are no protected areas for nature conservation, species or habitats of particular interest that will
be directly or indirectly affected. It is expected that most of the potential adverse environmental and
social impacts associated with the project investments will be avoided and/or mitigated through
provisions adopted during the project preparation phase and/or the development of the technical
designs.
Since the precise location of Project activities, along with their footprints will not be known prior to
appraisal, the borrower will update and disclose Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) to comply with OP/BP 4.01 requirements. The ESMF will include both an environmental
and social screening form (ESSF) and a set of Environmental and Social Clauses (ESC) for project
implementers. The ESMF will be reviewed by both the Social and Environmental Safeguards
Specialists, and cleared by the Regional Safeguards Advisor (RSA), and ultimately disclosed both in-
country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal. Nonetheless, project implementation will be preceded
by a preparation and disclosure of site specific the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
(ESIA) and Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) will identify safeguards risks and
define mitigation measures of negative environmental and social impacts associated with the
construction works.
The proposed WSIDP II project is a repeater of the ongoing WSIDP I project, which is a Category B
project. WSIDP II will finance the same nature of investments as those financed by WSIDP I in
largely the same Provinces in Angola. WSIDP II is also a Category B project. In addition, the
locations of infrastructure investments under both projects are similar - urban areas and rights-of-way
of existing roads.
The borrower has long lasting proven experience and expertise in managing World Bank funded
operations, both in water and sanitation. Borrower had since recurrently prepared consulted and
disclosed in country and in Infoshop nineteen Safeguards Documents including a number of
Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMP) for different constructions sites across the
country.


﻿The proposed project investments and associated potential impacts are summarized below:
Typical project-supported infrastructure investments:
O
)       The proposed infrastructure investments include:
(a)    Civil, electrical and mechanical works to improve water supply production, which include
expansion and refurbishment of well fields, a water intake, and water treatment plants;
(b)    Priority infrastructure to increase service coverage and operational efficiency of the water
distribution system, which include goods and rehabilitation or construction of water distribution
centers, increasing water storage capacity and pressure;
(c)    Rehabilitation or expansion of water transmission infrastructure, including new pipelines and
pump stations, as well as rehabilitation and expansion of water supply networks.
(d) Rehabilitation or replacement of hydrometric stations nationwide.
(e) Supply of chlorine, aluminum sulfate, caustic soda, and fuel.
Typical negative environmental and social impacts expected from the project-supported investments:
- Infrastructure investments under (a), (b), and (d) above will be constructed in Government-
owned land, in which similar infrastructure already exists but is in need of expansion or
rehabilitation. When carrying out the field visits, the project team observed that Government
properties are partially fenced, free of encroachment and, in general, well kept. The negative
environmental and social impacts expected from the project investments in these areas will be limited
to the construction phase; these impacts will be mitigated through implementation of the ESMF and
the subproject specific ESIAs/ESMPs. It is expected that there will be little or no land acquisition in
the project, but in case any construction requires land acquisition and/or affects community or
individual livelihoods, Government will follow the provisions of the RPF addressing compensation
requirements. The Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) of WDSIP I will be updated to be used in
WDSIP II.
- Infrastructure investments under (c) will be constructed on the existing rights-of-way of
roads. During field visits, the project team observed that the road rights-of-way envisaged for the
investments are free of encroachment, but detailed information about any required land acquisition
and/or impact on livelihoods (such as of street vendors who may eventually use the area) will be
available only during the preparation of the detailed engineering designs. Given the technical
a       flexibility allowed for the installation of water pipelines, it will be possible to avoid land acquisition
and also impacts on livelihoods. In case these impacts cannot be avoided, the Government will
follow the provisions in the RPF addressing compensation requirements.
Specific project infrastructure investments and associated impacts to be noted:
In Dundo and Luena, the project will expand the water distribution network and install new
connections without increasing the total production in the systems. The water treatment in Dundo
uses the water from the Luachimo River, which is an affluent of the Congo/Zaire River. The water
treatment in Luena uses the water from the Luena/Lumeje river that is an affluent of the Zambezi
River. Although the project will not increase the abstraction from Luachimo and Luena/Lumeje
rivers, and the project will not affect the flows of the rivers, this activity triggers the Policy on
International Waterways OP/BP 7.50.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Adequate staffing capacity and procedures exist within FCMU/MINEA, including specialists


﻿dedicated to oversight on similar projects, AfDB and WSIDP I, whose implementation is ongoing.
There is a strong record of experience with environmental and social Safeguards aspects of projects
financed by the World Bank and other international and bilateral donors. An ESMF and RPF
acceptable to the Bank were prepared and disclosed for WSIDP I. Prior to appraisal of the proposed
O
U       project; the exiting ESMF and RPF will be updated and re-disclosed in Angola and in the World
Bank's InfoShop. Where necessary, ESIAs, ESMPs, and RAPs will be inserted in the works contracts
obligations.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Kristine Schwebach (GSURR)
Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         This project is a repeater of WSIDP I, which was
OP/BP 4.01                              classified Environmental Category B. The nature,
scale and scope of the infrastructure investments
proposed for the project are similar to those financed
under the original project. Nonetheless, the precise
location of Project activities, along with their
footprints will not be known prior to appraisal, this
policy is triggered to set forth the basic principles
and prerogatives to be followed to comply with
safeguards requirements related to due to potential
negative environmental impacts expected during the
construction phase.
During project preparation, existing Environmental
and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF) and
Environmental and Social Management Plans
(ESMP) prepared for the original project and
disclosed in the Bank's InfoShop (3/31/2008) will be
updated and re-disclosed prior to appraisal. The
ESMF will contain both an environmental and social
screening form (ESSF) and a set of Environmental
and Social Clauses (ESC) for project implementers.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No         There are no sensitive or critical natural habitat areas
affected by proposed investments.
Forests OP/BP 4.36         No           The project does not involve or affect forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09    No           The proposed project activities do not require the use
of pesticides or other inputs that trigger this policy.


﻿Physical Cultural Resources  No          The presence of physical cultural resources has not
OP/BP 4.11                               been identified in the project area. In addition, the
project will avoid disturbing or affecting physical
Q)o                                  cultural resources. Nonetheless, civil works contracts
will include "chance finds" procedures as described
in the project ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The proposed project activities might result in
BP 4.12                                  temporary or permanent loss of assets, i.e., crops or
other means of income generation. Therefore,
appropate compensation for these negative social
impacts may be needed.
Under the original project, the Borrower developed a
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). This was
reviewed, approved and disclosed in the Bank's
InfoShop (3/31/2008). The RPF will be updated and
made available prior to appraisal. In case land
acquisition or restriction of access to resources will
be identified as a requirement for a project activity, a
RAP will be prepared, consulted upon, publicly
disclosed, and implemented prior to civil works
causing impact.
The ESMF will contain both an environmental and
social screening form (ESSF) and a set of
Environmental and Social Clauses (ESC) for project
implementers.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           This policy is not triggered.
Projects on International   Yes          This policy is triggered because the project will
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                    finance activities potentially affecting two
International rivers, the Congo/Zaire River and the
Zambezi River.
Congo/Zaire River - In Dundo, the project
investments will include about 140 km of new water
supply network expansion and rehabilitation,
installation of district meters and pressure control
valves within existing pipelines, telemetry, and
approximately 20,000 new household meters and
associated materials for connections (primarily for
yardtaps).
The Congo/Zaire River is shared by Republic
Democratic of Congo and Angola. RDG is the


﻿downstream riparian.
Zambezi River - In Luena, the project investments
will include about 120 km of new water supply
network expansion and rehabilitation, installation of
district meters and pressure control valves within
existing pipelines, telemetry, and approximately
10,000 new household meters and associated
materials for connections (primarily for yardtaps).
The Zambezi river is shared by Angola, Botswana,
Mozambique, Namibia, Zambia and Zimbabwe.
Mozambique, Namibia, Zambia and Zimbabwe are
the downstream riparians.
Based on the detailed review, notifications to riparian
states may be required during project preparation.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        The project is not taking place in disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Updating and Disclosure of Safeguards Documents - from April 2015 through September 2015
- Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
- Generic Environmental Management Plan (EMP)
- Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
International Waterways - review from May 2015 through November 2015
- Request exceptions to the notification requirement - Paragraph 7(a) of OP 7.50
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Luiz Claudio Martins Tavares
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                    Date: 18-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)            Date: 18-Aug-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


