                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA16615
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Nepal                             Project ID:   P154548
                            Project Name:      Strengthening Systems for Social Protection and Civil Registration Project
                                               (P154548)
                            Task Team          Yasuhiko Matsuda,Jasmine Rajbhandary
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       09-Aug-2016                 Estimated     13-Oct-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSP06                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       150.00           Total Bank Financing:    150.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              150.00
                              Total                                                                                    150.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the coverage of social security allowances
                           and civil registration, and the delivery of social security allowances.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project supports Civil Registration and Social Security Strengthening Program of DOCR and
                           consists of four components. Over a five-year period, the project is expected to support: (i) the
                           establishment of a comprehensive national population register and expanded coverage of CR and
                           SSA and (ii) improved delivery of SSA via transition to e-payments in selected districts and


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         improvements in related processes. These will be supplemented with institutional strengthening at
                         both central and local levels.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improving Coverage of Civil Registration and Social Security Allowances

                         Component 1 will support the expansion of coverage of CR and SSA by establishing a national
                         population register of individuals and household/family folders. The register will be updated through
                         regular CRs and targeted outreach and communications campaigns. The population register will be
                         housed in DOCR existing management information system (MIS), which will be enhanced to
                         accommodate the additional functionalities required (to be supported under Component 3). The goal
                         is to establish a CRVS system that will allow all individuals/residents easy access to CR, enable
                         regular monitoring of registrations, generate timely vital statistics from a central database and
                         establish linkage with programs such as SSA.

                         The component consists of:
                         (a)      Sub-component 1.1: Data collection through a combination of a door-to-door household
                         visits and ward-level registration camps in selected locations to establish a national population
                         register with household/family folders; and
                         (b)      Sub-component 1.2: Information and outreach campaigns to support the data collection,
                         promotion of regular registration of vital events and enrollment of the eligible into SSA.

                         The population register will serve as a basis for identifying the eligible population for SSA and those
                         excluded from accessing CR services. The identification of the excluded individuals will enable
                         tailored communications and outreach programs to encourage them to register vital events and/or
                         enroll in applicable social security schemes. Local level registration camps will be organized once
                         immediately after the data collection and annually thereafter during the project period to improve
                         access to civil registration services. The World Health Organization (WHO) will provide technical
                         assistance to DOCR in the area of civil registration. The expected outcome of the component is
                         expanded coverage of CR and SSA through the following outputs:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)     The establishment of a population register with household/family folders where each
                         individual member has a unique ID; and
                         (b)     Increased coverage of CR and SSA among the target population.

                         Component 2: Modernizing Social Security Delivery Systems

                         The current system of SSA delivery suffers from ineffective control and accountability, low
                         operational efficiency and poor services. Specific sources of the weaknesses include the absence of a
                         reliable, modern IT system to record and manage beneficiary enrollments and payment transactions
                         and the lack of sufficiently trained personnel to manage these processes at the local level. These
                         weaknesses have resulted in leakages and delayed payments. Building on recent pilot projects,
                         MOFALD plans to transition to e-payments for delivery of SSA. The component will support roll-
                         out of e-payments to improve operational efficiency and accountability of the SSA program in 25 of
                         Nepal's 75 districts (sub-component 2.1). It will also support strengthening of other facets of the SSA
                         benefit delivery largely through increased and improved citizen engagement and use of IT in all 75
                         districts (sub-component 2.2). The United Nations Capital Development Fund (UNCDF) will provide
                         technical assistance to DOCR for this component.

                         The component consists of:

                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         (a)      Sub-component 2.1: Phased roll-out of electronic payments via contracted payment service
                         providers (PSPs) using a results-based financing approach with disbursement-linked indicators
                         (DLIs) in 25 selected districts; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)      Sub-component 2.2: Improving accountability and citizen engagement in the social security
                         delivery process particularly enrollment and payment verification and monitoring and grievance
                         redress and applicable improvements in manual payment delivery in all 75 districts, following the
                         traditional investment lending modality.

                         The specific outputs of the component are:
                         (a)    Functioning e-payment system with the actual deployment of e-payments in 25 districts; and
                         (b)    Improvements in SSA benefit delivery, monitoring and grievance redress mechanisms.

                         Component 3: Institutional Strengthening

                         To achieve the project objectives of increased coverage of social security beneficiaries and CR and
                         improved delivery of social security allowances, the institutional framework regulating these two
                         functions as well as the organizational capacity of implementing bodies need to be enhanced.
                         Component 3 is designed to support a range of cross-cutting activities for sustainable
                         institutionalization of the improvements supported under components 1 and 2 by building the
                         government's organizational and institutional capacities for managing CR and SSA functions at both
                         the central and local levels. The activities supported under this component will be divided into
                         following sub-components.
                         (a)      Sub-component 3.1 to support strengthening of DOCR as the central oversight agency of CR
                         and SSA by defining improved business processes for CR and SSA, developing the organizational
                         capacity of DOCR, and enhancing DOCR's existing management information system to align its
                         functionalities to the requirements of the new IT-based CR and SSA business processes.
                         (b)      Sub-component 3.2 to support set-up of service units to provide IT-based back-end support
                         and associated staff training at the local level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Expected outputs of the sub-component are:
                         (a)     Operation Manuals for MIS-based CR and SSA services
                         (b)     Fully equipped and functional DOCR with proper organizational structure and capacity
                         (c)     Enhanced MIS platform
                         (d)     Functional and fully-equipped 'service units'; and
                         (e)     'Service unit' personnel and relevant staff at the local level trained on improved business
                         processes and the use of MIS to manage the CR and SSA database.

                         Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)

                         The component will support project implementation and M&E by establishing and maintaining an
                         effective project management unit (PMU), district-level project implementation units (DL-PIUs),
                         building capacity of project management staff, and financing specific project evaluation studies (e.g.,
                         spot checks, base/mid/end-line surveys).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         Annu Rajbhandari (GEN06)
                         Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)
                         Drona Raj Ghimire (GEN06)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Jun Zeng (GSU06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            No         Considering that the project will support and invest in
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               hardware and software aspects of delivery of social
                                                             security allowances to strengthen the efficiency of the
                                                             DOCR and Local Bodies and not support civil works
                                                             including any type of rehabilitation and maintenance, the
                                                             project has been categorized as C. There will be minimum
                                                             or no adverse impacts from the implementation of the
                                                             project. Hence, no safeguard document on environment
                                                             needs to be complied with or prepared.

                                                             However, it is recommended that the project, as a
                                                             proactive measure, will strive to adopt environment good
                                                             practices such as waste management, purchase of energy
                                                             efficient goods and recyclable and reusable hardware
                                                             goods etc. to reduce the environmental impacts of
                                                             government operations and promote environmental
                                                             stewardship by integrating environmental performance
                                                             considerations in the procurement process.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No         No natural habitats will be impacted.
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No         Forest will not be impacted.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project will not finance the purchase of pesticides nor
                                                             promote the use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural        No         There is no foreseeable impact on Physical Cultural
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                Resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes        This policy has been triggered mainly to ensure outreach,
                         BP 4.10                             inclusion, effective targeting, and monitoring of hitherto
                                                             marginalized groups, including IPs, during the
                                                             implementation of various sub-components designed to
                                                             strengthen social protection programs and civil
                                                             registration. A Vulnerable Community Development Plan
                                                             detailing the steps that will be taken to mitigate against
                                                             any risks of exclusion, provide opportunities for greater
                                                             citizen engagement, and ensure enhanced project benefits
                                                             to vulnerable groups, including IPs, has been prepared.
                                                             The VCDP is consistent with the Bank policy on
                                                             indigenous peoples and the specific guidelines for
                                                             Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP).
                         Involuntary Resettlement No         This policy is not triggered since it does not include any


                                                               Page 4 of 7
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 type of civil works, and it is clear that there is no land
                                                                       requirements.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project will not finance dams.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No             The project is not situated in international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             No disputed areas are involved.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will only support the establishment of a national population register, improved
                              delivery of social security allowances, and institutional strengthening at the central and local
                              levels. There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. On the contrary,
                              the focus improving civil registration and delivery of social security allowances will mean that the
                              positive impacts on human populations, including indigenous people and other vulnerable groups,
                              will be significant.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Not applicable
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              DOCR has prepared a Vulnerable Community Development Plan (VCDP) to ensure that the
                              Project is implemented in a manner that addresses issues related to access, equity, quality and
                              sustainability of social protection schemes for the vulnerable groups; that vulnerable groups are
                              engaged in a process of free, and informed consultation to identify their views and ascertain their
                              broad community support for the project; and to ensure that the vulnerable groups are not
                              adversely affected by the project interventions. The VCDP details the agreed principles, guidelines
                              and procedures to be integrated into project implementation that would ensure compliance with the
                              applicable Nepali laws relating to indigenous peoples and other marginalized groups, and the
                              relevant World Bank safeguard policies and objectives relating to Indigenous Peoples. The VCDP
                              includes plans for consultation and participation; monitoring; institutional arrangements for
                              implementation; and capacity building.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Key stakeholders include the general population benefiting from civil registrations, recipients of
                              social security allowances, the DoCR, local government institutions (Village Development
                              Committees, District Development Committees and Municipalities), commercialbanks, civil
                              society organizations, and community groups. The VCDP includes plans for consultation and
                              participation; monitoring; institutional arrangements for implementation and capacity building.

                                                                         Page 5 of 7
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                             Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Aug-2016
                              Date of submission to InfoShop                                   08-Aug-2016
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Nepal                                                            29-Jul-2016
                              Comments: The VCDP was disclosed in-country on July 29, 2016.
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS



                                                                        Page 6 of 7
                         Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yasuhiko Matsuda,Jasmine Rajbhandary
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/    Name: Pablo Gottret (PMGR)                 Date: 10-Aug-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Page 7 of 7
