                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC19699

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Ukraine                         Project ID:       P161312
                            Project Name:   Strengthening Evidence-Based Policymaking with Education Statistics and
                                            Analysis
                            Team Leader(s): Igor Kheyfets
                            Estimated Date 31-Oct-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GED03                           Lending           IPF
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.4                             Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       0.06
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                   0.34
                            Environment         C - Not Required
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of this project is to strengthen the capacity of Ukrainian education
                           authorities to utilize administrative, statistical, and learning assessment data and analytical methods
                           to inform policymaking.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will be financed through a Recipient Executed Grant from the Trust Fund for
                           Statistical Capacity Building (TFSCB) over a period of two years (FY17-FY19). The total requested
                           amount for the Grant is US$ 340,000, which will be divided across the following three components:

                           Component 1. Development of an integrated Education Management Information System (EMIS)

                           The objective of this component is to support the development of a modern EMIS that contributes to
                           evidence-based policymaking and increases transparency of education statistics.

                           Sub-component 1.1. Integration and quality assurance of existing databases. This sub-component will
                           finance the modernization and upgrading of an existing EMIS that was recently acquired by the
                         Ministry of Education and Science. Previously operated by a private company, the EMIS requires
                         significant quality assurance and integration with existing data systems. Specifically this will require:
                         (i) assessment of the existing data systems; (ii) support from programmers and database developers;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iii) consulting from international and domestic EMIS experts; (iv) knowledge exchange with other
                         countries that have recently established a modern EMIS of their own; and (v) provision of hardware
                         and software necessary to maintain and operate the EMIS.

                         Sub-component 1.2. Database security certification. This sub-component will finance the necessary
                         database security measures, as required by national legislation. Specifically it will include: (i)
                         development of a Terms of Reference for the services of a firm engaged in database security
                         certification (including assessment of security risks, development of a data protection policy, testing
                         of the security system, and its implementation); and (ii) contracting of such firm to provide the
                         necessary database security services.

                         Sub-component 1.3. Development of an open data portal. This sub-component will finance the
                         construction of an open data portal that will make timely and relevant EMIS data available to all
                         stakeholders in the education sector. Specifically this will include: (i) contracting programmers and
                         data visualization specialists to develop a user friendly portal linked to the EMIS; (ii) acquisition of
                         statistical, database management, mapping, and data visualization software necessary to run the
                         portal; and (iii) communications and outreach services necessary to inform the various stakeholders
                         about the portal and its uses.

                         Sub-component 1.4. Training and analytical capacity building. This sub-component will finance a
                         range of capacity building activities to encourage effective use of education statistics, including
                         training on the use of the EMIS and the open data portal developed under sub-components 1.1 and
                         1.3. Specifically this will include: (i) training of the Institute of Educational Analytics staff in proper
                         database maintenance and EMIS operation; (ii) training for representatives of local education
                         authorities in proper data entry and submission techniques; (iii) training of other stakeholders and
                         decision makers (including the Ministry of Education and Science, local authorities, and others) in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the effective use of education statistics for evidence-based policymaking; (iv) instruction of key
                         stakeholders in statistical and analytical methods that take advantage of data available in the EMIS.

                         Component 2. Preparation for participation in the Programme for International Student Assessment
                         (PISA)

                         The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of Ukrainian authorities to participate
                         in PISA 2018 and analyze the subsequent assessment results.

                         Sub-component 2.1. Preparation for PISA implementation. This sub-component will finance selected
                         activities to be undertaken by the Institute of Educational Analytics and other agencies in preparation
                         for PISA 2018 testing. Specifically this will include: (i) data collection and processing for the
                         preparation of the PISA 2018 sample; (ii) preparation of the sample of schools to be included in
                         PISA 2018 piloting and implementation; (iii) knowledge exchange and consulting support with local
                         and international experts on topics relevant to PISA implementation; and (iv) informational activities
                         for teachers and other education system stakeholders regarding international large-scale sample-
                         based student assessments.

                         Sub-component 2.2. Capacity building for the preparation of the PISA 2018 national report. This
                         sub-component will finance the training of Ukrainian experts in the accepted analytical techniques
                           used in the preparation of PISA national reports based on international best practices. Specifically
                           this will include: (i) training of the staff of Institute of Educational Analytics and other relevant
                           agencies in statistical techniques used for analyzing PISA data; (ii) knowledge exchange with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           international organizations and other national agencies experienced in preparation of similar reports;
                           (iii) consulting support from local and international experts on relevant topics.

                           Component 3. Institutional capacity building

                           The objective of this component is to build institutional capacity of the Institute of Educational
                           Analytics and ensure adequate support for Grant implementation.

                           Sub-component 3.1. Institutional capacity building. This sub-component will finance the
                           strengthening of institutional capacity of the Institute of Educational Analytics to become the leading
                           education statistics and analysis organization in Ukraine. Specifically this will include: (i) the
                           development of the Institute's website; (ii) training of Institute staff in modern research methods,
                           analytical report preparation, use of statistical software, and English language proficiency; (iii)
                           knowledge exchange activities with domestic and international experts on topics relevant to the
                           Institute's mission; and (iv) provision of a small amount of furniture, hardware, and software.
                           Training of IEA staff on sociological research methods is expected to be provided by the Recipient as
                           part of the in-kind contribution toward the implementation of this Grant.

                           Sub-component 3.2. Grant implementation support. This sub-component will finance the necessary
                           support for the Institute of Educational Analytics to adequately implement the Grant in line with
                           World Bank rules and procedures. Specifically this will include: (i) consulting services in the areas of
                           procurement, financial management, translation, and others; (ii) operating costs; and (iii) other
                           expenditures (e.g., training) required by the Project Management Team to successfully implement the
                           Grant. Despite facing severe resource constraints, the Recipient will provide an in-kind contribution
                           in the form of covering administrative costs of the implementing agency (including staff time and
                           operating expenses of the IEA). These are expected to amount to approximately US$ 60,000 over the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           life of the Grant.

                           Sub-component 3.3. Audit. This sub-component will finance the required audit of Grant
                           implementation activities.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Because the grant activities focus mainly on the strengthening of management information systems
                           and capacity building, no Safeguard Policies will be triggered.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/                 No
                           BP 4.01
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Igor Kheyfets
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                               Date: 25-Aug-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Keiko Inoue (PMGR)                                           Date: 25-Aug-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
