                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC14934

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Cameroon                         Project ID:       P154908
                            Project Name:       Livestock Development Project (P154908)
                            Task Team           Omar Lyasse,Manievel Sene
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           22-Aug-2016                      Estimated         27-Oct-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GFA07                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Animal production (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Rural policies and institutions (20%),
                                                Rural markets (15%), Other rural development (15%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    136.00                      Total Bank Financing:         100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              12.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    100.00
                              Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies                                       17.50
                              Municipalities of Borrowing Country                                              0.50
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                              6.00
                              Total                                                                          136.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve productivity, competitiveness and
                           efficiency of smallholder short cycle livestock producers and the livelihoods’ resilience of pastoral
                         and agro-pastoral producers in target areas.

                         For the purpose of this project, efficiency is defined as the capacity to turn natural resources into
Public Disclosure Copy




                         animal products. It is measured in terms of feed conversion ratio (kg feed per kg product), GHG
                         emissions per unit of product and synthetic N and P used per unit of animal product
                         C. Project Description
                         The project will be structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF), funded by an IDA credit in
                         the amount of US$100 million over six years. The project will help alleviate vulnerability of
                         pastoralism and transhumance and increase resilience, improve livestock health system and
                         productivity, support the development of selected livestock value chains. The sub-sector and value
                         chain analysis which is ongoing will inform the selection of value chains and the preparation of the
                         project. The project will be structured around four components as follows:

                         Component 1: Strengthening animal health system (US$10 million IDA) to more rapidly detect and
                         better control the prevalence of parasites and infectious diseases that are among the main constraints
                         to pastoralism, and prevent natural disasters that might affect the livelihood of pastoral and agro-
                         pastoral communities. This component will support the following activities: reinforce the Veterinary
                         services, public and private, and their governance, and implement surveillance and control plans of
                         priority animal diseases in targeted production basins. This component will include three sub-
                         components:

                         Sub-component 1.1: Strengthening the Veterinary services, especially epidemio-surveillance and
                         early detection systems (US$6 million IDA) ➢❨ will enhance the early detection and rapid response
                         of major animal diseases such as avian influenza, CBPP, FMD, Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR),
                         African Swine Fever (ASF) and Newcastle Disease (NCD) in the long term. It will also contribute to
                         the control of ➢❨ productivity➢❨ - affecting diseases, such as parasitic, vector-born or
                         bacteriological ones, through strengthening the private veterinary practices and services, and
                         reinforcing its links with the veterinary public authorities, through the sanitary mandate, using
Public Disclosure Copy




                         experience gained during the PACA. For this, the component will use the results from the evaluation
                         of the quality of veterinary services conducted by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE)
                         in 2008 and using the ➢❨ Performance of Veterinary Services➢❨ (PVS) tool and its subsequent
                         ➢❨ Gap Analysis➢❨ undertaken in 2011. The support will include small infrastructure (quarantine
                         and check points, laboratory), transport and cold store facilities, equipment and training. It will also
                         support the MINEPIA in its efforts to operationalize the legislative framework on the ➢❨ Sanitary
                         Mandate➢❨ to delegate some activities of public good nature to the private veterinarians and as a
                         way to expand the surveillance network in the country. The scarcity of veterinary professionals and
                         specialized advisory services may hinder the adoption of better animal husbandry techniques and
                         contributes to poor reproductive performance in local breeds, high mortality rates, and low
                         productivity. Specific long and short trainings will be provided to professionals (project staff, public
                         and private veterinarians) to improve their capacity to provide technical advice relating to the
                         targeted livestock systems and species. The sub-component will also support Lanavet to increase
                         vaccine production by 10 per cent yearly, collaboration between Lanavet and ILRI in diagnosis and
                         disease control, and capacity building.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Implementation of surveillance and control plans of priority animal diseases
                         (US$4 million IDA) ➢❨ will contribute to reduce losses from the most prevalent parasitic and
                         infectious animal diseases (Africa Swine Fever (ASF), Contagious Bovine Pleuropneumonia
                         (CBPP), Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD), Newcastle disease and PPR), etc. The project will support
                         (i) the preparation of surveillance and controls strategy (including vaccination) of priority animal
                         diseases by the ministry in charge of livestock and (ii) the implementation of planned interventions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Priority will be given to interventions (vaccination, tests ➢❨¦) on livestock owned by households in
                         the target regions. It will (i) provide veterinary equipment (cold storage facilities for vaccines,
                         transport facilities, fuel and other working materials) to public animal health services at regional and
                         local levels, (ii) facilitate vaccine supply, and (iii) support the involvement of private veterinarians in
                         the implementation of disease surveillance and vaccination campaigns.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Contingency emergency response (US$0 million IDA). Considering adverse
                         natural events that might cause major disasters affecting the livelihoods of pastoral and agro-pastoral
                         communities in the project areas, the Government of Cameroon would request the World Bank to re-
                         allocate project funds to support mitigation, response, recovery and reconstruction. This component
                         would draw resources from the unallocated expend iture category and/or allow the affected country
                         to request the World Bank to re-categorize and reallocate financing from other components to
                         partially cover emergency response and recovery costs. This component could also be used to
                         channel additional funds, should they become available as a result of an eligible emergency. All
                         expenditures under this component, should it be triggered, would be in accordance with paragraph 11
                         of OP 10.00 of the IPF and will be appraised, reviewed and found to be acceptable to the World
                         Bank before any disbursement is made. Eligible operating costs would include incremental expenses
                         incurred for efforts arising as a result of the natural disaster.

                         Component 2: Support to natural resources management, transhumance and security of herders in
                         pastoral areas (US$25 million IDA) ➢❨ will increase productivity and resilience of pastoral
                         production systems to the negative effects of poor pastures, and will promote transhumance and
                         security by financing Sub-Projects (SPs) that will be presented and managed by local communities.
                         This component will adopt a collective and community-based rangelands management approach. It
                         comprises two sub-components. During the project preparation, investment models for community
Public Disclosure Copy




                         SPs will be developed to forecast the likely interventions in the targeted areas. The selection criteria
                         and mechanism for communities and transhumance areas will be specified during the pre-appraisal
                         based on both the findings of the transhumance map and the sub-sector and value chain analysis
                         which are underway.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Support to pastoral land development and resilience of the pastoral communities
                         (US$15 million IDA) ➢❨ will improve rangelands productivity and resilience to drought, and
                         contribute to a secured access of herders to rangelands and complementary feed resources in target
                         areas. It will finance collective natural resources management approaches and infrastructure to
                         upgrade/protect vulnerable pastures against degradation (erosion and bush encroachment) and
                         enhance their resilience to climate change. The support will notably include investments to develop
                         integrated landscape management practice including watershed management infrastructure,
                         reforestation, conservation of protected areas, agro-forestry, and management and development of
                         livestock manure. It will also finance activities related to the production, storage and marketing of
                         fodder and crop residues to be used during dry season and droughts. SPs will also include targeted
                         SPs for women➢❨ s organizations in herder communities designed to enhance households➢❨
                         nutrition situation through diversification of household food production, income generation,
                         improved maternal and child feeding practices, and introduction of labor-saving technologies adapted
                         to women➢❨ s needs. Income generation activities for women➢❨ s groups will include honey
                         production as an indicator of environmental health. Sub-component 2.1 will support collaboration
                         with ICRAF, ILRI, ACREST, and CGEW in the characterization of the state of pastures, agro-
                         forestry and in the transfer of improved technology (such as Brachiaria grasses) to beneficiary
                         communities and farmers.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 2.2: Improving transhumance and the security for herders (US$10 million IDA) ➢❨
                         will support transhumance planning and rehabilitation/establishment and demarcation of corridors for
                         herders to avoid related conflicts mainly in the North, Far North, East and Center regions. A
                         transhumance map was prepared with the technical assistance of the National Institute of
                         Cartography, and provides major corridors for selection. Subcomponent 2.2 will build capacity of
                         customary conflicts prevention and peace-building institutions and establish such platform where
                         they are not existent. It will support collaboration with ICRAF and SNV in conflict management.

                         Component 3: Intensification of selected cattle, goat, sheep, pig,poultry and bee farming systems and
                         value chain development (US$50 million IDA) ➢❨ will support development of pig, poultry, beef,
                         goat, sheep, milk and honey productions and value chains in target areas. The component will
                         establish ➢❨ Productive Partnerships➢❨ (PPs) between livestock producer organizations (POs) and
                         buyers. These PPs will be implemented through the provision of matching grants and will facilitate
                         access to rural financing for investing in various PO Sub-Projects (SPs). During the project
                         preparation, investment models for PO SPs will be developed to forecast the likely interventions in
                         the targeted value chains. The selection criteria and mechanism for POs, PPs/SPs will be spelled out
                         at pre-appraisal based on the findings the sub-sector and value chain analysis which is underway. The
                         component will include three subcomponents:

                         Sub-component 3.1: Establishment of PPs (US$4 million IDA) and Support to improved access to
                         rural financing. This sub-component will promote and enhance direct and sustainable PPs between
                         POs and buyers of products (meat, milk and honey) of target species (cattle, goat, sheep, pig, poultry
                         and bee) to match PO supply to buyers demand. Financial Institutions (FIs) will be included in the
                         PPs as they will co-finance SPs by providing credit to POs. A PP specifies: (a) product quality and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         characteristics such as size and species to be produced; (b) quantity to be produced and bought; (c)
                         delivery modalities: how the product will be delivered, when, and in what condition; (d) payment
                         modalities and price determination criteria; and (e) the buyer➢❨ s contribution, such as Technical
                         Assistance (TA), specific inputs, and arrangements for input reimbursement. The sub-component will
                         also support the establishment of sustainable business relations between targeted POs and Financial
                         Institutions (FIs). PO SPs will be financed by Matching Grant (XX per cent), FI credits (YY per
                         cent) and beneficiary POs➢❨ contribution (ZZ per cent). To facilitate the involvement of FIs and the
                         provision of adapted financial services, it will support capacity building of POs in the area of
                         preparation of viable projects and business plans for financing including training in Business Edge.
                         As developed within AIMDP, FI credit extended to targeted POs will be financed from own
                         resources as a result of the mobilization of adapted financial instruments developed by IFC for FIs
                         (including risk sharing, credit line, etc.). Sub-component 3.1 will also support collaboration with
                         ILRI, ACREST, CGEW, and SNV in feed productions, value chain development, waste management
                         and biogas production.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Financing of SPs for POs (US$40 million IDA) ➢❨ will finance PO SPs
                         (business plans) which have been established by PPs with buyers to: (i) strengthen the capacity of
                         beneficiary POs; (ii) increase the productivity and production of cattle, goat, sheep, pig, poultry and
                         bee value chains; and (iii) increase the processed amount of beef, sheep, goat, milk, honey, pig and
                         poultry productions. Based on a PO➢❨ s business plan, investment will cover collective investments
                         (feed production and processing, improved animal husbandry techniques, small-scale processing
                         units/equipment, waste management systems to minimize greenhouse gas emissions, pollution and
                         dissemination of pathogens, energy supply, TA and training) through a Matching Grant aimed at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         increasing production and productivity, improving post-harvest (including processing) facilities, and
                         quality. A conditionality mechanism will be built into the Matching Grant to ensure that the
                         collective investment SP do not generate negative externalities on public goods, such as environment
                         and public health. The support will ultimately increase competitiveness of target value chains.

                         Sub-component 3.3: Improve productivity of breeds (US$6 million IDA) will increase provision of
                         improved breeds to livestock farmers. It will finance rehabilitation/construction of five breeding
                         centers for small ruminant and pig production, the acquisition of parent stocks and other related
                         inputs. The sub-component will expand some of the work that the BecA-ILRI Hub has undertaken
                         (under the Swedish-funde d goat improvement program) with the ministry of livestock in Cameroon
                         to develop capacity at some of the breeding centers. Activities will be carried out under a win-win
                         PPP with defined specifications.

                         Component 4: Strengthening livestock institutions, policy capacity and Project coordination and
                         monitoring (US$15 million IDA). This component will identify long-term training and education
                         needs to increase the pool of specialized experts and finance those trainings to build long-term
                         capacity in the country. This support could target MINEPIA, national POs or private sector. It will
                         also support multi-disciplinary national task forces (technical experts, jurists, decision-makers) and
                         accompanying experts to review the outdated legislative and regulatory framework and support the
                         preparation and adoption of key laws, decrees and policies, in order to improve the livestock
                         investments environment. A Project Coordination Unit (PCU) will be established. This component
                         will support project implementation activities, including operating costs of the PCU with offices at
                         national and regional levels. The PCU will be under the ministry in charge of livestock. The PCU
                         will be responsible for the day-to-day project management, implementation, fiduciary management,
                         and overall communication, monitoring and evaluation (M&E). The operational costs of the Project
                         Steering Committee will be supported by the Project. The Project will finance the establishment and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operations of an M&E unit. It will also finance trainings, workshops and seminars, study tours, and
                         relevant studies.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The target areas include the following regions: Adamaoua, North, Far-North, East, South, West,
                         North-West, Littoral, and Central. Indigenous peoples are present in the East, Central and South
                         regions.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         The Ministry of Livestock (MINEPIA) has progressively built its capacity for safeguards
                         management during the implementation of previous projects. In addition, the Ministry of
                         Environment, Nature Protection and Sustainable Development (MINEPDED) and the Ministry of
                         Property and Land Affairs (MINCAF) will also be involved in the implementation of safeguard
                         measures. The capacity of the PIU to manage safeguard implementation will be assessed during
                         preparation and plans for capacity building and training will be included in the implementation plan.
                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)
                         Kristyna Bishop (GSU01)
                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies            Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment      Yes        This policy is triggered as the project activities and
                           OP/BP 4.01                               mainly those related to component 2 and 3 (Support
                                                                    to natural resources management, transhumance and
                                                                    security of herders in pastoral areas; Intensification
                                                                    of selected cattle, goat, sheep, pig, poultry and bee
                                                                    farming systems and value chain development) and
                                                                    to a lesser extent component 1 (small infrastructure,
                                                                    vector control) may have environmental and social
                                                                    impacts. The scope, nature and scale of these
                                                                    potential impacts are not known at this project
                                                                    concept stage. The exact nature and location of
                                                                    activities could not be identified during the project
                                                                    preparation. The Team anticipates that an ESMF
                                                                    will be prepared and disclosed prior appraisal to
                                                                    guide the way that potential negative environmental
                                                                    and social impacts of future activities will be
                                                                    identified and mitigated during the project
                                                                    implementation.
                                                                    It is worthy also to notice that several environmental
                                                                    mitigation measures are already anticipated under
                                                                    subcomponent 2.1.
                                                                    There are a number of social safeguards issues as
                                                                    well as general social development impacts that are
                                                                    not covered by 4.12 or 4.10 that will be addressed in
                                                                    the ESMF. These impacts include potential conflict
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    over land especially between pastoralists and settled
                                                                    communities, gender gaps and differentials in
                                                                    livestock rearing, land tenure and poverty. The social
                                                                    assessment that will be completed during preparation
                                                                    will be used to identify these impacts and provide
                                                                    measures by which they will be mitigated. These
                                                                    measures will be incorporated into project design and
                                                                    reflected in the PAD, ESMF, IPPF and RPF as
                                                                    relevant.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No         The ESMF will define relevant screening and
                                                                    mitigation measures to avoid any threats to critical
                                                                    natural habitats such as protected areas, and to avoid
                                                                    and mitigate potential adverse impacts to non-critical
                                                                    habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes        This policy is triggered as the project activities under
                                                                    sub-component 2.1 will include investments to
                                                                    develop integrated landscape management practice
                                                                    reforestation and other activities, such as include
                                                                    conservation measures and agro-forestry. The project
                                                              will give preference to siting such activities on
                                                              unforested sites or lands already converted
                                                              (excluding any lands that have been converted in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              anticipation of the project).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes   The project activities will likely increase the use of
                                                              private veterinary practices and services including
                                                              chemical pesticides for vector management (see
                                                              under OP 4.01) and control of pests (combatting
                                                              insects) which could have negative environmental
                                                              and health impacts.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    TBD   This remains to be determined. During the
                         OP/BP 4.11                           development of the ESMF physical cultural
                                                              resources will be taken into consideration and
                                                              baselines defined. As needed, the ESMF will include
                                                              clear procedures that will be required for
                                                              identification, protection of cultural property from
                                                              theft, and treatment of discovered artifacts, and will
                                                              be included in standard bidding documents. The
                                                              ESMF will also provide procedures for handling with
                                                              ➢❨ chance finds➢❨ during implementation project
                                                              activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       Yes   Indigenous peoples meeting the four criteria in the
                         4.10                                 policy are present in the proposed project area. The
                                                              social assessment that is currently underway will
                                                              identify the specific communities and the potential
                                                              impacts and benefits related to project activities. The
                                                              results of the social assessment will be used to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              inform the project design and the preparation of an
                                                              IPPF/IPP as required. The IPPF/IPP will be disclosed
                                                              prior to appraisal per the requirements of the policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   There will be no involuntary taking of land or
                         BP 4.12                              physical resettlement as a result of project activities.
                                                              However, this policy is triggered as there may be
                                                              impacts on customary use of rangeland and access to
                                                              resources in protected areas. Further examination of
                                                              the dynamics and local realities of land tenure and
                                                              access to resources will be undertaken as part of the
                                                              social assessment. In particular, the social assessment
                                                              will examine the presence of squatters and farmers
                                                              and livestock owners using the land under customary
                                                              law and identify any negative impacts on their
                                                              livelihoods that may result from the implementation
                                                              of project activities. Based on the results of the social
                                                              assessment, an RPF and PF will be prepared in order
                                                              to manage any potential economic impacts and avoid
                                                              restriction of access where possible.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects on International                                   TBD                        This policy could be triggered as the project will
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   finance water infrastructures mainly in the North and
                                                                                                                        Far North regions where two international water
                                                                                                                        bodies could be impacted (Lake Chad and Benoue
                                                                                                                        River).
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Feb-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The TORs for the ESMF, IPPF and RPF/PF have been prepared and reviewed by the Bank.
                                      Recruitment of the consultants is underway and the social assessment and the first drafts of the
                                      instruments are expected by end of February 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Omar Lyasse,Manievel Sene
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                                                                                Date: 16-Jun-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)                                                                                            Date: 17-Jun-2016
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
