                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA18557
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cameroon                           Project ID:   P154908
                            Project Name:      Livestock Development Project (P154908)
                            Task Team          Omar Lyasse,Manievel Sene
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          22-Aug-2016              Estimated     27-Oct-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFA07                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       166.92           Total Bank Financing:    100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          13.31
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                100.00
                              Borrowing Country's Fin. Intermediary/ies                                                   44.85
                              Municipalities of Borrowing Country                                                          0.66
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                          8.10
                              Total                                                                                      166.92
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve productivity of selected livestock
                           production systems and the commercialization of their products for the targeted beneficiaries, and
                           provide immediate and effective response in the event of an eligible livestock crisis or emergency.
                            3. Project Description

                                                                       Page 1 of 14
                         The project will be structured as an Investment Project Financing (IPF) funded by an IDA credit in
                         the amount of US$100 million over six years. The project will be structured around four
                         components : (i) Improving Livestock services access and delivery; (ii) Improving pastoral
Public Disclosure Copy




                         productivity, access to markets, and resilience of pastoral communities; (iii) Support to livestock
                         value chains development; and (iv) Project coordination and management. The first component is
                         crosscutting and designed to secure investments in livestock within the project by preventing and
                         controlling livestock main diseases. The second component is designed to support productivity and
                         marketing for the pastoral communities of smallholder households, while restoring the productive
                         means of the poorest and vulnerable households in the North and Far North. The third component
                         will support business between livestock producer organizations, buyers and financial institutions and
                         value addition at producer organization levels where business opportunities exist. Components 2 and
                         3 will also promote the inclusion of women and improve nutrition. The fourth component will
                         support implementation of the first three components, inform the project execution and performance
                         and support studies that are essential to the project and for building the basic capacity of core public
                         services.

                         Component 1: Improving Livestock services access and delivery (US$24 million IDA). This
                         component aims to improve access to key livestock services for livestock producers, especially
                         animal health services, improved genetic material and high quality inputs. This component is
                         structured around 4 sub-components as follows:

                         Sub-component 1.1: Access to Animal health services (US$14 million IDA). Strengthening the
                         Veterinary services, especially epidemio-surveillance and early detection systems, will enhance the
                         early detection and rapid response to major animal diseases such as avian influenza, CBPP, FMD,
                         Peste des Petits Ruminants (PPR), African Swine Fever (ASF) and Newcastle Disease (NCD) in the
                         long term. It will also contribute to the control of "productivity" - affecting diseases, such as
                         parasitic, vector-born or bacteriological ones, through strengthening the private veterinary practices
                         and services, and reinforcing links with the veterinary public authorities through their sanitary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mandate. For this, the sub-component will build on the results from the evaluation of the quality of
                         veterinary services conducted by the World Organization for Animal Health (OIE) in 2008, as well
                         as the "Performance of Veterinary Services" (PVS) tool developed by this organization and its
                         subsequent "Gap Analysis" undertaken in 2011.

                         This sub-component will be implemented by: i) improving the service delivery capacity of
                         Veterinary Services (VS), including both public and private veterinary services; and ii) supporting
                         surveillance and control of animal diseases. In terms of the VS service delivery capacity, the project
                         will finance: a) the development and operationalization of an animal health information system at the
                         Directorate for Veterinary Services (DVS); b) the operationalization of the regulatory framework
                         governing the animal health system (including the "Sanitary Mandate" ), including support to the
                         Government's field services (VZC), and private veterinary practices; c) strengthening the National
                         Order of Veterinarians in Cameroon to ensure the quality of service delivery; and d) training and
                         awareness building of producer organizations.

                         Support to surveillance and control of animal diseases will include financing for: a) surveillance
                         activities ("passive" and "active"); b) a vaccination campaign for PPR, to vaccinate an incremental 15
                         percent of small ruminants, in line with Government's commitment to the global effort to eradicate
                         PPR in the world ; and c) the update and field-testing of animal health emergency plans.




                                                                      Page 2 of 14
                         Sub-component 1.2: Access to high quality inputs ($4 million). The sub-component will support: (i)
                         access to improved genetic material, and (ii) access to improved feed, particularly improved fodder.
                         To improve the availability of improved breeds and pasture seeds, the project will: (i) assist
Public Disclosure Copy




                         MINEPIA to develop strategy for improving the supply of improved animal genetic resources in the
                         country and an associated investment plan, and (ii) partially finance the investment plan, particularly
                         by providing support to five breeding and seed centers , pre-identified during the preparation ,
                         which will ensure supply of improved breeds and pasture seeds to the POs targeted under component
                         2 and 3. To improve feed quality, the project will: (i) promote good practices in feed production at
                         farm level, and develop norms and quality standards for feed for the targeted value chains, and (ii)
                         support MINEPIA's basic control activities to ensure the quality of breeds, feed and pasture seeds
                         provided to the beneficiaries.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Institutional support, capacity building and communication ($6 million). This
                         sub-component will strengthen staff capacity in the ministry to carry out its core responsibilities
                         including sector analysis, policy preparation and implementation, sector monitoring and evaluation.
                         Activities include : (i) identification of short- and long-term training and education needs to increase
                         the pool of specialized experts and financing of this plan for targeted trainings to build long-term
                         capacity in the country , (ii) improvement of the MINEPIA's information system, (iii)development of
                         a communication strategy and implementation plan on the sector to improve the relation between the
                         ministry and key stakeholders involved in the targeted value chains, including private investors and
                         financial institutions , (iv) support to the ongoing development of food-safety norms for livestock
                         products, quality standards and their reinforcement, which will include the provision of specialized
                         equipment, transportation, etc., (v) support (capacity building, equipment, and locally sourced
                         technical assistance) to ten regional centers of information and promotion of livestock products
                         ("maisons des Ã©leveurs"), (vi) strengthening of inter-professional livestock associations, and (vii)
                         development of a contingency emergency response plan, to increase preparedness in the event of a
                         crisis affecting the livestock sector.

                         Sub-component 1.4: Contingency emergency response ($0 million). Following an adverse natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         event that causes a major natural disaster, the government of Cameroon may request the Bank to
                         reallocate project funds to support response and reconstruction. This component will draw resources
                         from the unallocated expenditure category and /or allow the government to request the Bank to re-
                         categorize and reallocate financing form other Project components to partially cover emergency
                         response and costs. This component could also channel additional funds should they become
                         available as a result of an eligible emergency. Detailed operational guidelines acceptable to the bank
                         for their implementation of the Contingency Emergency Response Plan, developed under sub-
                         Component 1.3 will be prepared during the first year of project implementation. Should this
                         component be triggered, all expenditures will be made in accordance with paragraph 11 of OP 10.00
                         and will be reviewed and accepted by the Bank before any disbursement is made. In accordance with
                         paragraphs 11 and 12 of OP 10.00, this component would provide immediate, rapidly disbursing
                         support to finance goods (positive list agreed with governments), works, and services needed for
                         response, mitigation, and recovery and reconstruction.

                         Component 2: Improving pastoral productivity, access to markets, and resilience of pastoral
                         communities (US$24 million)

                         The component's main objective is to increase the contribution of pastoral areas to the domestic
                         supply of red meat (especially for urban markets) while upgrading livestock production systems
                         (cattle, small ruminants, poultry) for poor and conflict-affected communities. The component will

                                                                      Page 3 of 14
                         increase productivity of pastoral production systems and promote transhumance and security by
                         financing Sub-Projects (SPs) that will be presented and managed by local communities. This
                         component will adopt a collective and community-based rangelands management approach. Since
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Communal Development Plans (CDPs) include priority investments for communities, community
                         SPs on pastoral management will be identified in CDPs already prepared within PNDP-II and III, and
                         implemented following the same mechanismused by PNDP-III. Component 2 consists of three sub-
                         components: (i) Support to animal production practices and the community based management of
                         pastoral areas; (ii) Support to commercialization and marketing of pastoral livestock products; and
                         (iii) Provision of animals (cattle, small ruminants, and poultry) to households in conflict-affected
                         communities.

                         Thirty communes will be selected for the implementation of the component, in areas used by
                         pastoralists, either as main resource ("territoire d➢❨ attache") or transit area: these are the entire
                         regions of Far North, North and Adamawa, as well as part of the regions of North West, West, Centre
                         and East. The direct beneficiaries of the component are pastoralists, particularly those of them, large
                         or small holders, who want to move towards a more commercially oriented activity. Implementation
                         partnerships will be explored with agencies currently active in the targeted regions (e.g. SNV,
                         APESS , and other NGOs).

                         Sub-component 2.1: Support to animal production practices and the community based management
                         of pastoral areas ($17 million). The main objective of this subcomponent is to improve the livestock
                         production practices (including herd management) by promoting better management of pastoral and
                         animal resources, increasing forage productivity, securing pastoralists' access to resources, and
                         reducing conflicts. At the core of the sub-component is the support to dialogue processes and shared
                         management of resources as well as the implementation of communal level management plans
                         following the approach developed and successfully implemented under PNDP. More specifically,
                         activities will include: (i) Participatory development of management plans to include women,
                         vulnerable groups and youth; (ii) Implementation of the management plans; and (iii) Promotion and
                         support to conflict resolution mechanisms through the establishment or strengthening of specific
Public Disclosure Copy




                         platforms for dialogue and conflict management at local level. To increase productivity at animal
                         level (weight gains) and herd level (reproduction rates), this sub-component will strengthen the
                         capacity of producer organizations following successful models currently implemented by
                         development partners in the target areas through the participatory development and implementation
                         of adapted technical itineraries for herd management. Particular attention will be paid to the active
                         and meaningful participation of vulnerable groups such as indigenous peoples, women, youth and
                         theelderly in the preparation and implementation of community-based pastoral development plans.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Support to commercialization and marketing of pastoral livestock products ($3
                         million). The main objective of this subcomponent is to increase the amount and quality of animals
                         and animal products marketed by pastoral communities in intervention areas which implies a more
                         pronounced shift towards market-orientation and commercialization. Specifically, activities will
                         include: i) Strengthening and / or support for the establishment of dialogue platforms bringing
                         together the various parties involved in the management of municipal markets and marketing of
                         animals; ii) Strengthening the marketing capacity among pastoralists and pastoralists associations;
                         and iii) Improving market information, focusing on the access by pastoralists to pertinent information
                         for sale.

                         Sub-component 2.3: Improving the resilience of poor and conflict-affected communities ($4 million).
                         This sub-component will improve the resilience of the poorest or the most vulnerable communities

                                                                      Page 4 of 14
                         affected by the crisis in the North and Far North regions of the country. Given the insecure, and at
                         times dangerous environment prevailing in these areas, implementation will follow a simplified
                         design by focusing on investments that will yield results in the short term and address the immediate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         effects poverty and of conflict and fragility, whilst engaging these communities and community
                         based organizations directly to strengthen their resilience and facilitate the emergence of a more
                         inclusive social contract. This sub-component will provide beneficiaries with productive safety nets
                         that are considered by the SCD as top priorities in terms of contribution to poverty reduction and
                         political feasibility and that focus on livestock value chains that are most relevant for poor farmers.
                         Sub-component 2.3 will also support specific activities geared towards women's groups, such as
                         investment in nutrition-sensitive agricultural interventions and behavioral change communications
                         strategies for women on issues related to access to new technologies, maternal care, and child
                         feeding practice. Depending on real opportunities and needs, the support will include labor saving
                         devices to reduce women's workload, promotion of diversified food production, income generation,
                         promotion of improved complementary foods for young children, thus contributing to improving the
                         livelihood of rural women. Concomitantly strengthening their capacity to settle disputes and mediate
                         conflicts (through the project's grievance redress mechanisms) will also help decrease escalation of
                         conflicts. This approach will build on ongoing initiatives, which work with communities through
                         CDPs in PNDP.

                         Component 3: Support to livestock value chains development (US$40 million IDA; US$8 million
                         Beneficiaries; US$24 million FIs) will support development of pig, poultry, beef, goat, sheep, milk
                         and honey productions and value chains in target areas for a broader engagement of local
                         entrepreneurs in the sector. The component will establish "Productive Partnerships" (PPs) between
                         livestock producer organizations (POs) and buyers (Agri-Businesses: agro-industries, small and
                         medium enterprises, etc.). These PPs will be supported through the provision of matching grants,
                         contingent upon contractual arrangement between producers and buyers, and will facilitate access to
                         rural financing for investing in various PO Sub-Projects (SPs). The selection criteria and mechanisms
                         for POs, PPs/SPs will be detailed in the implementation manual. The component will include two
                         subcomponents: (i) Establishment of a Productive Partnership Scheme; and (ii) Financing of SPs for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         POs. This component will build on experiences gained through the implementation of PIDMA (PP
                         and business plan approach), and successful initiatives piloted by other development partners ,
                         particularly the initiatives related to training and development of advisory services. Direct and
                         specific targets for the support of indigenous communities in the East will be provided as outlined in
                         the IPPF prepared for the project.

                         Sub-component 3.1: Establishment of Productive Partnership Scheme ($5 million). This sub-
                         component will promote and develop Productive Partnerships between POs and buyers of products
                         (meat, milk and honey) of target species (cattle, goat, sheep, pig, poultry and bee) to match PO
                         supply to buyers demand. Financial Institutions (FIs) will be included in the PPs as they are expected
                         to co-finance the sub-projects to be developed by the POs. The Productive Partnerships will be based
                         on the following principles: (a) agreement on product quality and characteristics such as size and
                         species to be produced; (b) quantity to be produced and bought; (c) delivery modalities (how the
                         product will be delivered, when, and in what condition); (d) payment modalities and price
                         determination criteria; and (e) the buyer's contribution, such as Technical Assistance (TA), specific
                         inputs, and arrangements for input reimbursement. The sub-component will also support the
                         establishment of sustainable business relations between targeted POs and Financial Institutions (FIs).
                         To facilitate the involvement of FIs and the provision of adapted financial services, it will support
                         capacity building of POs in the area of preparation of viable sub-projects (business plans) for
                         financing including training in Business Edge for business and administrative skills, through IFC

                                                                      Page 5 of 14
                         Business Edge partners, as developed within the ongoing Bank financed Agriculture Investment and
                         Market development Project (PIDMA).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The overall aim of this component is thus to create an enabling environment for direct and
                         sustainable commercial relations between producers and buyers of products of the targeted value
                         chains, and FIs. Activities will include: (i) improving the understanding of the supply and demand of
                         the products of the targeted value chains, by supporting market studies and surveys to characterize
                         the supply and demand, by organizing communication and dissemination campaigns to inform
                         stakeholders about the project, by supporting the restructuring and professionalization of demand and
                         supply, and by creating an online-based market information system; (ii) connecting the demand and
                         supply through the identification of market opportunities, the establishment of a dialog platform
                         between the government and key stakeholders, and the establishment of PPs, which will be
                         concretized by the development of the sub-projects (business plans); (iii) mobilizing financial
                         institutions by negotiating a co-financing agreement for the SPs, and by providing a technical
                         assistance on the design and development of financial services and products that are tailored to the
                         diversity of financing needs of the eligible SPs.

                         Subcomponent 3.2 -Financing of Sub-Projects for Producer Organizations ($35 million) will finance
                         PO SPs (business plans) which have been developed by POs under the Productive Partnerships
                         established under sub-component 3.1 to strengthen their capacity to increase the productivity and
                         production of selected livestock products in the targeted value chains. Based on a PO's business plan,
                         investment will cover collective investments (feed production and processing, improved animal
                         husbandry techniques, small-scale processing units/equipment, waste management systems to
                         minimize greenhouse gas emissions, pollution and dissemination of pathogens, renewable energy
                         (bio and solar energy) supply, technical assistance and training) through a Matching Grant aimed at
                         increasing production and productivity, improving post-harvest (including processing) facilities, and
                         quality. A conditionality mechanism will be built into the Matching Grant to ensure that the sub-
                         projects do not generate negative externalities, and will be screened for potential adverse effects on
                         the environment and public health.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Selected SPs will be financed through a combination of an IDA-financing, a contribution from the
                         POs, and short to medium-term credit provided by participating FIs. The mobilization of the grant
                         element (max 60 percent, with a ceiling of maximum $100,000 per SP) will be subjec t to the
                         mobilization of the SP's initiator own resources (min. 10 percent of the SP's investment costs, in
                         cash) and the credit extended by the FIs .

                         Component 4: Project Coordination, Management, Communication and Monitoring (US$12 million
                         IDA). This component will support project implementation activities, including operating costs of the
                         PCU with offices at national and regional levels. The PCU will be under MINEPIA. The PCU will be
                         responsible for the day-to-day project management, implementation, fiduciary management,
                         environmental and social safeguards management, and overall communication, monitoring and
                         evaluation (M&E). The operational costs of the Project Steering Committee will be supported by the
                         Project. The Project will finance the establishment and operations of an M&E unit. The project will
                         finance the recruitment of an Environmental and Social Expert who will be an integral member of the
                         NPCU, to ensure the coordination, monitoring, and implementation of the safeguard instruments
                         developed under the project across all components of the project, assisted by the Regional
                         Environmental and Social Experts in the targeted regions. This component will also finance training,
                         workshops and seminars, study tours, and relevant studies identified during the project
                         implementation. The main objectives of this Component are to: (a) ensure effective strategic and

                                                                     Page 6 of 14
                         operational planning, monitoring and implementation of the Project financed activities and efficient
                         use of various sources of funding, as well as coordination of the Project interventions of components
                         1, 2 and 3 implemented by participating stakeholders and partners; (b) evaluate the Project's final
Public Disclosure Copy




                         results, outcomes and impacts on beneficiary smallholders/POs; and (c) communicate efficiently to
                         various public and private entities on Project activities, outcomes, best practices and lessons learnt.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)
                         Kristyna Bishop (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            This policy is triggered as the project activities and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     mainly those related to component 2 and 3 (Support to
                                                                    natural resources management, transhumance and security
                                                                    of herders in pastoral areas; Intensification of selected
                                                                    cattle, goat, sheep, pig, poultry and bee farming systems
                                                                    and value chain development) may have environmental
                                                                    and social impacts. The scope, nature and scale of these
                                                                    potential impacts are not known at this project appraisal
                                                                    stage. A draft ESMF was prepared and was disclosed
                                                                    prior to appraisal to guide the way that potential negative
                                                                    environmental and social impacts of future activities will
                                                                    be identified and mitigated during the project
                                                                    implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    It is worthy also to notice that several environmental
                                                                    mitigation measures are already anticipated under
                                                                    subcomponent 2.1.
                                                                    There are a number of social safeguards issues as well as
                                                                    general social development impacts that are not covered
                                                                    by 4.12 or 4.10 that are addressed in the ESMF. These
                                                                    impacts include potential conflict over land especially
                                                                    between pastoralists and settled communities, gender gaps
                                                                    and differentials in livestock rearing, land tenure and
                                                                    poverty. The social assessment completed during the
                                                                    preparation of the IPPF identifies these impacts and
                                                                    provides measures by which they will be mitigated. These
                                                                    measures were incorporated into project design and
                                                                    reflected in the PAD, ESMF, IPPF and RPF as relevant.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes            This policy is triggered as the project activities under sub-
                          4.04                                      component 2.1 will include investments to develop
                                                                    integrated landscape management practices. The project
                                                                    activities under subcomponent 2.1 will encourage the
                                                                    protection of biodiversity corridors as well as



                                                                      Page 7 of 14
                                                        conservation and protected areas activities.
                                                        The ESMF defines the relevant mitigation measures to
                                                        avoid any protected areas threats.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   This policy is triggered as the project activities under sub-
                                                        component 2.1 will include investments to develop
                                                        integrated landscape management practices, reforestation
                                                        and other activities such as conservation measures and
                                                        agro-forestry. The project will give preference to target
                                                        such activities on unforested sites or lands already
                                                        converted (excluding any lands that have been converted
                                                        in anticipation of the project).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    The project activities will likely increase the use of
                                                        veterinary products and services including chemical
                                                        pesticides for vector management (see under OP 4.01) and
                                                        control of pests (combatting insects) which could have
                                                        negative environmental and health impacts.The Project
                                                        beneficiaries are likely to adopt integrated pest
                                                        management practices. A separate PMP document was
                                                        prepared and disclosed prior appraisal.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The proposed operation will involve excavations and
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           movement of earth for the building facilities. During the
                                                        development of the ESMF physical cultural resources
                                                        were taken into consideration and baselines defined. The
                                                        ESMF includes clear procedures that will be required for
                                                        identification, protection of cultural property from theft,
                                                        and treatment of discovered artifacts, and will be included
                                                        in standard bidding documents. The ESMF provides
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        procedures for handling "chance finds" during
                                                        implementation of project activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   Indigenous peoples meeting the four criteria in the policy
                         BP 4.10                        are present in 3 of the 9 regions in which the project will
                                                        be implemented. The social assessment carried out during
                                                        preparation identified the potential communities and the
                                                        potential impacts and benefits related to project activities.
                                                        The results of the social assessment were used to inform
                                                        the project design and the preparation of an IPPF to
                                                        provide guidance during implementation. The IPPF was
                                                        disclosed prior to appraisal per the requirements of the
                                                        policy.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   There will be no involuntary taking of land or physical
                         OP/BP 4.12                     resettlement as a result of project activities. However, this
                                                        policy is triggered as there may be impacts on customary
                                                        use of rangeland and access to resources in protected
                                                        areas under Component 2. The social assessment
                                                        examined the presence of squatters and farmers and
                                                        livestock owners using the land under customary law and



                                                         Page 8 of 14
                                                                       identified any negative impacts on their livelihoods that
                                                                       may result from the implementation of project activities.
                                                                       In addition, the potential overlap of the proposed corridors
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       to be financed under Component 2.1 with existing
                                                                       protected areas was also examined. Based on the results
                                                                       of the social assessment, an RPF and Process Framework
                                                                       were prepared in order to manage any potential economic
                                                                       impacts and avoid restriction of access where possible.
                                                                       The RFP and PF were disclosed prior to appraisal per the
                                                                       requirements of the policy.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project activities are not expected to have significant environmental and social adverse
                              impacts.
                              The potential negative impacts to be limited are site specific. The main negative impacts and risks
                              identified are: conflict over land especially between pastoralists and settled communities, land
                              degradation, increase of veterinary medical wastes; agro pastoralist conflicts, water pollution due
Public Disclosure Copy




                              to poor use of veterinary pests management products, increase of animal diseases; gender gaps and
                              differentials in livestock rearing.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The rehabilitation and consolidation of transhumant corridors may increase conflicts between
                              pastoralists and settled communities although negative impacts on their actual use of the land and
                              access to resources will not be required for project related activities. This impact can be mitigated
                              by regular social communication and improved regulation and management of rangeland.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              During the project implementation, each sub-project to be financed will be subject to
                              environmental and social screening using a participatory approach. A subproject that may have
                              significant adverse impacts or that would require land acquisition or physical displacement will
                              not be eligible for financing.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Safeguard instruments. A framework approach for OP 4.01, OP 4.10, and OP 4.12 is being used
                              for this project as the list of investments to be financed is still indicative and may change, and the
                              scope and exact location of all site specific activities is still unknown at the time of appraisal.


                                                                         Page 9 of 14
                         Therefore: (i) an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) a Resettlement
                         Policy Framework (RPF)/ Process Framework and (iii) an Indigenous People Policy Framework
                         (IPPF), were prepared, and describe the procedures and processes that will be followed in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparing and disclosing site specific safeguard instruments where required as soon as the exact
                         locations and scope of sub-project activities are known. The final versions of these documents
                         were disclosed in country on August 24, 2016 at http://www.minepia.cm/fr/ministere/
                         actualite/294-prodel.html and Infoshop per the requirements of the policy prior to appraisal.
                         During the implementation phase, each sub project selected for financing will be subject to an
                         environmental and social screening that will determine the relevant environmental and social
                         instrument to be prepared per the guidance provided in the Frameworks. For the project, most of
                         the activities financed under the project will be subject to Environmental and Social Assessment or
                         Environmental and Social Notice of Impacts according to Cameroonian regulations.

                         Implementation cost of safeguard instruments. The Framework instruments that have been
                         prepared will provide an indicative amount expected for the cost to prepare and implement the
                         specific safeguard implementation instruments i.e., for Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessments (ESIAs), Environmental and Social Management Plans (ESMPs), Action plan(s) for
                         the Process Framework and Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP). The cost of the implementation of the
                         environmental mitigation measures under the ESMPs, Process Framework Actions Plan and
                         Ressetlement Action Plans (RAP(s) if needed, will be fully covered by the project budget. Each
                         year the PIU will prepare an Annual Work Plan that will clearly take into consideration the
                         environmental and social measures required in order to ensure compliance with safeguards
                         instruments. The Environmental and Social screening of the Annual Work Plan will a key action
                         that will help in the decision making on the readiness and feasibility of the activities proposed
                         within the year.

                         Borrower capacity assessment and Institutional Arrangement for safeguards management. Given
                         that the Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock has very limited capacity for safeguards management
                         and compliance, the safeguard implementation responsibility will be given to the PIU which will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         include a socio-environmental specialist at the national level and three (3) socio-environmental
                         specialists will be recruited at the regional level for the whole project duration. A short and
                         medium-term environmental and social capacity building plan will be prepared for the main
                         stakeholders involved in the project implementation including the main beneficiaries. The PIU will
                         work closely to finalize the plan with the effective participation of the relevant ministries
                         (Ministry of Environment, Protection of Nature and Sustainable Development, Ministry of State
                         Property and Land, Ministry of Social Affairs, Ministry of Fisheries and Livestock), other existing
                         livestock organizations and civil society organizations involved in Livestock sub- sector.

                         Consultation with stakeholders. During the preparation of the various Frameworks and the PMP, a
                         comprehensive consultation was carried out and has included the expected main agricultural
                         ecological regions. The E SMF includes a proposed consultation framework for each site specific
                         investment. The RPF, Process Framework and the IPPF outline the process to be used for the
                         indigenous communities and other affected people. The PIU will prepare and implement a
                         consultation plan for the whole project based on the main safeguards instruments.

                         Interaction between feasibility studies and specific safeguards instruments. For all investments that
                         will require the preparation of a specific safeguard instrument, the Environmental and Social
                         consultants will work closely with the team of consultants completing the feasibility studies. The
                         choice of specific sites will take into account a number of principles and general considerations

                                                                   Page 10 of 14
                           from the environmental and social screening. The consultant completing the feasibility studies will
                           also include a social safeguards specialist and will propose potential site options on the basis of
                           defined criteria including the environmental and social considerations such as the need to avoid
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and minimize adverse social and environmental impacts, including involuntary resettlement and
                           adverse impacts on indigenous peoples. This preliminary siting will be submitted to the client and
                           the consultant in charge of preparing the relevant specific safeguards instruments. The
                           environmental and social studies will analyze the proposed sites and select the best option based
                           on the ranking. The consultant in charge of the feasibility studies will consider the environmental
                           and social comments and the proposals in order to change the sites if needed.

                           Grievance Redress: Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a
                           Bank-supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level grievance redress
                           mechanisms or the Bank Grievance Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints
                           received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related concerns. Project affected
                           communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the Bank independent Inspection
                           Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of Bank non-
                           compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after
                           concerns have been brought directly to the Bank attention, and Bank Management has been given
                           an opportunity to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the Bank's corporate
                           GRS, please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints
                           to the Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org. In addition, the conflict
                           management platform managed by MINEPIA will be used to mediate disputes at the community
                           level. More information regarding the functioning of these mechanisms will be provided in the
                           project Operational Manual.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The project key stakeholders are
                           -       Livestock producer organizations;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           -       Public administrations;
                           -       Community Based Organizations; and
                           -       Traditional chiefs/rulers.

                           The PIU will prepare a consultation plan. Each year, specific activities will be integrated in the
                           annual working plan, budget provided and implemented accordingly. The consultation plan will be
                           structured through three pathways: (i) local consultation or organization of public days. (ii)
                           organization of community level fora ; (iii) sectoral meetings with social groups and or interest
                           groups.

                           Most of the safeguards documents and periodic reports will be publicly disclosed on the PIU web
                           site and at Infoshop. At the regional level, the regional socio-environmental specialist will use
                           community radio and other culturally appropriate venues to share project related information.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                        27-Jun-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                     24-Aug-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

                                                                    Page 11 of 14
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                         24-Aug-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Jun-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Aug-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                         24-Aug-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Jun-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Aug-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                         24-Aug-2016
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Jun-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Aug-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Cameroon                                                         24-Aug-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

                                                                   Page 12 of 14
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?

                                                                     Page 13 of 14
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Omar Lyasse,Manievel Sene
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                           Date: 30-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)                   Date: 30-Aug-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 14 of 14
