INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12791
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Bangladesh                 Project ID:   P154511
Project Name:   Dhaka-Chittagong IWT Corridor Project (P154511)
Task Team       Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
Leader(s):
Estimated        12-Oct-2015               Estimated     17-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Ports, waterways and shipping (95%), Railways (5%)
Theme(s):       Other trade and integration (50%), Trade facilitation and market access (50%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     300.00            Total Bank Financing:  270.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                              30.00
International Development Association (IDA)                   270.00
Total                                                          300.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
12.   The development objective of the project is to increase the capacity, reliability and safety of
inland water transport along the Dhaka-Chittagong Corridor.
C. Project Description
A. Project Components
Component 1: Improved Inland Waterway Maintenance through long-term performance-based


﻿contracts (PBCs) for channel maintenance and provision of visual Aids to Navigation for Class 1
routes between Dhaka and Chittagong Corridor, including branches to Ashuganj, Narayanganj and
Barisal and the main river crossing routes (US$170-180 million). This sub-component shall include
work to maintain advertised depths and to mark channel routes through provision of long-term
performance-based contracts. The size and terms of the PBCs will be determined during preparation.
Although river channel maintenance will require river training works, channelization and dredging,
BIWTA and the contractor will explore all methods to minimize dredging requirements and to
maintain long-term river sustainability. Visual aids to navigation include light buoys (lateral marks,
cardinal marks, isolated danger and other marks), radar beacons (for navigation during rain and fog),
leading lines and other aids to assist day and night navigation. The work shall be centered on the
main Class 1 river route between Dhaka and Chittagong, with branch routes to Ashuganj,
Narayanganj and Barisal.
Component 2: Navigation Safety Improvements including Developing Hydrographic Surveying
Capacity and Establishing a Search and Rescue Organization (US$35 million)
a.     Hydrographic Survey Improvements (US$ 25 million). Hydrographic charts are the most
fundamental need to aid navigation. This sub-component, which will benefit all IWT in Bangladesh,
includes work to procure and disseminate nautical charts on all river routes. It includes the supply of
new survey vessels (for operation in coastal and inland water areas), modem survey and charting
technologies, new differential global positioning system (DGPS) system capacity, river gauge
stations, and a system to produce and disseminate Electronic Nautical Charts (ENCs) for the main
priority routes between Dhaka and Chittagong, including branch routes to Ashuganj, Narayanganj
and Barisal as well as paper charts and river navigation notices on other important routes. This sub-
component also includes possible development of crowd source technologies to obtain important
(and changing) bathymetric information through procurement and installation of equipment on select
commercial vessels regularly operating on various river routes; procurement of coastal survey vessels
(with multi-beam survey capacity), procurement of inland survey vessels (with multiple single beam
survey capacity), procurement of small speed boats (with single beam survey capacity for cross
lining and bank survey works) and procurement of new topographic survey technologies for survey
of banks, chars and other important navigation features.
O
b.     Establishment of a Search and Rescue Organization (US$ 10 million). The prevention of
a       accidents is vital to avoid the loss of life. The best preventive measure is for ships to avoid getting
into difficulties. The second best is for ships in difficult situations to avoid disaster. This sub-
component, which will benefit all IWT transport in Bangladesh, includes work in capacity building
and safety reform including: (a) Work to update laws and regulations regarding design, safety
construction, safety operation, manning and maintenance of IWT vessels; (b) Work to restructure the
various Ministries, Agencies and Departments dealing with IWT safety into harmonized units,
including departments dealing with vessel registration, survey and inspections, licensing (of vessels
and crews) and enforcement; (c) Training, which is critical if efficiency and safety are to be
improved. The program will include a review of staff skills and the development of training
programs that allow IWT to adopt best International Maritime Organization (IMO) practice; and (d)
Establishment of a formal IWT Search and Rescue (SAR) Organization, including facilities for the
reception and dissemination of Distress Messaging; searching for missing persons, IWT vessels; and,
rescuing persons in distress on the IWT Routes. Design of the SAR organization shall be done so as
to: incorporate the specific needs of women users; provide different tiers or levels of response at the
local, district and national levels, and; link into State disaster planning to raise the tiered response
level where the situation demands and to call upon the assistance of other agencies of Bangladesh.


﻿Component 3: Improvements to Selected Inland Waterway Ports (US$ 30 million). This sub-
component includes work to improve common user cargo and passenger terminals using design-build
contracts at important existing inland ports on the Dhaka-Chittagong route (no land acquisition is
O
)       required). The design of the terminals will specifically incorporate the facility needs of women users
and small traders (such as toilet facilities for women, women-only waiting rooms) and address
safety-related issues for women users. BIWTA will also make suggested changes to operational
guidelines to improve women's safety and experiences using inland water transport services.
a.      Development of a new common user terminal with last mile connectivity access
infrastructure at Pagla (on the Dhaleshwar river near Dhaka opposite the Pangaon container terminal)
for vessels carrying construction materials in general cargo form, including cement, sand, rock and
other cargo carried in bagged or break-bulk form;
b.     Rehabilitation and modernization of the existing general cargo terminal at Narayanganj,
including provision of cargo handling equipment, construction of yard space and upgrading of last-
mile connectivity access infrastructure;
c.      Rehabilitation and modernization of the existing cargo terminals at Ashuganj and Bharab;
d.     Rehabilitation of the main Dhaka passenger terminals, including provision of new floating
pontoon mooring arrangements, new pile (retaining structures), linkspan bridges, new bank
protection, new terminal structures and upgrade of connecting infrastructure (road and parking
access);
Component 4: Institutional Capacity Development and Improvements (approx. US$5 million),
including studies and technical assistance to (i) improve sustainable maintenance of river navigation
channels, monitoring of maintenance contracts/works and improved institutional arrangements for
navigation channel maintenance; and, (ii) facilitate transport of containers on inland waterways
including incentivizing private sector investment in the sector. Even though there is considerable
potential for the transport of containers along the Dhaka-Chittagong IWT route, and Chittagong Port
Authority and BIWTA have built the container river terminal at Pangaon near Dhaka, for various
reasons the service has not been operationalized. The barriers to operationalization need to be studied
a       in detail and addressed.
Component 5: Studies to Improve Chittagong Port Capacity (approx. US$10 million). Detailed
Feasibility, Design and Environmental and Social Safeguards Studies for another Container Terminal
at/near Chittagong Port, e.g. Bay Terminal or another site as identified by the final Chittagong Port
Master Plan and CPA.
Contingency (US$10 million)
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The contract(s) for performance-based dredging and provision of visual Aids to Navigation will be
done on the Class 1 routes between Dhaka and Chittagong Corridor, including branches to Ashuganj,
Narayanganj and Barisal and the main river crossing routes as follows:
Route 1: Dhaka-Munshiganj-Gajaria-Chandpur-Chittagong (on the Buriganga, Dhaleswari, Meghna


﻿and Karnafuli Rivers). Both the Buriganga and Dhaleswari rivers are on average 1 Om- 1 5m in depth.
They are meandering tidal-influenced rivers, fixed by the resistant clays marking the southern edge
of the Madhupur Tract. At the confluence with the Meghna just north of Shatnal, the river is
approximately 5km in width. Sixteen kilometers south of Shatnol, the combined flow of the Ganges
O
U       and Brahmaputra-Jamuna, known as the Padma, meets the Meghna at a 11 km wide confluence near
Chandpur. From this point southwards the Meghna is known as the Lower Meghna, becoming one of
the broadest rivers and largest estuaries in the world. It flows into the Bay of Bengal through the
Shadbazpur and Hatia Channels, which are encumbered by numerous shoals and bars. Navigation
limiting conditions are dictated by the presence of these mouth bars, though the semidiurnal nature of
the tide can mitigate draft constraints. The full route is approximately 300km long, of which the
required dredging length is estimated at 40km.
Route 3: Chandpur - Char Prakash - Hijla - Barisal (on part of the Lower Meghna, part of the Arial
Khan and Kirtonkhloa Rivers). While the main channel of the lower Meghna river is on average 15m
in depth, new sediment deposition and erosion are constantly taking place on the margins,
continuously altering the shape of numerous chars (and the channels) on the western bank.
Accordingly, much of the dredging (or river engineering) tasks should be focused on developing the
channels leading from the Lower Meghna to Barisal, including the Jayanti, Azimpur, Tetulia and
Dharmaganj. The full route is approximately 88 km long, of which the required dredging length is
estimated at 10km.
Part of Route 11 Narsingdi-Marichakandi-Salimganj-Bancharampur-Homna from Shatnol to
Ashuganj (on the Upper Meghna River). The full route is approximately 73 km long, of which the
required dredging length is estimated at 23km.
Ferry crossing routes between: i) Chandpur and Shariatpur; ii) Lakshmipor and Bhola; and iii)
Beduria and Laharhat.
The development and rehabilitation of the four river ports (Component 1(c)) will be based on
existing sites which do notare not expected to require land acquisition, as follows:
a.     Development of a new common user terminal with last mile connectivity access
infrastructure at Pagla (on the Dhaleshwar river near Dhaka opposite the Pangaon container
a terminal). This site is an existing port managed by BIWTA but currently used for VIP visits.
b.     Rehabilitation and modernization of the existing general cargo terminal at Narayanganj
which is an existing terminal.
c.     Rehabilitation and modernization of the existing cargo terminals at Ashuganj and Bharab.
d.     Rehabilitation of the main Dhaka passenger terminals, including provision of new floating
pontoon mooring arrangements, new pile (retaining structures), linkspan bridges, new bank
protection, new terminal structures and upgrade of connecting infrastructure (road and parking
access);
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Bangladesh Inland Water Transport Authority (BIWTA) within the Ministry of Shipping will
implement the majority of Project activities. BIWTA last implemented a World Bank-financed
project for inland waterways during 1991-2000. The Implementation Completion Report noted the
weak capacity of BIWTA, although achievement of project outcomes was rated Satisfactory by both
the ICR and IEG.


﻿The Project Management Unit in MoS has already been established, and has been implementing a
Recipient-Executed Trust funded project conducting preparation studies and activities for the
proposed Project as well as other projects to facilitate trade and transport for Bangladesh. The PMU
is in the process of hiring an Environmental Specialist and a Social Safeguards Specialist. Selection
O
)       process of environmental and social specialists and safeguards documents quality will be monitored
by the World Bank and institutional capacity enhancement measures will be provided if necessary.
The civil works themselves will be concessioned to private operators. The concessionaires will be
responsible for implementing pre-approved environmental and social management plans, maintain
appropriate in-house staffing, and demonstrate effective environmental and social performance as
part of their disbursement-linked indicators.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Leanne Farrell (GENDR)
Mridula Singh (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         The IWT routes selected for dredging are already
OP/BP 4.01                               being dredged, however inefficiently and irregularly.
While the specific methodologies to be employed for
maintaining the river channel depth will be up to the
concessionaires to determine, in all cases the key
environmental issues to be managed will include
disposal of dredged material, as well as disturbance
of aquatic and benthic habitats caused by dredging
operations or other river works which may
potentially be employed (which might for example
include limited use of river training structures to
influence sediment deposition patterns). River port
construction and rehabilitation works will meanwhile
entail minor, site-specific construction impacts.
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) is thus
triggered.
All works will be concessioned out to private
operators - likely to consist of one for river ports,
and one to two for IWTs -- on a performance-based
contracting scheme. The river ports concession will
follow a design-build structure, while the IWT
concession(s) will be based on maintaining specified
river depths along the designated routes, with
detailed methodologies for how this is achieved to be
selected by the concessionaires. As such, detailed
EIAs and EMPs cannot be developed at this stage by
BIWTA. Rather, they shall be carried out by the
concessionaires, during the design process for river


﻿ports, and during definition of dredging and/or other
river depth maintenance methodologies, technologies
and timelines by the concessionaire(s) for IWTs.
Since the IWT dredging component is expected to be
Category "A" level, the route-specific EIAs and
EMPs to be completed by the concessionaire(s) will
be subject to independent review and approval by
BIWTA as well as the World Bank, before dredging
operations can begin.
Prior to appraisal, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared,
which will include: (a) an initial environmental and
social screening of the project areas (IWT routes and
river ports) and study of current dredging practices
along the specified routes to identify current known
environmental and social risks and issues associated
with existing maintenance dredging activities, (b)
detailed TORs for the activity-specific EIAs/EMPs to
be carried out by the concessionaires during project
implementation; (c) specific criteria (such as
avoidance of specific sensitive zones or areas of
human habitation or livelihood use in selecting
locations for dredge disposal) as well as minimum /
generic environmental, social, health and safety
(ESHS) management measures and/or Environmental
Codes of Practice that the concessionaires will be
required to uphold, consistent with international
standards and good practices for dredging and river
port works (such as PIANC --World Association for
Waterborne Transport Infrastructure --
environmental guidelines, World Bank EHS
Guidelines on Ports, Harbors and Terminals, and
other relevant international guidelines and
standards); (d) institutional arrangements,
responsibilities, and systems for various aspects of
ESHS management under the project, including
procedures for carrying out and independently
reviewing detailed EIA/EMP work within the context
of the concession agreements, and roles/
responsibilities/staffing on ESHS aspects for both
concessionaires and BIWTA during all phases of
project implementation; (e) reporting requirements
on ESHS aspects, including any performance
indicators related to ESHS management that will be
considered part of the Disbursement Linked
Indicators for the concessionaires; and (f) capacity


﻿assessment and necessary capacity building measures
for BIWTA. The ESMF will also specify that studies
to be carried out under the project for a new
container terminal at or near Chittagong Port will
include also environmental and social assessments in
accordance with World Bank safeguard policies and
national legislation.
o       Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes          This policy is likely to be triggered, due to the
potential impacts to aquatic habitats from dredging
operations, and potentially also by construction or
rehabilitation activities at the 4 river ports. The
ESMF will include screening and initial assessment
of natural habitats in the project areas, as well as
requirements for further detailed baseline
assessments to further identify and delineate any
areas of critical habitat and ensure application of the
mitigation hierarchy in accordance with this policy
for all project works, to be developed under the
detailed EIAs/EMPs during project implementation
and implemented by the concessionaires.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           This policy is not expected to be triggered, given that
project components focus on improvement of inland
waterway transportation, and on-land activities will
be limited to the riverbank areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           This policy is not expected to be triggered given that
project components focus on improvement of inland
waterway transportation. No pesticides are expected
to be procured by the project, and the project will not
affect agricultural activities or practices.
Nonetheless, the ESMF will specify that river port
EIAs should verify whether any measures to manage
rodents or pests (such as in areas of cargo storage)
are required, and that if so, the provisions of this
policy will be followed.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          The applicability of this policy will be assessed
OP/BP 4.11                                 during the environmental and social screening
process under the ESMF, and addressed as required
in more detail under the detailed EIAs/EMPs to be
completed by concessionaires during project
implementation. The ESMF will also specify chance
finds procedures in the event of encountering any
cultural artifacts during dredging or river port
construction activities, to be referenced in concession
contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           Project sites are not located near populations of
4.10                                       indigenous people.


﻿Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No          No land acquisition is expected to be required for
BP 4.12                                   any of the four river ports, as all four are constructed
on existing ports or port sites already under the
jurisdiction of BIWTA. Nonetheless, all concession
agreements -- for dredging works as well as river
port upgrading activities -- will furthermore specify
that no land acquisition for project purposes will be
permitted if it would lead to displacement of
households or economic livelihood activities. The
ESMF will indicate that is determination must be
documented in the baseline assessments of the
detailed EIAs to be carried out by concessionaires.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project does not involve any new or existing
dams.
Projects on International    Yes           Some of the linked waterways are part of the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      Bangladesh-India Bilateral Protocol Route. Riparian
notification will be carried out in accordance with
this policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project will not operate in any disputed
BP 7.60                                   territories.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF will be prepared and disclosed before the appraisal of the project. Detailed
Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) and Social Management Plans (SMPs) will be
developed by the private sector firms who win the contracts for the implementation of the
performance-based contracts for dredging, and by the firms that win the design-build contracts for
the construction/rehabilitation of the river ports.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Diep Nguyen-Van Houtte
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                   Date: 07-May-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)            Date: 14-May-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


