                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA21401
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Feb-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Feb-2015, 02-Feb-2017, 26-Feb-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                             Project ID:   P133803
                            Project Name:     India Ecosystems Service Improvement Project (P133803)
                            Task Team         Anupam Joshi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         02-Mar-2015                       Estimated   06-Jul-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEN06                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            GEF Focal
                                              Multi-focal area
                            Area:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         24.64          Total Bank Financing:   0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 0.00
                              Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                                       24.64
                              Total                                                                                   24.64
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Global Environmental Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to Improve forest quality, land management and non-
                           timber forest produce (NTFP) benefitsfor forest dependent communities in selected landscapes in
                           Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project would work closely with Green India Mission (GIM) to implement three components


                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         that focus on capacity building (training and technical assistance), enhancement of forest carbon
                         stocks through forest quality improvement approaches and improved livelihoods for forest dependent
                         communities (interventions), and reversal of land degradation on private land holdings and common
Public Disclosure Copy




                         property resource (CPR) lands through development of models and capacity for scaling up of
                         sustainable land management practices (interventions). Forest and private land holdings and CPR
                         lands for project support and intervention would be identified within a defined landscape based
                         approach to facilitate ecological connectivity between ecologically important habitats and
                         biologically rich areas.

                         Component Name:

                         Component 1: Strengthen capacity of government institutions in forestry and land management
                         programs in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh (US$ 4 million)

                         The objective of this component is to enhance the capacity and skills of the State Forest
                         Departments, Forest Development Agencies and local communities for improved management of
                         forest and land resources and ensuring the delivery of sustainable benefits to local communities that
                         depend on these resources. This component provides technical assistance to: (i) build institutional
                         capacity and capability for planning and efficient delivery of forest ecosystem quality improvement
                         and land management programs; and (ii) develop, test and pilot nation-wide systems for measuring
                         and monitoring forest carbon stocks. A number of training activities would be supported under this
                         component to build human resource capacities for improved forest management. These would
                         include: (i) spatial planning using new tools and technologies for designing sub-projects for
                         mainstreaming biodiversity in production forests; (ii) training for measuring and monitoring carbon
                         stocks in forests and related lands as well as monitoring habitat quality; (iii) training for
                         strengthening local self-governance institutions, including Joint Forest Management Committees
                         (JFMCs), to establish Community Reserves for co-management, monitoring and sustainable and
                         equitable access to NTFP resources; and (iv) generation of baselines for realistic assessment of the
                         dependencies/ livelihoods on NTFPs, for developing local management plans for value addition,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sustainable use and equitable sharing of NTFP. To implement this component, the project will
                         finance technical training assistance, training workshops and study tours, and equipment.

                         Component 2: Investments for improving forest quality in selected landscapes (US$ 14.5 million)

                         The objective of this component is to improve the quality and productivity of the existing forests so
                         as to ensure sustained flows of ecosystem services and carbon sequestration, and sustainable
                         harvesting and value addition of NTFP to provide economic benefits to forest dependent
                         communities that promote conservation and improve ecological connectivity between critical
                         biodiversity areas. This component will complement the ongoing efforts of GIM by: (i) improving
                         forest quality using native species mix; (ii) managing invasive species; and (iii) developing models
                         for sustainable utilization of NTFPs in collaboration with local forest communities. This component
                         would facilitate the mainstreaming of biodiversity objectives in degraded forestlands and non-
                         forestlands in the government program to establish sustainable forest and land management in project
                         areas. The project will finance on-the-ground interventions in nurseries and planting materials,
                         community labor for forest land preparation for planting and invasive species removal, technical
                         support and equipment and training for sustainable NTFP utilization. There are three sub-
                         components:

                         Sub-component 2.1: Enhancing and restoring carbon stocks in forestlands: This component will

                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         support interventions for improving, upgrading and modernizing selected forest nurseries for raising
                         high-quality native species and planting material. It will introduce and support new and innovative
                         processes for undertaking soil preparation, forest enrichment planting and protection works in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         different degraded forest types in production forests landscapes as well as on non-forest lands. This
                         sub-component will also undertake demonstrative pilots for rehabilitation of degraded forest patches
                         and simultaneously integrate sustainable resource use practices.


                         Sub-component 2.2: Developing community-based models for sustainable utilization of NTFP: This
                         sub-component will support formalized allocation of usufruct rights, value addition and marketing to
                         traditional NTFP resources, and creation and management of Community Reserves, in project states.
                         The modalities for establishing community reserves will be as per the National (Wildlife) Protection
                         Act (as amended). The result will be GIS based management plans for Community Reserves
                         incorporating participatory monitoring of biodiversity. This sub-component will work with various
                         resource user groups, women Self Help Groups, and other local stakeholders to understand the
                         challenges of NTFP supply chains, identify potential interventions to improve NTFP marketing, and
                         develop strategies for enhancing incomes from sustainable NTFP utilization

                         Component 3: Scaling-up sustainable land and ecosystem management in selected landscapes (US$
                         3.74 million)

                         The main objectives of this component are to prevent land degradation and desertification and
                         increase above-ground forest carbon stock through a combination of activities to implement and
                         scale-up tried-and-tested SLEM best practices, increase national capacity for monitoring land
                         degradation and track associated indicators and generate knowledge exchange on SLEM approaches
                         so as to benefit small and marginal farmers and other rural poor. These activities are designed to
                         overcome the twin challenges of arresting land degradation and meeting food security targets. In
                         particular, this component will draw heavily from the lessons and best practice approaches to
                         sustainable land and ecosystem management that were developed and piloted under the ongoing GEF
Public Disclosure Copy




                         financed SLEM project. In addition, the team has also consulted with GIZ, India and will draw on
                         their experiences of best practices during implementation. This component would finance on-the-
                         ground sustainable land management interventions in private land holdings and common property
                         resource lands for scaling up of SLEM best practices in selected landscapes. It will also help build
                         national capacity for land degradation and desertification monitoring and support development and
                         implementation of a national knowledge network. The component will also explore synergies with
                         the World Overview of Conservation Approaches and Technologies (WOCAT), which is an
                         established global network of soil and water conservation specialists.

                         Component 4: Project Management (US$ 2.4 million)

                         A modest Project Management Unit (PMU) would be established to coordinate and monitor project
                         implementation and progress towards the envisaged development objective. The PMU would be
                         housed within the Division/Cell responsible for implementing the GIM within the MOEFCC, so as to
                         ensure that there is complete complementarity between the project and GIM and co-financing
                         benefits are supportive rather than competitive. Project Implementing Units (PIUs) will be
                         established within the SFDs of Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh and ICFRE. Other than the core
                         Government staff in the PMU and PIUs, this component will support hiring of specialized staff
                         within the PMU and PIUs for project management, technical advice and communications.



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented in Madhya Pradesh and Chhattisgarh and across a number of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Districts and Blocks. In Chhattisgarh, over 6 landscapes comprising of about 50,000 ha have been
                         finalized for undertaking demonstrative investments for the first two years of the project. These are
                         located in the districts of Kawadha (PandriaWest), Bilaspur, Marwahi, Raipur (Sonakhan), East
                         Raipur (Fingeshwar) and North Surguja (Raghunathnagar). Landscapes in in Madhya Pradesh will be
                         in the districts of Tamia, Bhopal, Chhindwara, Hoshangabad and Betul. Additional districts may be
                         taken up at appropriate stages during the implementation of the project. Final selection of areas is
                         based on the projected vulnerability of forest grids to climate change impacts. In addition, the
                         selection criteria included filters on presence of globally significant and threatened species, socio-
                         economic, inclusiveness, forest type and their degradation status and anthropogenic pressures. Most
                         of the selected landscapes include a range of forest types and sub-types characteristic to the central
                         Indian highlands - semi-evergreen to dry deciduous types. Often interspersed are grasslands and
                         bamboo brakes with some thorny elements. Key tree species include Tectona grandis, Sterculia alata,
                         Madhuca indica, Dyrospyros melanoxylon, Terminalia tomentosa, Accasia species etc. These
                         landscapes will include mix land use with private farmlands, interspersed with forested landscapes.
                         The project will not work inside the Protected Areas but could include parts of Reserve Forests for
                         ensuring contiguity of forest quality improvement. Many of these landscapes are located in key
                         biological corridors in biologically rich landscapes of the central Indian highlands.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
                         Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar (GEN06)
                         Sharlene Jehanbux Chichgar (GEN06)
                         Varun Singh (GSU06)
                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental              Yes            Given the project spread over degraded forest areas and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     vulnerable and extreme poor as primary stakeholders, this
                                                                    policy is triggered. The project is likely to result in overall
                                                                    positive impact through increased carbon sequestration
                                                                    and enhanced ecosystem services flows as well as
                                                                    developing sustainable NTFP harvesting models. Some
                                                                    specific activities may have adverse environmental
                                                                    impacts if not implemented with due caution. Examples
                                                                    include, developing sustainable NTFP harvesting models.
                                                                    A project level Environmental and Social Management
                                                                    Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for identifying and
                                                                    addressing compliance with relevant Bank and National
                                                                    Environment Policies.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes            The project activities would be carried out within natural
                          4.04                                      habitats present in the area. However, these activities are
                                                                    likely to yield positive outcomes, and enhance the
                                                                    environmental quality as the objective is to improve
                                                                    ecosystem services and natural resource management.
                                                                    Activities would not be carried out within the designated



                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                                                                       Protected Areas so impacts on critical habitats are not
                                                                       foreseen. An ESMF has been prepared.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          Yes            OP 4.36 is triggered for ensuring that activities in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       forestlands are aligned with their management/ working
                                                                       plans and do not result in any significant adverse impacts
                                                                       on forest quality. Bulk of the project investments are
                                                                       aiming to enhance forest quality and introduce sustainable
                                                                       forest management practices to improve ecosystem
                                                                       services. The forests would include common forestlands,
                                                                       village forests, reserved forests, and forest areas under
                                                                       Territorial Forest Divisions. However, no investments
                                                                       would be made in forests inside the Protected Areas.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 No significant pest management issues are expected.
                                                                       Pesticides or pesticide application equipment will not be
                                                                       procured under the project. Project activities will not
                                                                       result in change in existing pest management practices.
                            Physical Cultural           No             Physical and cultural resources, if located in the project
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       areas, will not be impacted. There is no heavy excavation
                                                                       planned and any large infrastructure under the project.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes            Tribal communities reside within project areas and are
                            BP 4.10                                    also beneficiary stakeholders. A specific Tribal
                                                                       Development Framework to address issues related to this
                                                                       policy is developed.
                            Involuntary Resettlement No                This policy is not triggered as the project does not involve
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 appropriation/acquiring of any land for project
                                                                       interventions. The project would also not accept voluntary
                                                                       land donation at an individual level. The project will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       result in any new restrictions on accessing resources.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project does not support the commissioning or
                            4.37                                       construction and/or operations related to dams.
                            Projects on International   No             No international waterways are involved
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project is expected to have an overall positive environmental impact by improving forest
                              quality that will also result in conserving globally and nationally significant biodiversity.
                              Protecting ecosystems and enhancing the sustainability of natural resource use in the project areas.
                              Other likely environmental benefits include: (a) reduced soil erosion; (b) forest quality
                              improvement using native species mix; and (c) enhanced carbon sequestration. No significant
                              adverse or irreversible impacts are foreseen under the project, and impacts are manageable within
                              the existing institutional and technical framework. As part of project preparation, key safeguards


                                                                         Page 5 of 9
                           issues have been identified associated with the project activities through a project level ESMF
                           which includes environmental and social baseline information, policy analysis at the national and
                           state level, and measures for compliance with World Bank safeguard policies. The ESMF serves
Public Disclosure Copy




                           as a decision-making tool to promote environmentally- and socially-sound subprojects. A tribal
                           development framework has also been prepared that provides guidance on engaging with tribal
                           communities and holding informed consultations. Key impacts that need to be managed are: (a)
                           localized loss of biodiversity; (b) unforeseen restrictions on stakeholder communities in accessing
                           natural resources; and (c) promotion of sustainable NTFP harvesting models.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No potential indirect and/or long-term adverse environmental or social impacts are envisaged due
                           to anticipated future activities in the project area. Improved forest quality is likely to ameliorate
                           local environmental conditions, conserve biodiversity, enhance ecosystem services and benefit
                           local populations.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           For a speedier restoration of degraded forests, the use of non-indigenous and fast growing exotic
                           tree species was considered but rejected, as these would interfere with the local ecology and pose a
                           significant threat to local flora and fauna. Similarly, the usual approach of mono-culture
                           plantations was considered but rejected so as to maximize the production and flow of ecosystem
                           services.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Ministry of Environment, Forests and Climate Change (MoEFCC) is the primary recipient of
                           the grants and is presently implementing three Bank financed projects (approximating USD 300
                           million) on improving environmental quality and biodiversity conservation. For all these projects,
                           the MoEFCC is already implementing various tools for managing environmental and social issues,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           such as the ESMF, EMP and other investment specific environmental assessments and mitigation
                           plans. Hence MoEFCC is equipped with orientation and sensitivity to implement Bank➢❨ s
                           safeguards policies. Within MoEFCC, a Green India Mission Directorate is established that will
                           have officers from the Indian Forest Service and which will work closely with the National
                           Afforestation and Eco development Board (NAEB) having wide experience in afforestation
                           activities. It has been implementing a number of forestry and afforestation programs over the years
                           targeting both environmental and social gains and outputs. A project level ESMF has been
                           prepared and disclosed. A close monitoring of triggered safeguard policies during project
                           implementation would be undertaken. Since State Forest Departments would also be involved and
                           have previously handled Bank financed projects, addressing any safeguards issues is not seen as a
                           concern. However, provisions have been made in the ESMF for providing capacity building and
                           training support to concerned officers at the state level and frontline for addressing safeguards
                           issues. All capacity building, monitoring and institutional details of ESMF will also apply to TDF.
                           Budget for training and awareness has also been indicated.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Four large public consultations, with adequate prior notice, were held with potentially affected
                           people that included extreme poor, forest dependent vulnerable and marginalized communities and
                           tribal populations during the preparation of the ESMF with Implementing Agencies at the state
                           level. Two consultations each were held in Chhattisgarh and Madhya Pradesh in actual project


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           landscapes and with future project beneficiaries. In addition, the project design and safeguards
                           issues have drawn from a series of expert interviews, multi-state consultation workshop and
                           discussions with the State Forest Department officers. The ESMF was disclosed in country and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           made publicly available. A summary of this ESMF was translated into local languages and
                           displayed at the Gram Panchayat Offices. During implementation, project beneficiaries would
                           continue to be involved in jointly managing the project activities and undertaking forest quality
                           improvement works.

                           The ESMF includes a reporting format, which will provide regular updates on the status of its
                           implementation. The PMU will prepare and implement an outreach strategy, and will have local
                           offices in the project areas to facilitate communication with beneficiaries and stakeholders. This
                           will help gather the community perceptions and concerns, their priorities for development and
                           mechanisms for project implementation at the local level. The project has been designed so that
                           information awareness and communication activities are undertaken to enable effective
                           implementation of the ESMF including assessment procedures, supervision, monitoring, etc. as
                           well as for community awareness and sensitization.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Jan-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            31-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Sep-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Jan-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            31-Oct-2014
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [       ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?



                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?
                          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                          the project legal documents?



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anupam Joshi
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)     Date: 21-Feb-2017
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (PMGR)   Date: 26-Feb-2017
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                               Page 9 of 9
