                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC12550

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Nepal                         Project ID:      P155096
                            Project Name:   Integrated Platform for Gender Based Violence Prevention and Response in
                                            Nepal
                            Team Leader(s): Luiza A. Nora
                            Estimated Date 24-Mar-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSU06                         Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Central government administration (10%), Public administration- Other social
                                                 services (10%), Information technology (10%), Other social services (70%)
                            Theme(s):            Gender (80%), Other social development (10%), Social Inclusion (10%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 2                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              State and Peace Building Fund                                                                2
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of this project is to raise awareness about, and improve response to,
                           Gender Based Violence in Nepal. This will be achieved by improving the quality and reach of
                           services for GBV survivors through a helpline, promoting greater awareness among key stakeholders
                           and strengthening the capacity of National Women Commission (NWC).
                           C. Project Description
                           In June 2013, the World Bank and OXFAM International organized a regional conference on GBV –
                           “Joining Forces to Overcome Violence against Women in South Asia” where the Bank committed to
                           address GBV. The Bank in collaboration with IFC, Young Innovations and the Computer
                           Association of Nepal jointly organized a Hackathon on Violence Against Women (VAWHack). The
                           Hackathon was the first time in Nepal that the private sector, youth technology and practitioner
                           communities worked jointly on the issue of VAW. The hackathon was organized in collaboration
                           with the National Women Commission and Young Innovations. VawHack produced ICT
                           applications developed by Nepal’s youth for victims, support services providers and perpetrators of
                         VAW. Winning apps were integrated into a comprehensive online platform FightVAW (www.
                         fightvaw.org). In 2014, the World Bank. published the regional report that documented the
                         prevalence and typology of, risk and protective factors for, context behind, and promising approaches
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to addressing Violence against Women and Girls (VAWG)—while in the process bringing together
                         diverse stakeholders to discuss these facets of VAWG. The project builds on Bank’s past efforts to
                         address GBV and draws on its comparative advantage to convene multiple stakeholders, to produce
                         analytical work, and sector operations for its various components.
                         More specifically, the project is founded on the achievements and lessons of the FightVAW initiative
                         and will support its conversion from a case management system to a national ICT-based helpline for
                         GBV survivors. The initiative was implemented from August 2013 to June 2015 in Kathmandu
                         district with a focus on women survivors of GBV, but also attempted to involve men and boys. The
                         FightVAW initiative developed a Helpline and a full-fledged case management system from the
                         ideas generated during the Hackathon. Other ICT applications including an Android application that
                         allows users in unsafe situations to discretely press the power button and message family and friends
                         along with GPS location was developed. The initiative partnered with i) youth and women’s media
                         organizations to disseminate information on the Helpline, and ii) CSOs providing support services to
                         respond to cases reported to the Helpline. The NWC demonstrated interest and relevance of the
                         technology during the Hackathon and therefore coordinated the FightVAW activities and piloted the
                         system.
                         During the FightVAW pilot, the case management system and referral processes were refined with
                         feedback from CSOs and NWC. The CSOs and NWC reported that the Case Management System
                         (CMS) would improve coordination and enable tracking of cases to ensure GBV survivors are
                         receiving continuous support. Outreach activities indicated a need for a Helpline dedicated to GBV
                         issues similar to Child Helpline. Other results from the initiative include:
                         •        Capacity building of CSO focal points on using applications and internet-based applications.
                         •        Improved institutional relationships between government stakeholders, including NWC,
                         Nepal Police, Ministry of Home Affairs, Department of Women and Children at the Ministry of
                         Women, Children and Social Welfare, Office of the Prime Minister, other development partners, and
                         CSOs, as well as increased awareness on the nature and scope of GBV and the internet-based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         applications developed to combat the issue.
                         •        Some 57 cases recorded by phone, SMS or entered manually (including calls from family
                         members reporting domestic violence and trafficking of women).
                         •        Compilation and maintenance of a database of 94 organizations that work to address GBV.
                         •        Monitoring of 12 news sites for GBV-related news.
                         •        A collection of stories of women and girls who had experienced gender-based violence.

                         Key lessons of the FightVAW initiative include ability of the World Bank to bring together
                         traditional and non-traditional actors to address GBV and the pilot provided platform for
                         coordination of services. These lessons have contributed to designing the components.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                         F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      Yes           The proposed TF will support capacity building
                                                                            activities that facilitate support to GBV victims,
                                                                            including those from indigenous groups and
                                                                            other vulnerable communities. Changing gender
                                                                            norms and providing support to victims
                                                                            however could result in intra-household tensions
                                                                            as well as friction at the local level. To address
                                                                            these concerns, a Vulnerable Community
                                                                            Development Plan will be prepared to maximize
                                                                            support services to victims from vulnerable
                                                                            groups, including indigenous community; and
                                                                            measures for mitigating potential conflicts
                                                                            within households as well as local levels
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                           4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
                           Projects on International          No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP   No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                             Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):            Name: Luiza A. Nora
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:        Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                   Date: 01-Apr-2016
                           Practice Manager/          Name: David Seth Warren (PMGR)                   Date: 01-Apr-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
