INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                              Report No.: ISDSC12169
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Bangladesh                Project ID:   P154738
Project Name:     BBS capacity building
Team Leader(s): Yoonyoung Cho,Monica Yanez Pagans
Estimated Date    10-Aug-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GSPO6                     Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Public administration- Other social services (50%), General information and
communications sector (50%)
Theme(s):         Poverty strategy, analysis and monitoring (50%), Social Protection and Labor
Policy & Systems (50%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  0.38                 Total Bank Financing: 0.00
Financing Gap:       0.00
Financing Source                                                         Amount
Borrower                                                                     0.00
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                 0.38
O
Total                                                                        0.38
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the capacity of BBS to improve
the quality, frequency, and use of the two most important nationally representative household
surveys in Bangladesh: the Labor Force Survey (LFS) and the Household Income and Expenditure
Survey (HIES) in line with the broader framework of strengthening the national statistical system.
C. Project Description
To achieve the PDO, the proposed project activities are organized under three components: (i)
household survey design and data management; (ii) data analysis and information systems; and (iii)
data dissemination.
Component 1: Household survey design and data management


﻿The objective of this component is twofold. First, it is to support BBS in building local capacity on
the design of household survey including sampling and survey instruments development. Second, it
is to support BBS in developing a comprehensive data and information management framework for
the QLFS and HIES with a longer term view. The two key results from this component are the
O
U       following. First, BBS will have strengthened capacity to modify sampling frames over time and data
entry programs when questionnaires are modified in response to changes in the conditions of the
country, revisions in the international codes, or needs for adding new areas of interest. Second, BBS
staff will have enhanced skills in data management and increased coordination between the LFS and
HIES teams through a common data management framework.
Component 2: Household survey data analysis and information systems
The objective of this component is to support BBS in the design of data visualization tools for easy
access to statistics on labor markets, welfare, and living standards based on the QLFS and HIES data.
Further, it is to assist BBS in the production and modification of existing LFS and HIES data reports
and documentation to accommodate for the increased frequency of data and the revision of statistics
based on recent revisions to international standards. The two key results from this component are the
following. First, the use of labor markets and poverty indicators within the country policy dialogue
and more evidence-based policy decision making will be fostered. Second, capacity in BBS to
undertake more frequent data analysis, dissemination of major statistics, and more policy-oriented
outputs produced using the QLFS and HIES data, will be enhanced.
Component 3: Household survey data dissemination
The objective of this component is disseminating and sharing information of evidence-based policy
recommendations produced using the HIES and QLFS data. Further, it is to support activities that
stimulate more evidence-based policy dialogue in the country and promote the formulation and
prioritization of policies based on credible and high quality statistics, such as organizing consensus-
building seminars and workshops with local universities and think tanks. The expected outputs
include two annual workshops to disseminate findings from the HIES and QLFS data to
stakeholders. The expected outcome includes enhanced capacity in GED to formulate economic
strategies based on statistical information particularly in light of the Seventh Five Year Plan
(2016-2020).
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Sabah Moyeen (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies            Triggered?   Explanation (Optional)


﻿Environmental Assessment OP/   No
BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
O
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  Yes           Since the LFS and HIES are nationally
representative surveys, they are likely to cover
small ethnic communities if the sampling
scheme includes them. This project finances
complementary services related to the LFS and
HIES surveys only (i.e. data management,
analysis, and dissemination) and does not fund
any of the data collection itself. The data
collection is fully funded and managed by BBS
as part of their core activities. The
questionnaires and data collection process are
also quite standard, following international
protocols. In the event the final selected sample
covers small ethnic communities, enumerators
will be trained to conduct the surveys with
cultural sensitivity and appropriateness, and
data will be analyzed separately for small ethnic
groups if necessary. Also, a brief Tribal Peoples
Plan will be prepared to describe the approach
to training and surveying activities within these
communities if necessary.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No
Projects on International      No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):       Name: Yoonyoung Cho,Monica Yanez Pagans
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                 Date: 07-May-2015


﻿Practice Manager/          Name: Cem Mete (PMGR)                                 Date: 1 1-May-2015
Manager:
U
Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
U


