INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC1351 1
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Macedonia, former Yugoslav               P155353
Republic of
Project Name:   Macedonia Gas Sector Development (P155353)
Task Team       Stephanie Gil,Rhedon Begolli
Leader(s):
Estimated        11-Dec-2015               Estimated     28-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE03                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Oil and gas (70%), General energy sector (30%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     110.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                        10.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
Total                                                          110.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to support the transition towards a cleaner energy mix by
providing access to gas in the Polog, Vardar and Pelagonia regions of FYR of Macedonia.
To achieve these PDOs, the proposed project will provide:
(i) investment finance for the expansion of gas transmission within the country;
(ii) investment finance to support the implementation of measures which will help incentivize the use


﻿of natural gas as replacement for less sustainable fuels; and
(iii) support for project implementation.
C. Project Description
A US$100 million IBRD loan will be provided to FYR Macedonia to provide the necessary
investment financing and policy support to meet the above PDOs.
The Government is spearheading a gas sector development program which would provide a more
o environmentally-friendly and efficient way of producing electricity and heating. While a gas
transmission pipeline of 0.8bcm annual capacity exists, and brings natural gas to the capital Skopje
from the Bulgarian border, it is only utilized at about 15% of capacity due to high wholesale gas
prices, limited gas transmission and distribution infrastructure throughout the country, subsidized
electricity tariffs, and general lack of demand.
The Government developed pre-feasibility studies for the expansion of the transmission
infrastructure in 2010. The expansion consists of extending the existing pipeline (grey line from
Bulgarian border to Skopje) to cover most of the country territory (blue and green lines), and build
interconnectors to neighboring countries. These studies were reviewed and complemented by a
technical consultant hired by the Government and financed by European Bank for Reconstruction
and Development (EBRD), in 2013.
The Government plans to develop the transmission infrastructure in a phased approach:
- A first phase would include the following sections: Klecovce - Shtip, Shtip - Hamzali -
Greek border, Shtip - Negotino - Bitola, and Skopje - Tetovo - Gostivar (the section Bitola - Greek
border was dropped from the original Government's scope).
- In subsequent phases, the Government plans to build the remaining proposed gas
transmission infrastructure.
The Government is currently constructing the Klecovce - Shtip transmission section using as
financing the debt owed by the former USSR to former Yugoslavia; additionally, the Government
secured private financing for the construction of the section that runs from Shtip to the Greek border.
As part of the first phase of the transmission infrastructure, Government is seeking IFI financing to
build the transmission sections Skopje - Tetovo - Gostivar and Shtip - Negotino - Bitola.
Additionally, the Government also prepared an Environmental Impact Assessment, which has been
reviewed and complemented to comply with EBRD guidelines, and was approved by the
Government.
The proposed project aims to finance the construction of the following two segments: i) Skopje -
Tetovo - Gostivar, forming a westward extension of the existing transmission system with a length of
about 75 km in total to provide natural gas supply to the Polog region; and ii) Shtip - Negotino -
Bitola segment with a length of about 120 km and would form a southward expansion of the system
to provide natural gas supply to the Vardar and Pelagonia regions. The project also aims to provide
investment financing and technical assistance to implement acceptable measures to improve the
relative competitiveness of gas versus other fuels.
Component 1: Gas Transmission Pipeline (US$80 million), comprising the Skopje - Tetovo -
Gostivar Gas Transmission Pipeline ($30 million) and the Negotino - Bitola Gas Transmission
Pipeline ($50 million).


﻿Under this component, the project will provide financing for the construction of gas transmission
pipelines and associated equipment including: (i) valves and fittings; (ii) pipeline; (iii) crossings; (iv)
stations; and (v) other facilities. Initially, the pipeline would supply the industrial customers along
the pipeline, which are mostly using coal for heating. In the second phase, residential and
O
U       commercial customers would be connected through a distribution network in major urban areas such
as Tetovo and Gostivar, and Bitola and Prilep.
According to a base case scenario of the EBRD feasibility study, the Skopje - Tetovo - Gostivar
pipeline section would have a total throughput of about 225 mmcm by 2020 and then increasing to
about 1075 mmcm by 2040. A large part of the throughput would be transit gas from and to
neighboring countries (about 500 mmcm by 2040), followed by a power generation plant (about 385
mmcm by 2040) and industrial consumers (about 100 mmcm by 2040). The power generation
demand is expected to come from converting the current Oslomej Thermal Power Plant (TPP) from a
lignite fired TPP to a natural gas TPP. Demand projections would be confirmed during project
preparation.
For the Shtip - Negotino - Bitola pipeline section, the EBRD base case scenario anticipated a total
throughput of about 10 mmcm by 2020 and then increasing to about 80 mmcm by 2030 and 165
mmcm by 2040. A large part of the throughput would be demand from industrial customers (about
75 mmcm by 2040), followed by household demand (about 60 mmcm by 2040) and a smaller
demand from commercial consumers (about 25 mmcm by 2040). The EBRD feasibility study did not
include the possible replacement of lignite-fired TPP Bitola (675MW) by a natural gas plant once the
domestic lignite is depleted or the existing plant reaches end of life. Demand projections would be
confirmed during project preparation.
Component 2: Measures to support the switch to gas at power generation, industrial, commercial and
residential levels (est. US$18 million). Under this component, the project will provide financing for
the implementation of measures to be agreed with the Government during project preparation. The
measures will aim at increasing demand for natural gas along the existing and newly built pipelines.
An example of such measures could include: (i) financing support to initiate public sector investment
in the development of gas distribution networks, should private sector participation take longer than
originally anticipated; (ii) financing support to convert the Negotino fuel-oil plant to natural gas, in
the event the Government decides to go ahead and publicly finance the plant conversion; (iii)
establishment of credit lines to finance gas equipment purchases for industrial, commercial and/or
residential users.
Component 3: Project implementation support (est. US$2 million). The project will also support the
main implementing agency MER, as well as other stakeholders such as the Ministry of Transport and
Telecommunications (MTC), the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC) and the Ministry of Social
Welfare (MSW), to help ensure effective project implementation. This would include: (i) creation of
a project implementation unit (PIU) within the MTC, primarily staffed by MER and MTC staff, to
carry out Components 1 and 2, including support for procurement, financial management, technical
oversight, project monitoring and reporting; (ii) support to ERC for implementation of
recommendations arising from a review of gas tariff methodologies which would be undertaken as
part of project preparation; (iii) support to MSW for implementation of recommendations arising
from an affordability assessment which will be undertaken as part of project preparation, and (iv)
support to relevant counterparts which would implement Component 2.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Geographical scope of the project encompasses two areas: (i) area along proposed section of gas


﻿pipeline Skopje - Tetovo - Gostivar 75 km in length and (ii) area along proposed section of gas
pipeline Negotino - Bitola, approximately 120 km in length.
The minimal width of the gas pipeline corridor is 25m, which enables straightforward and safe
O
construction. The wider sanitary (protection) zone equals 250m on each side of the pipeline axis, or
500m width zone. ESIA indicated 400m width zone to be investigated for physical characteristics
relevant for to safeguard analysis.
The entire territory of Macedonia is seismically active. Its geomorphological development is
characterized by intense processes of rising and sinking and material deposition by gravity towards
valleys. Stip - Negotino - Bitola section cuts several seismically active rift valleys while Skopje -
Tetovo - Gostivar section generally spreads along neotectonical horizontal fissure intersecting it at
several points. Most territory of Macedonia is vulnerable to erosion and both pipeline sections pass
several Class I erosion areas (e.g. Tetovonorth of Gostivar, Negotin, northwest of Bitola).
(i) Skopje - Tetovo - Gostivar section encompasses nine (9) municipalities - six (6) Skopje
municipalities (K. Voda, Aerodrom, Sophiste, Gazi Baba, Karposh, Saraj) and municipalities of
Zelilon, Brvenica, Gostivar. This section of pipeline stretches from north to west of Macedonia.
The transmission pipeline Section 5, Skopje-Kicevo starts eastern direction of the village Aracinovo
(located westwards from Skopje) at the connection for the existing pipeline branch 'Skopje South'
and ends northeast from Kicevo in the proximity the riverbed of Zajska Reka.
The starting part of the gas transmission mainly passes through settlements, along existing roads and
crosses over the riverbed of river Vardar. At the right bank of river Vardar, the route penetrates
inside agricultural land. The pipeline also crosses mountain peak Vodno and Gorocvet following the
highest mountain ridge of Karshijak.
In continuation, the route enters the valley of the river Treska whereas it passes under its riverbed.
Critical part of the alignment is the section which approaches the densely populated villages and
enters the premises of the Macedonian National Army.
O
The transmission pipeline route penetrates in the third protective zone of Rasce spring, the northern
a       edge of the Polog valley is situated. The section enters the mountainous part of the western part of
the country where the forests prevail passing under Leshnicka Reka.
The continuation of the route passes hilly parts and villages towards the southwest by the monastery
called Sveta Nedela and crosses the riverbed of river Vardar several times as well as goes across
Polosko Pole's high quality arable land (probably under irrigation due to its proximity to river
Vardar). With several branch offs the route generally goes in direction southwest, and ends (the WB
financed part) at Gostivar after passing villages Balin Dol and Malo Turcane which in some way are
connected to the urban peripheral urban area of Gostivar.
Along this section, the pipeline intersects only one protected area - park forest Vodno, categorized as
the 'area of specific natural characteristics', with predominately recreational purpose according to
USAID. Park forest Vodno is located at higher areas of Vodno mountain with preserved indigenous
sites of chestnut, oak, fraxinus and hornbeam. Two other protected areas are located in the vicinity of
the route (more than 3 km away), Matka Canyon and Ubavica Cave - Monuments of Nature, but are
not expected to be affected by the project implementation.


﻿(ii) Stip - Negotino - Bitola section encompasses the following municipalities along its section:
Negotino, Kavadarci, Kavadarci Rosoman, Prilep, Mogila, Novaci and Bitola. The pipeline stretches
from northeast to southwest Macedonia. The area passed belongs to Vardar River catchment.
0
The pipeline section approaches Stip on its north-west edge, passing by the town on its western part
and crossing rivers Bregalnica and Lakavica. The pipeline then crosses Serta mountain, and takes a
position to cross the river Vardar (small portion crossing some military premises). After the crossing
with the Vardar River, the gas pipeline bypasses Negotino town and power plant TEC Negotino.
After Negotino the pipeline continues through urbanized areas major gas consumers being towns of
Kavadarci, Prilep and Bitola and thermo power plant "REK Bitola". At this point a junction with
other transit gas transmission lines passing through Greece is foreseen. Afterwards, the pipeline takes
the direction towards west and approaches the town of Bitola.
The transmission pipeline passes through vineyards in the beginning of the alignment; after it leaves
the area around the premises of the FENI industry, it goes through hilly terrain, crosses roads,
irrigation canals (hydro-system "Tikves") and trenches and climbs over local peaks. Before
approaching Prilep, the alignment passes through a difficult terrain of the mountain Pletvar and
follows mainly forest roads after which passes by high class of arable land.
On its way to Bitola, the alignment passes subsequently hilly and flat terrains, crosses local water
courses and tranches as well as linear infrastructure (roads and overhead electric transmission lines).
The area around the point 85+645 Km is problematic from technical point, since the route passes by
the reconstructed riverbed of river Dragor after passing by two open water canals of the hydro
reclamation system of river Crna, and crossing the reconstructed riverbed of Crna river. Additional
collisions are crossing over the irrigated part of Pelagonisko pole, crossing of the river Dragor twice,
crossing also the high pressure water pipeline F800 for water supply from the Hydro power plant
"Strezevo" up to the thermal power plant REK "Bitola. Strezovo dam is located 20 km away from the
O
U       pipeline.
Along this section, the pipeline passes in vicinity of, two protected areas or even intersects those: 1.
Tikves Region Important Bird Area (IBA) - Strict Nature Reserve, 2. Drenovo Gorge Monument of
a      Nature. There is also a number of areas designated/suggested for protection, however, not yet
officially under protection: 3. Pelagonia (IBA), 4. Raec (MK0000028) part of EMERALD Network
of Protected Sites and 5. Pelagonia (MK0000034) member of EMERALD Network of Protected
Sites, 6. Krivolak IPA, 7. Orlovo Brdo - Monument of Nature (Macedonian steppe) 8. Tikves Lake
Important Plant Area (IPA). The team in MER claims that all the protected areas have been avoided,
however, this will be conformed and reflected after the review of the original EIA.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The implementation of the gasification program is managed by the MoTC and the Joint Stock
Company for performing energy activities - MER, in 100% State Ownership. The implementing
agency, MER, is a new institution which has not yet been appointed as TSO, and is currently
understaffed and not fully functional. MER's unfamiliarity with Bank procurement, safeguard and
FM procedures could pose significant challenges during both project preparation and
implementation.
MER Company was established in 2011, and at present is the main responsible institution for


﻿implementation of the Project, i.e. construction of the Gas Pipeline. The Company currently employs
12 employees organized in 5 Departments (Department of Economic and Financial Affairs,
Department of Legal and General Affairs, Department for Implementation of the Project for
Construction of the National Gasification System, Department for Management of the Natural Gas
O
U       Transmission System and Department for Mineral Exploitation). The Company intends to hire 58
additional employees. The Company does not hold any quality/environmental certification, however
it is currently undertaking a tender procedure for selection of a consultant to help them adopt the ISO
9001 standard; the ISO 14001 standard is planned to be adopted at a later stage. The Company has in
practice well-established mechanism for employee-employer relations and communication; however
it lacks internal written procedures and policies. According to the information provided, there is
neither separate department nor an employee with direct responsibility for Social and Environmental
issues within the Company. However, the Company plans to hire an environmental expert to support
the work of each department regarding environmental and social impact aspects.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
Natasa Vetma (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         By all of its features, the project is classified as the
OP/BP 4.01                               category B project unless the risk of the sections'
pipeline route negatively impacting sensitive areas,
important habitats or Protected Areas (PAs) shows to
be significant which would subsequently classify the
project as category A. In the case the pipeline crosses
or passes PAs, but affects only relatively non-
sensitive areas, the project will remain B category.
This will be determined in early stage of
environmental documents review and preparation.
Five separate EIAs were produced for all five
sections. The WB project is covered by two full EIAs
and third partially. EIAs were conducted, publically
consulted and approved by the competent authorities
in accordance with Macedonian environmental
legislation. EBRD has conducted a gap analysis
between the due diligence carried out for the Project
(EIA) and EBRD Environmental and Social Policy
specific Performance Requirements
(PR) for key areas of environmental and social issues
and impacts. WB is also conducting a similar gap
analysis for the part of the project considered for
financing (section 5, and parts of section 1 and 2).
After the gap analysis is conducted, EIAs relevant
for the WB project will be updated accordingly and
publically re-disclosed and consulted.
EMPs will also be produced as part of the updated


﻿EIA for each section. EMP will be made an integral
part of bidding documentation.
In addition to issues of nature protection EIA will
also focus on community safety issues related to
pipeline operation phase as well as issues of
cumulative impact.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           The proposed pipeline sections routes intersects with
one protected site (park forest Vodno, area of
specific natural characteristics, 1953 ha). It is
possible that the project would affect two more PAs,
including a strict natural reserve (Tikvesh) and
several more sites suggested for protection or a part
of EMERALD Network of Nature Protection Sites
which present a version of non-EU Natura 2000
network. EMERALD Network will be evaluated and
possibly launched during 2015. This will be
confirmed after translation and review of original
EIA.
All issues and concerns related to nature protection
will be addressed in the updated version of EIA.
Although MER claims the pipeline does not cross
PA, the impact and its magnitude cannot be
confirmed at this moment. If during the early stage of
environmental document preparation and WB gap
analysis, the study shows and Bank environmental
team concludes that the project might have
significant, long-term and somehow irreversible
impact on Pas, natural habitats or species, the project
will be re-categorized to category A projects.
However, it is also possible that PAs sensitive areas
will not be affected by the project or that the impact
will be insignificant. During preparation phase, the
Bank environmental team will work closely and
advise with RSA.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           TBD          Pipelines are almost 200 km in length and will
probably pass some forest areas. Given the corridor
width standards there will most probably be some
logging during the construction. The exact corridor
route, thus the affected surface of the forest, will be
known by the appraisal stage. The EIA will assess if
the project will have impacts on the health and
quality of forests. The pipeline will also pass Vodno
park forest.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD          Macedonia is, in general, historically very rich area
OP/BP 4.11


﻿and there are high possibilities of chance findings. In
addition, the gas pipeline route can pass in vicinity or
intersect cemeteries, churches, monasteries, mosques
or existing archeological findings. The exact corridor
route will be known by the appraisal stage hence the
affected cultural heritage which will, possibly trigger
OP/BP 4.11 policy. The EIA will include procedures
for chance finds and guidelines on practices used in
the vicinity of sites of cultural importance.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         Five separate EIAs and related gap analysis were
BP 4.12                                   produced for separate sections of the overall national
pipeline expansion. EBRD produced a GAP analysis
for the Stakeholders Engagement Plan and
Livelihood Restoration. Implementing institution has
produced feasibility studies and preliminary designs,
thus preliminary route of the gas pipes has been
determined. The implementing agency will be
expected to complement the ESIAs to meet World
Bank safeguards requirements and to prepare a RPF,
based on which site-specific RAPs would be
prepared once detailed designs and are available.
Based on the preliminary designs there will be no
displacement neither because of loosing of homes/
dwellings nor because loosing of livelihood. Out of
land needed about 25% is a private land and 2-5% of
the public land is land in use.
O
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    TBD          Negotino- Bitola pipeline route is crossing three
open irrigation canals and several secondary water
supply pipelines from the hydro-system Strezevo.
The dam itself is positioned 20 km away. The EIA
o                                                  will address this issues as well.
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 25-Sep-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The entire length of the pipeline has been divided to five (5) sections and EIA has been produced
for each section. Only three (3) of these will be financed by WB. These three EIAs will be updated
and disclosed at the Borrowers' web pages as well as its premises (in hard copy) for at least two or
three weeks. The EIAs will be disclosed as well in settlements along the route. EIAs will be
disclosed in English, Macedonian and Albanian language. The interested parties will be informed
of the disclosure and called for comments via official web pages as well as through the local
O
media and in Macedonian and Albanian language. A postal and electronic address will be
provided for public to send comments to. During or upon the disclosure, public consultations will
take place. Call for participation in public consultation will be launched via official web pages as
well as through the local media and in Macedonian and Albanian language. EMP will be prepared
for the works at each of the three (3) financed sections. EMPs will be disclosed together with the
EIAs.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Stephanie Gil,Rhedon Begolli
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                      Date: 01-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Ranjit J. Lamech (PMGR)                 Date: 04-Sep-2015
Manager:


