                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC18379

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Kosovo                         Project ID:     P160382
                            Project Name:        Strengthening OAG capacities in procurement audits
                            Team Leader(s):      Jonida Myftiu,Manjola Malo
                            Estimated Date       31-Aug-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGO03                          Lending         IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.198                          Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Strengthening Accountability and the Fiduciary
                                                                                                                          0.198
                              Environment
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           This project will contribute to:
                           Strengthen Office of Audit General (OAG) capacity on the value for money (VFM) and compliance
                           audit in the field of procurement, enhancing in this manner public procurement process through
                           valued added insights and recommendations;
                           Use the compliance audit focus in procurement to more widely develop compliance audit activity
                           across the Office of Audit General, consolidating this work in the introduction of a separate
                           compliance audit opinion; and
                           Conduct procurement post review for project financed by World Bank and other Multilateral Donors
                           Organizations.

                           The provision of constructive, well focused recommendations related to procurement will promote
                           enhanced procurement processes within Kosovo intended to deliver more efficient and effective
                           service provision to citizens. The associated improvement in the controls applied to the procurement
                           process will underpin wider PFM developments further enhanced by a more developed Office of
                           Audit General compliance audit approach in non-procurement audit. This will promote an
                           improvement in the Government PFM performance and service delivery.
                         To achieve these objectives, the project will develop a broader audit of procurement through an
                         improved strategic overview of the field to identify where VFM activity can have most impact. This
                         will be supported by pilot audits. A wider understanding of the compliance aspects of existing laws
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and regulations will drive the compliance audit developments and allow the basis for a consistent
                         analysis of issues that would impact on the opinion.

                         The project will directly contribute to PEFA 2016 PI.19 ➢❨ competition, value for money and
                         controls over procurement (scored C in the PEFA assessment). A broader Office of Audit General
                         portfolio and other advisory activities will support public sector organizations strengthen
                         competition, value for money and controls over public procurements thereby addressing challenges
                         identified by the last PEFA and other external procurement assessments. It will also support better
                         compliance with laws and regulations across all financial systems.

                         Through improving the quality and range of Office of Audit General inspection, the project will
                         develop the skills of audit staff with a positive impact on all audit activity undertaken. An increased
                         focus on systems and controls will contribute to more proactive action deterring fraud and corruption
                         which are obstacles to long term Government development priorities. Also boosting auditors
                         capacity, by training them to audit donors financed projects will help international organization to
                         rely more on country system.
                         C. Project Description
                         Output 1: Assessment of the (relevant) landscape and context that the project will address
                         Activity 1.1: Review and Analysis of Factors that will determine the focus of work being undertaken

                         This activity will identify and analyze the impact of key documentation, guidance and other relevant
                         information which will maximize the impact of project activity. The outputs of this exercise will be
                         shared with all relevant stakeholders and will serve as a basis for discussions to refine the scope of
                         the intervention. Reference will be made to:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Public Expenditure and Financial Assessments (PEFA) conducted in Kosovo in past years to provide
                         an overview of the current situation in the public financial management system to the extent that
                         these impact on procurement and compliance audit activities;

                         the key actors and developments in Procurement and the extent to which this drives a revised (risk
                         based and impact focused) strategy and supports more focused compliance audit activity through a
                         better risk assessment of where the key audit issues are;

                         existing laws and regulations that impact on a compliance audit of Procurement and Non
                         Procurement activity to set clear and unambiguous guidelines as to what a compliance failure is and
                         when such a failure would have an impact on the proposed ➢❨ Compliance Opinion➢❨ ; and

                         ISSAI guidance (ISSAI 4000/4001/4002) setting out International Standards on Public Sector
                         Compliance Audit to ensure that the basis of compliance audit addresses international best practice
                         and is embedded in OAG processes.

                         Output 2: VFM Reports on Procurement
                         Activity 2.1: Pilot Audits
                         The pilot audit process will incorporate four mentored audit: two will be cross cutting reviews (one
                         related to central government and one related to municipalities, one will be focused on a single
                         Budget Organization and one will address comparative audit by benchmarking similar public
                         organizations. The final outputs will be reported to Parliament but also used as the basis for a
                         conference with key stakeholders to raise and discuss the barriers and opportunities that exist related
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to enhanced procurement in Kosovo. This conference will also be used to highlight other
                         procurement projects/ activities ongoing and seek to identify how the benefits of all these initiatives
                         can be maximized.

                         Activity 2.2: Revised OAG guidelines on VFM Procurement
                         In the spirit of continuous improvement the existing VFM procurement guidelines will be revised
                         and updated to reflect lessons learned from the pilot audits. The audit guidelines, prepared with
                         support of a previous IDF grant Enhancement of Public Procurement project, consist of:
                         an initial audit strategy which requires ongoing development to reflect activity 1.1 above; and
                         an audit manual streamlining VFM audit methodology to be applied by teams which now needs to be
                         tested in practice and updated as appropriate. Special attention will be given to the use of market
                         price comparisons and system based audit. As referred in the final report of the previous IDF grant
                         project these are not fully ingrained in the OAG procurement audit process.


                         Output 3: Compliance Audit
                         Activity 3.1: Introductory Training
                         An initial training program for OAG staff will be developed based on the results of Output 1 and an
                         assessment of existing skills within the OAG.

                         Activity 3.2: Coaching and Mentoring audit support department
                         A program will be implemented to ensure that the audit support department is able to carry out an
                         effective quality assurance process of a new compliance audit approach.

                         Activity 3.3: Pilot Audits
                         Nine mentored audits will be undertaken (one for each OAG directorate) to apply a systematic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         approach to procurement and non-procurement compliance audit. Team leaders not involved in the
                         pilot audits will be involved in the pilots to promote a consistent approach. A separate audit will also
                         be carried out as a cross cutting review of specific procurement audit issues. The outcome of this
                         work will be reported to the Assembly but will also be used to inform the conference highlighted in
                         Activity 2.1 to maximize the benefits of the work within the PFM framework.

                         Activity 3.4: Training and pilot auditing on Procurement Process in Donors Projects
                         OAG auditors will be trained with donor procurement regulations and this would address a range of
                         donors, including the EC and World Bank. Pilot auditing will be carried out to examine procurement
                         activities after they are completed by the Borrower. These activities will create capacities that may be
                         used by World Bank or other Multilateral Donor Organizations. OAG already undertaken audits of
                         some donor funds such as Danida projects and other donors such as SIDA have expressed interest in
                         using OAG for their audits. As there is an increasing demand in this regard OAG is seeking support
                         to strengthen its capacities in auditing donor projects thereby opening the way for more use of
                         country system by the donors and direct budget support - one of the underdeveloped areas according
                         to PEFA.

                         Output 4: Regional knowledge exchange
                         Activity 4.1: Regional knowledge exchange workshop
                         A regional event will be organized to allow stakeholders from Kosovo to share their knowledge and
                           experience with peer countries engaged in similar activities or having overcome similar challenges.
                           The Network of Supreme Audit Institutions of EU candidate and potential candidate countries
                           (Network of SAI) including Albania, Serbia, Montenegro etc. This will build on existing round table
Public Disclosure Copy




                           arrangements but will allow greater focus on procurement and compliance audit
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
                           Projects on International           No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP    No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):           Name: Jonida Myftiu,Manjola Malo
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:       Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                Date: 21-Jul-2016
                           Practice Manager/         Name: Soukeyna Kane (PMGR)                          Date: 26-Jul-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
