                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC13224

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jul-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Malawi                          Project ID:     P153205
                            Project Name:     Lilongwe Water Project (P153205)
                            Task Team         Josses Mugabi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         08-Feb-2016                     Estimated       18-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                   Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWA01                           Lending         Investment Project Financing
                                                                              Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (80%), Irrigation and drainage (10%), Public administration-
                                              Water, sanitation and flood protection (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (20%), Water resource management
                                              (80%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    290.00                   Total Bank Financing:        71.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         23.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                71.00
                              African Development Bank                                                   55.00
                              EC European Investment Bank                                               101.00
                              Foreign Private Commercial Sources (unidentified)                          40.00
                              Total                                                                     290.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve water supply to Lilongwe, and improve the
                           operational and financial performance of the Lilongwe Water Board. This will be achieved through
                         targeted investments in the Lilongwe Bulk Water System and technical assistance to LWB and
                         MAIWD to improve the efficiency and sustainability of water services and to support the Lilongwe
                         Water Program.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will support the Lilongwe Water Program with the objective to expand access to water
                         services in Lilongwe through improved bulk water supply, improved distribution and improved
                         capacity of MAIWD and LWB to better manage water services. The Program will be supported by a
                         number of Development Partner through discrete projects. These projects will either be co-financed
                         or parallel financed.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Government is embarking on the Lilongwe Water Program. The Program will expand access to
                         water services in Lilongwe through improved bulk water supply, improved distribution and improved
                         capacity of MAIWD and LWB to better manage water services. Individual Development Partners
                         may finance projects under the umbrella of the Program, in a similar manner in which the National
                         Water Development Program is being implemented. The Government has requested the Bank to
                         play the role of lead Development Partner in the Program in addition to financing an investment
                         component. Financing from the Bank will be through the Lilongwe Water Project.

                         The Program is expected to include three components, as follows:

                         Component 1--Lilongwe Bulk Water Supply: The objective of this component is to secure a new
                         water source for Lilongwe to meet the city’s water demand until 2045. Water requirements has been
                         developed based on the 2011 Sogreah feasibility study. However, given recent rapid population
                         growth and urban expansion in Lilongwe, this will be further reviewed during project preparation.
                         Physical investments cover the capital requirements for the bulk water supply system, comprising the
                         Diamphwe Multipurpose Dam, raw water transmission system, water treatment plant, and treated
                         water transmission main to the city. The detailed design and the ESIA for the bulk water system are
                         currently underway, and will impact the final dimensions of the system, but based on the feasibility
Public Disclosure Copy




                         study, the following are the main sub-components:

                         •        Diamphwe Multipurpose Dam: The feasibility study recommended a dam site on the lower
                         Diamphwe River. The dam would be about 30 meters (m) high and built of roller compacted
                         concrete (RCC). The dam design assumes an outflow of 2.6 m3/s for drinking uses and 0.6 m3/s for
                         irrigation uses. The feasibility of a future irrigation system that would use some water from the
                         Diamphwe Dam is being considered under a separate study.

                         •       Water Treatment Plant (WTP): The WTP is being designed to use conventional treatment
                         processes, notably coagulation-flocculation tanks, settling tanks, filters, and disinfection. The WTP
                         would be located 3.5 km from the dam wall. The estimated capacity of the WTP up to 2045 would be
                         210,540 m3/day.

                         •       Transmission Main: The raw water transmission main will pump water from the Diamphwe
                         Dam to the WTP. The transmission main will gravitate treated water from the WTP to the city over a
                         distance of 30 km. All of Component 1, including the transmission main, will be covered by an
                         Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) that will include an Environmental and Social
                         Management Plan (ESMP), along with a separate Resettlement Action Plan (RAP); preparation of
                         the ESIA and RAP is underway.
                         Component 2--Lilongwe Water Distribution System: The objective of this component is to improve
                         access to water supply for customers in Lilongwe, particularly the poor. The water supply
                         reticulation system in Lilongwe is old and requires rehabilitation and expansion to meet the growing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         needs of the city. A feasibility study is being commissioned to consider priority rehabilitation and
                         expansion needs of the city to expand coverage to unserved parts of the city (poor areas in
                         particular) and to reduce leakages. Preliminary cost estimates are that $68 million is required for this
                         component. Government is seeking financing from AfDB for this component. All of Component 2
                         will have a separate Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement
                         Policy Framework (RPF) that are due to be completed and publicly disclosed at about the same time
                         as the ESIA and RAP for Component 1.

                         Component 3: Technical Assistance and Program Management: The objective of this component is
                         to enhance the capacity of MAIWD and LWB to provide efficient and sustainable water and
                         sanitation services and to support the management of the Program, with the following sub-
                         components:

                         •       Technical assistance to MAIWD: This sub-component will support the establishment of a
                         national regulator in the water sector. The national regulator is envisaged as independent,
                         professional tariff setting body best suited to balance interests of customers and Water Boards, with
                         public accountability in the tariff setting function.

                         •       Institutional strengthening of LWB: The objective of this component would be to support
                         LWB in improve operational and financial performance. The need for this component– and which
                         financier may support it–will be considered during project preparation.


                         •        Water and Sanitation Master Plan: Both Central and Local Government (in particular, the
                         Lilongwe City Council and District Council) and LWB have expressed a need to for water supply
                         and sanitation Master Plan for Lilongwe . This will provide a plan for further investments in the city
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to address the rapidly growing population and changing demographics. The Master Plan will also
                         assess the policy, legal, and institutional aspects of water services in Lilongwe and highlight the
                         associated environmental and social issues. More detailed and corresponding safeguards tools will
                         be developed as the Master Plan evolves to specific targeted investments at the feasibility and
                         detailed design stages.

                         •        Program Management: The proposed Project will support a Program Coordination Unit
                         (PCU) within MAIWD and/or LWB that will support the implementation of the program. The PCU
                         will include all necessary project management capacity, including technical, procurement, financial
                         management, monitoring and evaluation, and environmental and social safeguards expertise.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Component 1 includes the Diamphwe Multipurpose Dam, water treatment plant, and transmission
                         mains (treated water pipelines). The proposed Diamphwe Dam would create a water storage
                         impoundment, flooding approximately 2,200 hectares (ha) of land. The dam and associated water
                         treatment plant, storage tanks, and the main portion of the treated water pipeline (about 30 km)
                         would be located in the rural parts of the Lilongwe and Dedza districts. The remaining portion of the
                         water pipeline would traverse through sections of urban Lilongwe. The dam would be on the
                         Diamphwe River, about 2 km upstream from the Diamphwe River Bridge on the M-1 Highway
                         between Lilongwe and Blantyre. The topography around the proposed Diamphwe Dam site varies
                         from flat to hilly. The land to be inundated by the dam is extensively cultivated by small farmers,
                         although there are some natural habitats present including dambos (seasonal grassy wetlands) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         remnant forest patches, along with the Diamphwe River itself. Human settlements in the area
                         comprise small villages and isolated rural houses. Local households generate their income from
                         agriculture, animal husbandry, micro- and small-scale enterprises, and formal and informal
                         employment. Vulnerable groups within the project area include the elderly, women, and orphans.

                         For Component 1, an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and Resettlement Action
                         Plan (RAP) will be prepared. Significant environmental and social issues that will require specific
                         attention in the ESIA and RAP include:

                         •        Natural habitats and biodiversity--terrestrial and especially aquatic. With respect to the latter,
                         the ESIA will need to indicate the likely impacts and proposed mitigation measures involving
                         threatened fish species, crocodiles, and other aquatic life. The ESIA is also expected to recommend
                         (as part of the project’s Environmental Management Plan) which fishery species could be developed
                         within the future Diamphwe impoundment without threatening the survival of native aquatic species.
                         •        Environmental flows to be released from the dam, including water availability for
                         downstream users along the Diamphwe River.
                         •        Water quality within the new impoundment, as well as downstream.
                         •        Public health issues associated with tropical dams, including malaria and possibly
                         schistosomiasis.
                         •        Physical cultural resources within the planned inundation zone and other project footprint
                         areas. Of special concern is the expected inundation of one or more cemeteries, a culturally sensitive
                         issue that will need to be properly addressed.
                         •        Catchment management options to help minimize reservoir sedimentation, with respect to
                         reservoir-edge lands, erodible agricultural lands, and the upstream Dzalanyama Forest Reserve.
                         •        Involuntary resettlement, involving both the physical relocation of households and the need
                         to replace agricultural and grazing lands that will be inundated with alternative land or other
Public Disclosure Copy




                         livelihood options.
                         •        Potential induced seismicity associated with the large weight of water built up in the dam
                         area.
                         •        Construction-related environmental and social issues typically associated with large civil
                         works.

                         Although Diamphwe is officially envisioned as a multi-purpose dam (for potable water supply,
                         irrigation, and fisheries), the proposed project does not finance any irrigation infrastructure, except
                         that the dam design will include 1-2 irrigation intake devices, which will keep open the option of
                         connecting a future (not yet defined) irrigation scheme to the dam. This new irrigation could
                         encompass up to 1,000 ha of suitable land (not yet specifically identified) and would use water from
                         the dam that is not delivered to Lilongwe city nor needed for downstream environmental flow
                         releases. If and when such a future irrigation project is designed (outside the scope of this current
                         water supply project), it would be evaluated on its own terms and subject to its own separate ESIA,
                         RAP, and/or other safeguards documentation (as needed).

                         Component 2 (Lilongwe Water Distribution System) would be built within the general Lilongwe
                         metropolitan area, but the specific locations are not yet known of the water distribution pipelines and
                         associated civil works, as well as the specific neighborhoods, businesses, or households to be
                         affected by the construction. These civil works are to be designed mainly during Project Year 1.
                           Accordingly, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and Resettlement
                           Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared for Component 2 in advance of project appraisal. The
                           ESMF and RPF are intended to enable the proper management of environmental and social impacts,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           including the preparation of site-specific ESIAs with ESMPs and RAPs as needed during project
                           implementation .
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The World Bank has been engaged with the water sector in Malawi for the past 8 years. Over this
                           period there has been progressive capacity building for the implementation of Bank Safeguard
                           Policies as well as national environmental standards. The managers of LWB and MAIWD have
                           considerable understanding and regard for the Safeguards Policies. Project staff assigned to this
                           project include a safeguards specialist who has been working with environmental and social issues in
                           the preceding National Water Development Program. LWB and MAIWD also have a well-
                           functioning relationship with Malawi’s (i) Environmental Affairs Department that is responsible for
                           ESIA approval and (ii) Lands Department that oversees resettlement and compensation issues.
                           Additional environmental and social capacity building assistance for LWB and MAIWD would take
                           place under the proposed project, including the contracting of specialized staff as needed to
                           implement specific provisions of the ESMP and RAP. With strong implementation support from the
                           Bank Safeguards Team and continued capacity building under the project, LWB and MAIWD should
                           have adequate capacity to effectively implement the project’s safeguards requirements.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           George Campos Ledec (GENDR)
                           Kristine Schwebach (GSURR)
                           Webster Munhundiripo Muti (GWA01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies              Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental Assessment        Yes            This is a Category A project. The project involves a
                           OP/BP 4.01                                     large dam and related infrastructure and many of the
                                                                          typical environmental and social issues (including
                                                                          resettlement) that accompany such a project. An
                                                                          ESIA and RAP will be formulated for Component 1,
                                                                          comprising the dam, water treatment, and
                                                                          transmission pipeline investments. Component 2, the
                                                                          Lilongwe Water Distribution System, would be built
                                                                          within the general Lilongwe metropolitan area, but
                                                                          the specific locations are not yet known of the water
                                                                          distribution pipelines and associated civil works, as
                                                                          well as the specific neighborhoods and host
                                                                          environment; therefore, a separate ESMF will be
                                                                          produced for this component.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     Yes            The Diamphwe River provides habitat for wide range
                                                                          of aquatic life including Nile Crocodiles and possibly
                                                                          some globally threatened fish species. The potential
                                                                          occurrence of threatened fish species in the project
                                                                          area will need to be confirmed by the ESIA, along
                                                              with adequate mitigation measures if any adverse
                                                              impacts are expected. The planned inundation area is
                                                              largely agricultural, but includes some natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              habitats including dambos (seasonal grassy
                                                              wetlands).
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             TBD   The inundation zone includes some remnant forest
                                                              and woodland patches, including along the river and
                                                              within traditional wooded cemeteries. From a
                                                              catchment management standpoint, the Diamphwe
                                                              Dam benefits from the upstream Dzalanyama Forest
                                                              Reserve (which would not be inundated by the dam).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        TBD   Construction and operation of the project will not
                                                              require pest, vector, or weed management, with a
                                                              few potential exceptions to be examined under the
                                                              ESIA. These exceptions might possibly involve the
                                                              control of floating aquatic weeds on the
                                                              impoundment and/or increased efforts to control
                                                              malaria or other vector-borne diseases in the project
                                                              area.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes   The Diamphwe project area has several cemeteries,
                         OP/BP 4.11                           at least one of which would be submerged by the
                                                              dam. The possibility also exists that other physical
                                                              cultural resources might be uncovered during project
                                                              construction . The ESIA will assess the impacts of
                                                              Component 1 upon cemeteries and any other cultural
                                                              resources; the associated ESMP will recommend
                                                              appropriate cultural resources management,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              consistent with OP 4.11 and applicable Malawian
                                                              legislation and cultural traditions. The ESMF will
                                                              also address any cultural resources issues within
                                                              Component 2. Both the ESMP and ESMF will
                                                              include Chance Finds Procedures, for any physical
                                                              cultural resources that might unexpectedly be found
                                                              during project construction.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    There are no people within the project area who meet
                         4.10                                 the Indigenous Peoples criteria of OP 4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   A preliminary visit to the project area suggests that 5
                         BP 4.12                              villages of about 150 households (roughly 1,000
                                                              people) might need to be relocated to accommodate
                                                              the new Diamphwe Dam, reservoir, and adjacent
                                                              buffer zone. A more accurate assessment will be
                                                              done through the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
                                                              To date, the people consulted have generally
                                                              expressed a preference to be relocated within the
                                                              same local area. Accordingly, the RAP will likely
                                                              include support for agricultural intensification and
                                                                                                                        other income generating activities, to help ensure that
                                                                                                                        the livelihoods of affected people will be maintained
                                                                                                                        and improved within the available land area. Aside
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        from the new Diamphwe Dam and reservoir, some
                                                                                                                        resettlement or compensation for land taken might
                                                                                                                        also be needed with respect to the water treatment
                                                                                                                        plant, storage tanks, and/or water transmission
                                                                                                                        pipelines. Before any civil works are undertaken that
                                                                                                                        would affect people’s lands or other physical assets
                                                                                                                        anywhere in the project area, (i) the Final RAP will
                                                                                                                        need to be reviewed and cleared by the World Bank
                                                                                                                        and (ii) the corresponding compensation or other
                                                                                                                        mitigation measures specified in the RAP will need
                                                                                                                        to be properly implemented.

                                                                                                                        Component 2, the Lilongwe Water Distribution
                                                                                                                        System, would be built within the general Lilongwe
                                                                                                                        metropolitan area, but the specific locations are not
                                                                                                                        yet known of the water distribution pipelines and
                                                                                                                        associated civil works, as well as the specific
                                                                                                                        neighborhoods, businesses, or households to be
                                                                                                                        affected by the construction; hence a Resettlement
                                                                                                                        Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   Yes                        The proposed Diamphwe Dam (30 meters high) is
                                                                                                                        considered a large dam under OP 4.37. In accordance
                                                                                                                        with this policy, project preparation will provide for
                                                                                                                        the necessary precautions, including an independent
                                                                                                                        panel of dam safety experts, dam safety plans, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        periodic safety inspections during dam operation.
                                 Projects on International                                   Yes                        The Diamphwe River eventually flows into Lake
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   Malawi, an international water body. However, the
                                                                                                                        water storage and abstraction attributable to this
                                                                                                                        project will not measurably affect the quantity or
                                                                                                                        quality of water in this very large and deep lake.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The entire project area is undisputedly within
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                Malawi.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 05-Jan-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             Work on the ESIA and RAP began in 2014. However, owing to deficiencies in the quality and
                             timeliness of intermediate outputs received, the Lilongwe Water Board decided (with World Bank
                             concurrence) to terminate the consulting contract. A new consulting team will be selected, with the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             assignment of completing the (i) ESIA (including ESMP) and RAP for Component 1 and (ii)
                             ESMF and RPF for Component 2, all by about November 30, 2015 .

                             Component 2 (The Lilongwe Water Distribution System) would be built within the general
                             Lilongwe metropolitan area, but the specific locations are not yet known of the water distribution
                             pipelines and associated civil works, as well as the specific neighborhoods, businesses, or
                             households to be affected by the construction; and ESMF an RPF will be prepared by about
                             November 30, 2015 to manage social and environmental impacts and guide the preparation of
                             ESIA/EMPs and RAPs as needed . Respective cultural resources management actions will be
                             articulated in the ESIA and RAP for the dam, water treatment, and transmission investments, and
                             in the ESMF and RPF for the distribution component.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Josses Mugabi
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                             Date: 09-Jul-2015
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Steven N. Schonberger (PMGR)                        Date: 16-Oct-2015
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
