                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC15567

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Sierra Leone                   Project ID:      P157778
                            Project Name:        Sierra Leone Integrated Household Survey
                            Team Leader(s):      Kristen Himelein
                            Estimated Date       03-Dec-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GPV01                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (5%), Public administration-
                                                 Other social services (5%), General public administration sector (80%),
                                                 General education sector (5%), Health (5%)
                            Theme(s):            Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (5%), Poverty strategy, analysis
                                                 and monitoring (80%), Social Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (5%),
                                                 Gender (5%), Rural markets (5%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.75                          Total Bank Financing: 0
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrowing Agency                                                                           0.25
                              Borrower                                                                                      0
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                1.5
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall development objective of this project is to support the Government of Sierra Leone in
                           improving the availability and quality of poverty and other socioeconomic data to inform policy
                           monitoring and planning through the implementation of the 2016 Sierra Leone Integrated Household
                           Survey, and associated capacity building activities.
                           C. Project Description
                           Questionnaire Revision – Analysis of the 2011 SLIHS showed a number of short-comings in the
                           instrument design. While a full review of the survey instrument will be conducted, certain target
                           areas have already been identified. With regard to consumption, the main revisions will be related to
                           the conversion of non-standard units and appropriate estimation for prices of home production. Food
                         consumed away from the household will also be collected in the 2016 survey. These changes will be
                         made in such a manner as to allow for the update of the previous years’ aggregates to ensure
                         comparability of estimates over time. Outside of the consumption sections, the labor and agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         modules were not comparable between the 2003 and 2011 rounds, and it was not possible to
                         calculate standard international indicators for these topics. In the case of labor, changes can be made
                         to the SLIHS to align with the 2014 Labor Force Survey, while some additional work may be
                         necessary with agriculture. In addition, Sierra Leone suffered two major shocks in the past 18
                         months with the outbreak of Ebola Virus Disease and the closure of the two main mining operations
                         in the country, and the questionnaire will attempt to capture the welfare impact of these shocks. The
                         revisions to the questionnaire will be made with substantial input from the relevant sectors within the
                         World Bank, and from government and other stakeholders.

                         Sample Selection – The sample design will be based on variance and clustering information from
                         household consumption variable in the 2011 SLIHS. The design will maximize overall precision
                         while still maintaining representative estimates at the district level. Cluster selection will use the
                         estimated cluster sizes from the cartography for the upcoming 2015 census, which are projected to be
                         available by September 2015. As the survey will follow immediately from the implementation of the
                         census, initially clusters will use the census as the household listing for selection, though a separate
                         listing operation may be necessary for later clusters. This provides significant cost savings to the
                         overall design.

                         Fieldwork – Fieldwork will be conducted over a 12 month period to adequately account for
                         seasonality in employment and consumption statistics. In the previous round of the SLIHS,
                         enumerators spent one month in each enumeration area (EA) collecting information via a
                         consumption diary, and by overseen by a mobile supervisor with a motorbike. The current design
                         would decrease the amount of time spent on the diary to two weeks, requiring fewer enumerators and
                         supervisors. This decision was taken following a review of the previous data which showed minimal
                         information gained from the additional time spent in the EA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Data Capture – The current planning for data capture will explore two options as improvements over
                         the centralized, post-survey, scanning method used in 2011. The first is to do the data entry at
                         district offices with dedicated staff on dedicated laptops. The second is to move to a full Computer
                         Assisted Field Entry (CAFE) system in which teams travel with laptops and complete the data entry
                         while in the enumeration area. The latter is the preferred option as teams would have the opportunity
                         to revisit households and correct inconsistencies before leaving the cluster, though there is some
                         hesitation on the part of the statistics bureau to move to completely decentralized entry due to the
                         limited power supplies outside of major cities. In order for the decentralized data capture system to
                         be effective, a robust program of data checks would need to be developed for the CSPro data entry
                         software and training would need to be provided to supervisors, enumerators, and data entry
                         technicians.

                         Field Supervision and Data Checking – The field based data entry program allows for much faster
                         access to data for review. The World Bank will assist SSL in evaluating data quality in near-real
                         time, identifying problem enumerators and teams, and completing the feedback loop to improve data
                         quality. The project will also build on systems developed for the 2014 Labor Force Survey,
                         including (i) introducing screening and remuneration standards for field staff; (ii) using SMS-based
                         reporting and aggregation to monitor progress of fieldwork; and (iii) using smartphone-based
                         monitoring (e.g., back checks, spot checks, GPS recording).
                           Comparability - Revisions to the questionnaire and improved data quality through increased
                           supervision both have the potential to impact comparability between rounds and confound actual
                           changes in well-being. The team is conscious of these potential issues but believes the benefits
Public Disclosure Copy




                           outweigh the costs. During the analysis phase the changes will be carefully considered and, if
                           necessary, techniques such as imputation may be used to construct comparable trends.

                           Weight Calculations – The weights will be calculated using the probabilities generated by the sample
                           design, cluster-level non-response, and post-stratification using the population totals from the 2015
                           census.

                           Production of a Statistical Abstract – The project, along with the companion World Bank technical
                           assistance project, will ensure the timely production of updated, comparable poverty numbers (with
                           the 2003 and 2011 surveys), and tables of major correlates of poverty. To finalize the numbers, core
                           members of SSL will travel to Washington DC to participate in learning events and a study tour to
                           DC area statistical institutions (Bureau of Labor Statistics, Census Bureau).

                           Dissemination – In addition to printed copies of the statistical abstract, the final anonymized datasets
                           will be properly archived and disseminated through the SSL website or other appropriate data sharing
                           platform.

                           Bank Executed Component - In addition to the activities about that will be executed by Statistics
                           Sierra Leone, there will also be a small Bank Executed component of the project. This component
                           will constitute less than five percent of the total financing and will be targeting towards auditing and
                           monitoring activities. In previous activities (not funded by the World Bank) there have been
                           concerns regarding the misuse of resources and of quality issues. This funding mitigates those risks
                           by hiring a procurement consultant to prevent any inadvertent mistakes, an independent financial
                           auditor to review expenditures, and an independent verification team to spot check data quality by
                           conducting partial re-interviews. In addition, the most recent procurement review of Statistics Sierra
                           Leone indicated that they do not have sufficient capacity to carry out the procurement in accordance
Public Disclosure Copy




                           with World Bank guidelines, and in that case made the hiring of a procurement consultant a
                           condition of approval.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Kristen Himelein
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 14-Dec-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Pablo Fajnzylber (PMGR)                                      Date: 19-Dec-2015
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
