                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC15781

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Liberia                        Project ID:       P158005
                            Project Name:        Strengthening Liberia Health System
                            Team Leader(s):      Shunsuke Mabuchi,Rianna L. Mohammed-Roberts
                            Estimated Date       29-Jan-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GHN07                          Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):           Health system performance (50%), Population and reproductive health (50%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    4.9                     Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                       0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Ebola Recovery and Reconstruction MPF                                                        4.9
                            Environment        B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           17. The proposed Project Development Objective (PDO) is to contribute to the improvement of
                           maternal and neonatal health services through strengthening of the medical school functions and
                           health facility and community services in target counties.
                           C. Project Description
                           Component 1 (US$2.3 million): Strengthening of medical school (AMD) function

                           21. This project aims to strengthen Liberia’s health workforce by strengthening the educational
                           institutions and training environments necessary to increase the production of physicians. A
                           meaningful increase in the presence of Liberian medical doctors can be achieved by focusing on
                           discrete and targeted interventions at Liberia’s one medical school, the A.M. Dogliotti College of
                           Medicine (AMD) and at the teaching hospitals to which AMD will send its students for clinical
                           training.

                           22. Specifically, activities proposed under this component will aim to transform AMD into a state-of-
                         the-art medical school with targeted improvements to its operations, infrastructure, learning
                         environments, and living spaces. In addition, grant funding will be used to equip at least one of the
                         designated teaching hospitals with essential medical equipment and supplies needed for quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                         clinical teaching.

                         23. The deliverables and potential activities under this component are described below:

                         24. Deliverable 1: One functional and operational medical school with the capacity to provide
                         medical education and training to medical students.
                         (i) Essential medical equipment and supplies necessary for the delivery of quality education at AMD
                         procured.
                         (ii) AMD skills lab and training environment planning completed and equipment procured.
                         (iii) Vehicles procured to transport students from AMD to the clinical sites.
                         (iv) Clinical equipment and medical supplies procured and installed in at least one selected teaching
                         hospital.

                         25. Deliverable 2: One functional and operational medical school with the capacity to properly house
                         medical students and accommodate faculty.
                         (i) Dormitories and dining hall at AMD expanded and renovated to accommodate all medical
                         students and to meet students’ basic living needs.
                         (ii) Faculty accommodation and offices renovated/built at AMD.
                         (iii) Classroom and lecture hall space expanded at AMD to accommodate more students and make
                         progress towards accreditation.

                         Component 2 (US$2.3 million): Support to improve reproductive, maternal, and neonatal health
                         services delivery

                         26. This component aims to strengthen the capacity of the national health system in the reduction of
                         maternal and newborn mortality. Knowledge from high impact evidence-based interventions that are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         known to have significantly contributed to the reduction of maternal mortality in similar contexts will
                         be used. Activities will build on existing systems and structures at all levels of the healthcare
                         delivery; and will support initiatives that ensure coordination, capacity development for maternal
                         health services including death surveillance and response, and meaningful community engagement
                         and monitoring mechanisms.

                         27. Specifically, activities proposed under this component will increase access to and utilization of
                         comprehensive maternal health services including EmONC and family planning, improve the
                         technical skills and capacity of health care providers and training institutions to provide quality
                         services, improve MDSR at the District and County levels in all eight counties, and improve the
                         capacity of community health structures to deliver and monitor maternal health service provision in
                         targeted catchment communities.

                         28. The deliverables and list of potential activities under this component are described below. The
                         activities will be prioritized for each health facility based on its needs:

                         29. Deliverable 1: 15 health facilities including hospitals are supported to provide comprehensive
                         maternal health care including EmONC services.
                         (i) Procure and distribute essential equipment, lifesaving drugs, contraceptives and medical supplies
                         for all health facilities;
                         (ii) Procure transportation and communication equipment to improve the referral system in selected
                         health facilities and catchment areas;
                         (iii) Procure and install solar equipment to provide 24 hour electricity for the provision of quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                         maternal health services in selected referral centers;
                         (iv) Improve the supply of essential drugs through robust and innovative approach using mobile
                         technology to avoid stock-out of essential drugs and contraceptives;
                         (v) Conduct supportive supervision and monitoring of Comprehensive Maternal and Newborn health
                         services in targeted facilities and communities;

                         30. Deliverable 2: Ensure the availability of skilled providers in all health facilities 24 hours a day,
                         seven days a week through training and deployment of midwives to targeted health facilities
                         (i) Using the EPHS report and via desk review, identify needed human resource gaps in health
                         facilities, consider recruitment and deployment of required number of midwives;
                         (ii) Conduct new and refresher trainings for 150 skilled providers in various topics in maternal health
                         and EmONC including; EmONC/Life Saving Skills, Helping Baby Breathe /Helping Mothers
                         Survive, Family Panning, Infection Prevention and Control;
                         (iii) Conduct refresher trainings for Instructional staff in demonstration and use of laboratory
                         materials to improve the clinical skills of pre-service cadres;

                         31. Deliverable 3: The National MDSR strengthened and expanded to district and community levels
                         to provide reliable data on maternal deaths
                         (i) Develop an innovative approach using mobile technology to ensure timely identification and
                         notification of maternal deaths at community and district levels in a way that ensures timely review
                         and response in two out of eight counties
                         (ii) Provide technical and financial support to strengthen the capacity of the existing MDSR system
                         in line with international standards
                         (iii) Establish multi- and inter-sectorial partnership in the implementation of effective MDSR at all
                         levels
                         (iv) Create awareness and sensitization on MDSR through multimedia and other traditional
Public Disclosure Copy




                         community communication channels

                         32. Deliverable 4: 15 catchment communities’ health structures are established with strong
                         leadership to deliver and monitor maternal health service provision and MDSR
                         (i) Train and equip Contact Tracers that transition into Community Health Workers (CHW) to
                         provide community based outreach maternal health services as well as the distribution of Family
                         Planning commodities
                         (ii) Provide capacity building to CHDCs in targeted catchment communities to monitor reproductive
                         health services at community and health facility levels
                         (iii) Create awareness and sensitization on maternal health services through multimedia and other
                         traditional community communication channels

                         Component 3 (US$0.3 million): Grant management and monitoring and evaluation (M&E)

                         33. This component covers the operational costs associated with effectively managing, monitoring
                         and evaluating grant activities. Specifically, support will be provided to the on-going- World Bank
                         supported- Project Implementation Unit (PIU), which will be responsible for all day-to-day activities
                         associated with the grant, as well as procurement, fiduciary management, auditing and grant
                         monitoring activities (including any surveys). The PIU will also be responsible for ensuring
                         necessary monitoring and evaluation (M&E) activities at grant baseline, mid-line and end-line.
                           34. The deliverables and list of potential activities under this component are described below.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           35. Deliverable 1: Strengthened capacity of the PIU to monitor, evaluate, and report on project
                           implementation progress to inform decision-making.
                           (i) Develop a monitoring framework and work plan and ensure that activity implementations is
                           timely and responsive at various levels
                           (ii) Recruit and deploy project staff to monitor project implementation and reporting
                           (iii) Procure logistics to conduct effective monitoring of project implementation
                           (iv) Develop and disseminate periodic reports on project implementation
                           (v) Conduct project evaluation and disseminate report
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           49. The AMD for Component 1 is a part of the University of Liberia in Monrovia. The selection of
                           the facilities in the six counties for Component 2 will be finalized based on the discussion with the
                           MOH. The rehabilitation of the health facilities will be done within the premise of existing facilities.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           50. Capacity for medical waste management and safeguard management for rehabilitation is
                           generally low. This will be supplemented by a Technical Assistance (TA) firm to be hired through
                           the EERP for Component 1, and support from UNFPA on waste management and their oversight on
                           rehabilitation under Component 2. The National Medical Waste Management Plan and
                           Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) have been revised/developed, cleared
                           by the Bank, and published on the MOH website through the EERP. They will be updated as needed
                           for this trust fund activities.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Demba Balde (GSU01)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Ruma Tavorath (GEN06)
                           Sekou Abou Kamara (GEN07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         Yes              Some components of this project will include
                           BP 4.01                                               construction and rehabilitation works such as
                                                                                 expansion of classrooms, lecture hall, dormitory
                                                                                 and dining hall, and construction or renovation
                                                                                 of faculty accommodations and offices that are
                                                                                 likely to have potential negative impacts on the
                                                                                 environment as well as health as safety related
                                                                                 risks to workers.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No               The project will not have impacts on natural
                                                                                 habitat as none of the project activities will be in
                                                                                 areas with high biodiversity value, or close to
                                                                                 any protected areas.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No               The project does involve forests or forestry.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No                   The project will not finance the acquisition,
                                                                                             transportation, distribution, storage or use of
                                                                                             pesticide.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No                   The project activities will not involve large
                           BP 4.11                                                           excavation. However, chance finds procedure
                                                                                             may be included in sub projects ESMPs when
                                                                                             large excavations are anticipated, as matter of
                                                                                             precaution.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No                   There are no indigenous people in the project
                                                                                             area.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No                   The project will not require land acquisition as
                           4.12                                                              well as involuntary resettlement.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No                   The project does not have impact on
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              international waters.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No                   The project activities will not be in disputed
                           7.60                                                              areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  As per the Bank procedures for Small Recipient-Executed Trust Fund Grants, "the TL updates a
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  29-Dec-2015
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              An updated ESMF and medical waste management plan (WMP) are being developed based on the
                              ones for the Emergency Ebola Response Project (EERP).
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Shunsuke Mabuchi,Rianna L. Mohammed-Roberts
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                     Date: 22-Dec-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)                                        Date: 22-Dec-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
