                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA17596
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Moldova                           Project ID:      P127734
                            Project Name:     Tax Administration Modernization Project (P127734)
                            Task Team         Oleksii Balabushko,Jan Loeprick
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         18-Apr-2016                       Estimated   25-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GGO15                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Tax policy and administration (90%), Public expenditure, financial management
                                              and procurement (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:      20.00           Total Bank Financing:                 20.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                              20.00
                              Total                                                                                    20.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve revenue collection, tax compliance and taxpayer services
                            3. Project Description
                           The project seeks to improve STI’s institutional arrangements and management systems to
                           implement a highly automated, low-discretion, risk-based system. The project provides support for:

                                                                      Page 1 of 4
                         revenue collection methodologies and procedures; information technology and other technological
                         infrastructure and training, tax audit and operational systems refinements and technical assistance to
                         underpin STI’s management decisions on organization structure. The project consists of five
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components.

                         •        Component 1. Tax policy reform. This component will finance technical assistance for
                         capacity development on tax policy reform including tax systems and ensuring compliance of the
                         Moldova tax system with the EU-Moldova Association Agreement; support the Ministry of Finance
                         by providing recommendation on implementation of the tax legislation; and the development and
                         implementation of the transfer pricing controls in line with international standards. The component
                         will also support capacity building for revenue forecasting, tax expenditure analysis and tax rulings.
                         •        Component 2. Institutional Development. This component will support changes to STIs
                         organizational structure. It will finance: a comprehensive review and redesign of the organizational
                         structure at headquarters, regional, and local offices based on the STI restructuring plan;
                         implementation of the reorganization based on the restructuring plan; strengthening of capacity for
                         strategic management and performance assessment within the STI; a comprehensive review of HR
                         policies; and development of revised work flow analysis, workforce planning and strategy. In
                         addition, the component will finance: development of a training strategy and curriculum for tax
                         administration staff; purchase of technical and training equipment for the training center and distance
                         learning system; and building capacity of STI through study tours, managerial, human resource
                         management and language training. The component will support the development and
                         implementation of a taxpayer service and communication strategy, taxpayer journey mapping and
                         recommendations on improvement of the taxpayer experience.
                         •        Component 3. Operational Development. Compliance management based on self-assessment
                         and risk management is the cornerstone of an efficient tax administration. The component will
                         finance: technical assistance on strengthening the capacity of the Large Taxpayers Office, in
                         particular on profiling of entities to be serviced by LTO; improved compliance risk management and
                         audit practices; and required organizational changes, and capacity building through audit training.
                         The component will also enhance STI capacity for enforced collection and appeals handling. It will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support analysis of case-workflow management for appeals, audits and collection.
                         •        Component 4. IT Infrastructure and System Modernization: This component will acquire and
                         implement an Integrated Tax Management System that will unify IT support for all business
                         functions including: user role management and security, transaction audit trails and logging, taxpayer
                         registration, returns processing, accounting, payment processing, collections and enforcement,
                         objections and appeals, audit, risk assessment, management reporting, case work flow, data
                         warehouse and business intelligence tools, a document management system and a portal interface.
                         The new system will provide for electronic interaction with the taxpayers and enable further taxpayer
                         self-service through the web portal. It will be supported by an integrated data management system,
                         include all required hardware, network improvements, and software to support the ITMS and data
                         warehouse, and establish a business continuity recovery system. It will also provide a bi-directional
                         link to other systems that share data with the STI including Customs Service, CNAS, and NHIF. The
                         new system will be installed in the GoM’s e-Government data center and/or the Ministry of Finance
                         data center, it will reuse appropriate existing GoM e-services provided by e-GOV and will have data
                         replication to a business continuity center. ITMS implementation will include user training in the use
                         of all ITMS functions and the use of the management reporting, business intelligence and document
                         management tools
                         •        Component 5. Project Management and Change Management: Funds under this component
                         will be used to support the functioning of the Project Implementation Unit within the MSTI, which
                         will carry out day-to-day project management and help the MSTI coordinate project activities and

                                                                      Page 2 of 4
                           interact with all local and international entities involved in the project as well as facilitating
                           engagement of a private sector advisory panel. The component will finance: national and
                           international consultants to support procurement, financial management and technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           implementation; international advisors for IT project management, training and change management;
                           and operating costs associated with the implementation of the Project. In addition, the subcomponent
                           will finance audit and operational expenses.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               No           No civil works included in the project
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:

                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:

                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                       Page 3 of 4
                             impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Public Disclosure Copy




                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Oleksii Balabushko,Jan Loeprick
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)                         Date: 09-Apr-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
