INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15196
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P148129
Project Name: China: Tianjin Urban Transport Improvement Project (P148129)
Task Team       Gerald Paul Ollivier
Leader(s):
Estimated       21-Oct-2015                Estimated    19-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT102                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Urban Transport (100%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    224.27             Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
0
Borrower                                                                  124.27
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     100.00
Total                                                                     224.27
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed PDO is to leverage the Tianjin metro system and to promote walking and biking in the
urban core (in Heping and Nankai) in order to make transport greener and safer in Tianjin and draw
lessons for other large cities.
3. Project Description
The Project consists of five closely related components to achieve the overall objective. Component
Page 1 of 10


﻿1 focuses on walking and biking improvements within the urban center. Component 2 focuses on
accessibility improvements to the mass transit system. Component 3 establishes a pilot for a Tianjin
public bike sharing system (PBS). Component 4 focuses on the construction of bus terminals/parking
facilities close to metro stations in underserved areas. Altogether they will support integration across
O
transport modes, centered on the metro network and the central part of the city. The principles of
component 1, 2 and 3 will be applied in specific areas, and results monitored to allow for scaling up
and replication in other districts and other cities. Component 5 includes all technical assistance
activities and will support the development of such replication approach. The detailed description is
as follows.
Component 1: Green Transport Improvement in Heping and Nankai Districts (estimated cost: US$
89.5 million, 41% of total project cost). This Component will finance the redevelopment of the
streetscape in parts of the Heping and Nankai Districts to create a connected, vibrant and sustainable
urban space (spanning over about 7.2 km2 with a population of 187,000 and an estimated 239,000
jobs). It will follow a "Complete Street" approach that rebalances the street layout to better reflect
current and expected mode shares. For this area, it implies reprioritizing the layout to better support
biking and walking in combination with public transport and in particular metro lines that connect to
the rest of the city.
The component will include the creation of an integrated pedestrian and bike network with
infrastructure investment along about 42 streets (including about 26 streets in Heping District and 16
streets in Nankai District) for a total length of about 50 km. It will seek to systematically reduce road
safety hazards and existing bottlenecks for non-motorized transport (NMT), drawing on results of an
iRAP review, while maintaining mobility for all, including the less mobile. The streets will be
repaved with safety facilities including bollards separating NMT from vehicles, pedestrian crossing
facilities, street furniture, signage, greening, bus stops, junction improvements and selective upgrades
of underground drainage pipelines.
Component 2: Metro Access Improvement (US$ 89.1 million, 40% of costs): The project will
finance civil works for selected intersection improvements, interconnection facilities (bike parking,
bus connection/terminal, taxi connection, landscaping and park and ride) at about 111 metro stations,
along existing Tianjin Metro Line 1, 2, 3, 9, and Line 5 and 6 (under construction). This
subcomponent would increase the catchment area of these metro stations and leverage large past
o investments in the mass transit system.
Component 3: Public Bike Sharing System Pilot (US$ 23.1 million, 10% of costs): This Component
will finance the establishment of a pilot PBS system in the core urban area of Tianjin, as well as in
areas along metro lines, to support last mile accessibility. It will include about 12,370 bikes and 446
stations. The civil works include the pavement of the PBS stations. The project will also finance the
PBS management system, including hardware and software, the provision of bikes, docking poles,
CCTV and other required devices and equipment. Counterpart funding will cover the first three years
of subsidies for the service.
Component 4: Bus Terminal Development (US$ 16.0 million, 7% of costs): The civil works include
the pavement of the terminals, as well as the bus stops, bus parking, car parking, bike parking and
service buildings. The project also will finance equipment within the bus terminals for bus operation.
Those five terminals are part of a program of bus terminal development identified under a previous
World Bank project and are located primaril y at the end of metro lines, acting as a catchment area
for the poorer population located there. Joint commercial development will be carried out above one
Page 2 of 10


﻿of the bus terminal (Beichen Liuyuan). With this project, the existing bus parking in bus terminal
will increase from 68% to 71.5%, towards the end target of 80% for the city as a whole.
Component 5: Technical Assistance (US$2.9 million, 1% of costs): The topics for technical
U         assistance include:
(a)    Sustainable green urban transport development strategic study for the Tianjin Central Area
(Phase 1 and Phase 2);
(b)    Parking management improvement scheme in the Core Area of Tianjin;
(c)    Public bike sharing system implementation result evaluation;
(d)    Multi-channel financing mechanism for urban transport; and
(e)    Surveys and support for the analysis of and reporting on the project impact.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project is located in the city of Tianjin, about 150 km southeast of Beijing. It is a
renowned historic, cultural and port city in China and one of the four municipalities directly under
the Central Government. The municipality spreads over a total area of 11,916 km2, with a total
population of 15.2 million and a GDP per capita of US$16,718 in 2014. The physical activities of the
proposed project are all within the central urban built-up area. The street re-pavement under
component 1, mass transit access improvement and public bike stations will all be constructed within
the right-of-way of existing streets and existing green belt/parking spaces. Bus terminals will be
constructed in existing parking lots or bus terminals. There is no land acquisition expected. Given the
urban context, there is no sensitive ecological environment site (e.g. natural habitat, protected area
etc.) within the area of influence of the project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Meixiang Zhou (GSURR)
Peishen Wang (GENO2)
0
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project will include construction activities for the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                renovation of urban streets (e.g. re-pavement, drainage
improvement, street facility and landscape improvement),
access improvement around mass transit stations
(pedestrian access and parking spaces and green belt) and
construction of bus terminal buildings. The project will
have potential environmental and social impacts during
the construction stage including increased truck traffic
due to material transportation, noise and dust pollution,
pedestrian and business disruption, waste management
issues, and safety concerns. The environmental concerns
during operation stage will mainly be environmental
compliance of bus terminals/ hubs in terms of waste
management, and traffic safety.
Based on project design, all the construction activities are
of limited scale, will be relatively short to implement
Page 3 of 10


﻿(mostly a few months for each road), and will take place
within the right-of-way of existing urban streets, parking
spaces, green belt and bus terminals, . There is no land
acquisition required and there is no sensitive ecological
environment site (e.g. natural habitat, protected area and
parks etc.) within the area of influence of the project. The
main sensitive environmental protection receptors are the
residential communities, hospitals, schools and
kindergartens along the urban streets that are subject to
noise/vibration and dust impacts. The main environmental
and social impacts are those related to the construction
stage, and are expected to be site specific, temporary in
nature, well understood and can be readily mitigated with
good construction management and known mitigation
measures. Therefore, the project is classified as a category
B project. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA)
and a stand-alone Environmental Management Plan
(EMP) have been prepared for the project as per
requirements of OP4.01.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No            The project activities are all within the urban built-up area
4.04                                   of Tianjin. Based on EIA findings, there is no natural
habitat involved in the project area of influence.
Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No            The project activities are all within the urban built-up
area. There is no forest involved, therefore this policy is
not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or
have any impact on pest management practice. This
policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural        Yes           There are 54 historical buildings identified along the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  project streets. Though the road renovation will be within
the existing right-of-way without directly encroaching the
boundary of these buildings, the construction activities
have the potential impact on the safety of these buildings.
Precautionary measures are developed in the EMP. In
addition, chance-find procedures are included in the EMP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            The project activities will be all implemented in the urban
BP 4.10                                area of this city with a long history. There are some Hui
people in Tianmu Town at the north part of the project
area in this city. But these Hui people have already been
well integrated with the majority Han people and have
urbanized livelihoods and speak mandarin Chinese. The
team concludes that there is no indigenous people in the
project site according to the social screening by the task
team and social assessment done by a third party.
Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Page 4 of 10


﻿Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Based on information provided in the FSR, all land
OP/BP 4.12                           required for construction of bus terminals, bicycle parking
lands, bus depots and connections to metro stations has
o                                              been state-owned under the municipal government since
before 2009. During project preparation, great efforts
were made to avoid involuntary resettlement impacts
through optimized selection of project sites and specific
locations of civil works. Nevertheless, involuntary
resettlement cannot be fully ruled out by project appraisal.
There might be location adjustment for bus depots,
parking plots or road intersections which might require
occasional and small amount of demolition of ground
structure during project implementation. This can only be
confirmed as the project implementation goes on at the
specific project sites. Besides, the exact locations of
intersections, entrances and exits of bus stations,
overpasses and underpasses cannot be fully determined
until detailed technical design is finalized. The Bank
safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is triggered to provide
flexibility in implementation in case such needs arise. In
case any involuntary resettlement occurs in this project
during implementation, a resettlement policy framework
(RPF) has been prepared to guide any future land
acquisition and resettlement.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not involve impacts to any dams in the
4.37                                 project area. This policy is not triggered.
Projects on International  No        The project will not involve trans-boundary rivers. The
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 policy is not triggered.
0
Projects in Disputed    No           The project is not located in any disputed areas. The
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     policy is not triggered.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental safeguards
The project will include construction activities for the renovation of urban streets (e.g. re-
pavement, drainage improvement, street facility and landscape improvement), access improvement
around mass transit stations (pedestrian access and parking spaces and green belt) and construction
of bus terminal buildings. The project will have potential environmental and social impacts during
the construction stage including increased truck traffic due to material transportation, noise and
dust pollution, pedestrian and business disruption, waste management issues, and safety concerns.
The environmental concerns during operation stage will mainly be environmental compliance of
bus terminals/ hubs in terms of waste management, and traffic safety.
Page 5 of 10


﻿Based on project design, all the construction activities are of limited scale, will be relatively short
to implement (mostly a few months), and will take place within the right-of-way of existing urban
streets, parking spaces, green belt and bus terminals. Based on information available at this stage,
there is no land acquisition required and there is no sensitive ecological environment site (e.g.
O
Q)          natural habitat, protected area and parks etc.) within the area of influence of the project. The main
sensitive environmental protection receptors are the residential communities, hospitals, schools
and kindergartens along the urban streets that are subject to noise/vibration and dust impacts.
These include 54 historical buildings along the project streets. The construction activities will not
directly intrude into the boundaries of the identified historical buildings. With precautious
protection measures developed in EMP, the impacts on such buildings can be effectively
mitigated.
The main environmental and social impacts are those related to the construction stage, and are
expected to be site specific, temporary in nature, well understood and can be readily mitigated
with good construction management and known mitigation measures. Therefore, the project is
classified as a category B project. An Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and a stand-alone
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) have been prepared as per requirements of OP4.0 1.
Social safeguards
The project will bring in significant positive social impacts through better prioritized street layout
by supporting more effective public transport, and improving connectivity and accessibility to
metro stations and other public transport facilities. The project will include small civil works in
components 1 to 4, to support the construction or improvement of bus terminals and bus stops to
ease transfers to and from metro stations, car parking lots, bike parking facilities and access roads
to those facilities. Based on information provided in the FSR, all land required for such
construction has been under the control of the municipal government since before 2010. During
project preparation, great efforts were made to avoid involuntary resettlement impacts through
optimized selection of project sites and specific locations of civil works.
o
Nevertheless, involuntary resettlement cannot be fully ruled out by project appraisal. There might
be location adjustment for bus depots, parking plots or road intersections which might require
occasional and small amount of demolition of ground structure during project implementation.
o           This can only be confirmed as the project implementation goes on at the specific project sites.
Besides, the exact locations of intersections, entrances and exits of bus stations, overpasses and
underpasses cannot be fully determined until detailed technical design is finalized, it is foreseeable
such civil works will only need small pieces of sites all in urban area of the city. The Bank
concluded that the Bank safeguards policy OP/BP 4.12 is triggered to provide flexibility in
implementation in case such needs arise.
The project construction may cause temporary inconvenience in accessing local markets, shops
and public facilities during the construction period. The possible negative impacts will be very lim
ited and can be minimized and mitigated through proper project design and construction
management.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There will be further urbanization development in the project area according to the master plan for
the city.
Page 6 of 10


﻿3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To address the environmental safeguards issues, an Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) and a
stand-alone Environmental Management Plan (EMP) have been prepared for the project as per
a          requirements of OP4.01. The EIA thoroughly addresses the potential adverse environmental and
social impacts, based on which a stand-alone EMP was developed to identify the environmental
management setup, mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting and a budget estimate. The
preparation of EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and guidelines, as
well as Bank's safeguards policies and EHS General Guidelines. The EMP specifies the
institutional arrangement of environmental management and supervision, mitigation measures,
capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP implementation.
The environmental concerns of the project are mainly related to construction activities, including
nuisance of construction noise and dust, traffic disturbance due to large quantity of material
transportation, safety of pedestrian, waste management, business disturbance. These impacts are of
temporary feature and can be readily mitigated with sound planning and construction management.
The key mitigation measures during construction stage include:
- Social disturbance: proper planning of road traffic diversion; coordination with police
department, and prior notice through public media; proper relocation of public utility facilities
without interrupting usual life of local community; arrangement of temporary access with
adequate safety measures (temporary bridge, protection net, night light etc.) for local residents,
business, schools etc.; bulletin board information disclosure.
- Physical cultural resources: restricted construction activities within the right-of-way and
avoid encroachment in the protection boundary of the buildings; safety monitoring to the protected
buildings; chance-find procedures.
- Noise: use of low noise equipment and proper maintenance; installation of temporary
noise reduction facility if necessary; night-time construction will be restricted, and prior public
notice as well as EPB approval are required for activities that need continuous construction over
nighttime.
- Dust: installation of fences around construction areas; frequent water spraying on
construction site and access road to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk materials
and timely site clean up after construction; proper maintenance of construction machines and
vehicles; etc.
- Waste management: careful balance of excavation and backfilling and fully reuse of spoil
material; proper disposal of spoil waste following the city's regulations; proper treatment of
wastewater and sewage before discharge into municipal sewage network; timely collection of
garbage and disposal through municipal collection/disposal system, etc.
- Ecological environment: Minimization of area of disturbance and damage of green space;
relocation of trees; new plantation of trees and green space to off-set the green space loss; timely
removal of spoil material to minimize soil erosion; proper disposal of spoil material according to
city's regulations etc.
The EMP and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) implementation will be managed by the
Tianjin PMO which will assign dedicated environmental and social staff. The Tianjin PMO has
Page 7 of 10


﻿prepared and implemented two prior World Bank projects and therefore it has extensive
experience with World Bank safeguards policies and procedures. The PMO will be directly
responsible for ensuring the EMP and RPF implementation, with support from a project
management company. A safeguards (including environmental and social) management unit will
O
be established with dedicated both environmental and social staff as required. The EMP mitigation
measures will be incorporated into bidding documents and thus the contracts, and implemented by
the contractors. The contractors and supervision engineers will be required to assign qualified
environmental staff to their team to ensure effective implementation of the EMP.
To identify specific social risks and impacts and design proper measures to mitigate negative
social impacts and promote positive social impacts, a social assessment was done by a professional
consulting team. As part of the social assessment activities, intensive consultation was undertaken
with local residents (including no less than 30% women) in project sites and other stakeholders
like vulnerable people, drivers and transport policemen. Results of the public consultation are
incorporated in project design, covering road safety improvement, public participation,
consideration of needs for the poor and elderly road users. The PMO will coordinate another three
rounds of public consultation to reflect opinions of the public upon the project implementation.
In case any involuntary resettlement occurs in this project, a resettlement policy framework (RPF)
has been prepared to guide future land acquisition and resettlement. The RPF sets detailed
principles and procedures as well as other crucial requirements for handling involuntary
resettlement. Implementation of the RPF will be followed by Tianjin PMO and closely monitored,
internally and externally, during the supervision stage of the Project. A RAP will be prepared if
and when required based on the RPF implementation during project implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project will bring significant benefits to the people in Tianjin by improving quality of mass
transit, regular buses and non-motorized transport. The key project stakeholders are the general
public of Tianjin City, especially the local communities along/near the project roads and sites.
During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations
were conducted in the project area following both national environmental and social policies as
well as World Bank policies (OP4.01 and OP4.12). Consultations were conducted through a
*           combination of opinion surveys and public meetings among the concerned communities with
equal gender participation. Information about the project, potential environmental and social
impacts, and planned mitigation measures were provided to the public during consultation. Main
concerns from the public include traffic and accessibility impact during construction, nuisance of
noise (particularly night-time construction), dust and traffic safety. These concerns were addressed
in the EIA, and necessary mitigation measures were developed in EMP and the project design.
The draft EIA/EMP have been locally disclosed on July 23, 2015 in the website of Tianjin
Environmental Impact Assessment Center, with announcement published in Bohai Morning
newspaper. The final EIA/EMP were disclosed again in the same website on September 8, 2015.
The RPF has been locally disclosed on Tianjin government Rural-Urban Construction Bureau
website on August 18, 2015, and the final RPF was disclosed in the same website on Sept. 18,
2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Page 8 of 10


﻿Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           00000000
O
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    08-Sep-2015
Comments: The draft EIA/EMP have been locally disclosed in Chinese on July 23, 2015 in the
website of Tianjin Environmental Impact Assessment Center, with announcement
published in Bohai Morning newspaper.
The final EIA/EMP were disclosed again in the same website on September 8, 2015.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           00000000
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    18-Sep-2015
Comments: The RPF has been locally disclosed on Tianjin government Rural-Urban
Construction Bureau website on August 18, 2015, and the draft final RPF was
disclosed on the same website on Sept. 18, 2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes[X] No[  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ]  No [X]  TBD [  ]
o          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[    ]  NA[    ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gerald Paul Ollivier
o         Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                   Date: 09-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                   Date: 11-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


