INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13962
U
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P132562
Project Name: CN-Hubei Xiaogan Logistic Infrastructure (P132562)
Task Team       Reda Hamedoun
Leader(s):
Estimated       13-Oct-2015                Estimated    21-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT102                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Urban Transport (87%), Public administration- Transportation (13%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     147.56            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   47.56
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     100.00
Total                                                                     147.56
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To enhance connectivity and efficiency of the logistics operations of the Xiaogan Logistics Park in
Hubei Province.
3. Project Description
The project comprises a mix of infrastructure, systems, and technical assistance to be implemented
through the three components described below.
Page 1 of 12


﻿Component 1 - Connected Logistics (total: USD84.61 million; IBRD financing: USD52.65 million).
This component will finance a selection of external connections to the Logistics Park and comprises:
(i) Vertical Road No. 1 (5.4 km); (ii) Horizontal Road No. 8 (1.3 km); and (iii) Secondary Road No.
O
50 (1.7 km), providing key connections within the AEZ. The works will include drainage, water
supply, power, gas and telecom connections along these roads.
Component 2 - Efficient Logistics (total: USD57.95 million; IBRD financing: USD44.28 million).
This component will finance: (i) a Logistics Management Building hosting offices for the firms in
the Logistics Park, customs offices, business registration, as well as various other services including
community facilities; (ii) a Public Information Platform that will allow more efficient logistics
operations through collection and analysis of freight data, matching of logistics demand with existing
capacity, and the management of internal logistics park operations comprising seven sub-platforms
as follows: communications, big data analysis, logistics trading, on demand software for smaller
logistics providers, E-Government support, internal management of LP, and third party payment
services; and (iii) an ITS covering 60 junctions as well as main roads within the AEZ
Component 3 - Institutional Strengthening (total: USD2.81 million; IBRD financing: USD2.81
million). This component includes:
a.     Provision of technical assistance on: (i) ITS procurement, operation and management
including training of government staff and other stakeholders. The Bank's added value here is to
ensure not only that the ITS equipment bid is technically sound and fair to bidders but also that ITS
equipment on the ground is sustained and fully utilized by the Traffic Police as a key measure to
achieve connectivity and efficiency in the road network and for freight movements; (ii) technical
assistance on green logistics policies to mitigate environmental externalities related to the LP's
freight activities, to develop green performance indicators and guidelines for the subsequent
construction, management and operation of the LP. The Bank's added value here is to make sure that
improved connectivity and efficiency is linked to sustainable freight practices and that increased
freight movements do not adversely affect the environment; (iii) socio-economic study to assess the
project's impact on the local economic activity, with a particular focus on the reduction of logistics
costs and reliability improvements; and (iv) external monitoring of land acquisition and resettlement;
a        b.      Carrying out of road safety activities including the improvement of accident data collection
and analysis, road safety audit of new roads pre- and post-opening, Road User Education (RUE)
campaigns, activities focused on rural inhabitants who will face changes as the area is urbanized,
training for truck drivers and vehicle safety inspection programs for trucks. The Bank's added value
here is to make sure that improved connectivity and efficiency do not adversely impact road safety;
c.     Provision of project management support, including: (i) selection of an international
consulting firm to provide project management support, including review of designs, reports, bidding
documents and safety protocols and support in construction management, contract management,
payment process, financial management and report filing; (ii) outreach program of conference
presentations, engagement with city officials, seminars with other practitioners, visits to other
logistic parks under development and links with universities in order to disseminate the Bank's added
value and foster replicability; (iii) training and study tour for the benefit of PMO and AEZ staff. The
Bank's added value here brings the benefits of international experience to local practices; and (iv)
provision of office equipment for the PMO and the AEZ.
Page 2 of 12


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is located in Xiaogan, a prefecture-level city in east-central Hubei province, some 60 km
northwest of the provincial capital Wuhan. It has jurisdiction over seven counties (two of which are
listed as national poverty counties) with a land area of 8,910 km2 and a population of 5.27 million in
2012. Around 50% of Xiaogan's population was below the income line of RMB 12,000 marking the
bottom 40% of the population, the World Bank's definition of poverty in China.
The infrastructure roads under the project are in the logistics park zone of the Xiaogan Airport
Economic Zone (AEZ). The logistics park zone has a total area of 3.6 km2 with current land use of
farmland and rural communities (with a total population of ca. 28,000). The development of the
logistics park zone is underway, with a few trunk roads completed according to the road network
plan and a few land patches being developed by private logistics companies.
The current land use of the three proposed roads and the proposed management building is basically
farmland. There are no sensitive ecological environment sites (e.g. natural habitat, protected area,
national parks etc.) or physical cultural resources within the area of influence of the project. The
main sensitive environmental receptors are a number of rural communities and one drinking water
supply plant (with groundwater wells) along the project roads.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Peishen Wang (GENO2)
Zhefu Liu (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The physical activities of the proposed project include the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               construction of three roads and one management building
in the Airport Economic Zone of Xiaogan City. The
project roads and the building will be constructed on a
land which currently is rural farmland with scattered rural
residents, the project will have potential social
disturbance and environmental impacts during the
construction and operation. Given the simple and
straightforward project activities in a rural farmland
context intensively modified by human activity, the main
environmental impacts envisaged are mostly those
impacts related to construction activities, which are well-
understood, temporary in nature and site-specific, and can
be adequately avoided, minimized and mitigated with
good construction management practices. Moreover, the
originally planned Chentian Avenue which crosses the
Baishuihu Lake, a natural habitat, was dropped from the
project during the preparation stage. Therefore, RSS has
agreed to the task team's proposal to change the
environment Category to B from Category A as initially
proposed.
Page 3 of 12


﻿Since the AEZ is still in its very early stage of
development, there will be substantial development
activities and land use change in the project area
according to the city's master plan. Therefore, there will
be major cumulative impacts envisaged in the long-term,
which mainly include significant land use change from
current farmland to future urban residential, commercial
and industrial land. Ecological environmental will also
shift from a rural environment to an urbanized
environment. Loss of farmland will lead to loss of
agricultural productivity and adverse impacts on
livelihood of rural population. Development of
urbanization and industrialization will also lead to
increased wastewater, solid waste and wastewater gas
emission in the area.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No            Based on the environmental assessment, the project is
4.04                                  located in a rural area which has been heavily influenced
by human activities. The project activities will not affect
any protected reserves, natural habitats, or established or
proposed critical natural habitats. Therefore, this policy is
not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No            The project area is a typical rural area with farmlands, fish
ponds and rural communities. There is no forest within
the area of influence of the project. Therefore, this policy
is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The project will not include procurement of pesticides or
pesticide application equipment, nor lead to substantially
increased pesticide use and subsequent increase in health
and environmental risk, or could maintain or expand
present pest management practices that are unsustainable.
Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural        No            Based on the environmental assessment, there are no
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  physical cultural resources identified within the area of
influence. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No            Based on task team's due diligence review, Xiaogan is a
BP 4.10                               prefecture city with a population of 5.27 million,
including a Chinese minority population of about 7,000
people scatted in the urban area and representing 44
Chinese minorities. No Indigenous Peoples, as identified
by the Bank, are present in, or have collective attachment
to the project area. The information provided by the
municipal department in charge of minority affairs also
confirmed that the project area is a Han population
centralized area without any Chinese minority community
in the project area and Han population is not identified as
minority by the Bank. As a result, no Indigenous Peoples,
Page 4 of 12


﻿as identified by the Bank, are present in, or have
collective attachment to the project area. Therefore, this
policy is not triggered and the IPDP is not required.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes           The Bank policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
OP/BP 4.12                             4.12) is triggered and the resettlement action plan was
prepared for Bank clearance. The land acquisition and
resettlement activities will consist in the demolition of
9,768 square meters of private houses, the land
acquisition of 35 hectares, and the resettlement of 45 rural
families (242 people).
A due diligence review of all previous activities and
infrastructure in the project area prior to project
identification by the Bank was carried out. The review
encompassed activities that included logistics park
infrastructure, landscaping and road sections. The PMO
has already relocated 205 rural families and 360 hectares
of land were acquired in 2012 and 2014 for the logistics
park infrastructure, landscaping and road networks. Based
on the resettlement census survey, all of the 205 families
opted for in-kind resettlement compensation. It was
reported that all payments for land acquisition were made
and that there are no outstanding grievances. The due
diligence report indicated that land acquisition will not
affect people's livelihood but will rather lift up their
income and living standards. The report also
recommended that potential future grievances to be
monitored externally and by the Linkong District
Management Committee. The due diligence review
reported and confirmed that all actions carried out were in
compliance with Chinese land laws, Hubei provincial land
administrative management regulations and local
regulations, and were consistent with the objectives of OP
4.12.
In case of any land acquisition and resettlement activities
associated with project modification or project
restructuring, these will be carried out in accordance with
the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF
includes the same entitlements as in the RAP.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                   of any dams as defined under this policy. This policy is
not triggered.
Projects on International  No          The project is not on international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Page 5 of 12


﻿Projects in Disputed    No           The project is not in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental safeguards
The physical activities of the proposed project include construction of three roads and one
management building in the Airport Economic Zone of Xiaogan City. These roads and the
building are located in an area which is currently rural farmland with scattered rural residents. The
project will have potential social disturbance and environmental impacts during the construction
stage, including land use change, loss of surface vegetation, nuisance of dust and noise,
transportation of large quantities of materials, disposal of excessive spoil waste and solid waste
generated from demolished buildings, wastewater management, traffic disturbance and public
safety concerns, disturbance to daily life of the nearby communities/businesses etc. The main
environmental and social concerns during the operation stage include road safety, air quality and
noise impact.
Since the AEZ is still in its very early stage of development according to the city's master plan,
there will be substantial land use change in the project area in the future, which will have major
cumulative impacts in the long-term. Such impacts mainly include significant land use change
from current farmland to future urban residential, commercial and industrial land. Ecological
environmental will also shift from a rural environment to an urbanized environment. Loss of
farmland will lead to loss of agricultural productivity and adverse impacts on livelihood of rural
population. Development of urbanization and industrialization will also lead to increased
wastewater, solid waste and wastewater gas emission in the area.
Based on the environmental assessment, the project area is a typical rural area with farmlands, fish
ponds and rural communities. There are no sensitive ecological environment sites (e.g. natural
habitat, protected area, national parks etc.) or physical cultural resources within the area of
influence of the project. The main sensitive environmental receptors are a number of rural
communities and one drinking water supply plant (with groundwater wells) along the project
roads. The main environmental impacts envisaged are mostly those impacts related to construction
activities, which are temporary in nature and site-specific, and can be adequately avoided,
minimized and mitigated with good construction management practices. Therefore, with adequate
development and proper implementation of the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), the
potential environmental and social impacts can be adequately mitigated to an acceptable level.
Social safeguards
The Bank policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12) is triggered and the Resettlement
Action Plan was prepared. The land acquisition and resettlement relocation will consist of: the
demolition of 9,768 square meters of private houses with 45 rural families to be resettled; land
acquisition of 35 hectares.
Page 6 of 12


﻿A due diligence review of all previous activities and infrastructure in the project area prior to
project identification by the Bank was carried out. The review encompassed activities that
included logistics park infrastructure, landscaping and road sections. The PMO has already
relocated 205 rural families and 360 hectares of land were acquired in 2012 and 2014 for the
O
Q)          logistics park infrastructure, landscaping and road networks. Based on the resettlement census
survey, all of the 205 families opted for in-kind resettlement compensation. It was reported that all
payments for land acquisition were made and that there are no outstanding grievances. The due
diligence report indicated that land acquisition will not affect people's livelihood but lift rather up
their income and living standards. The report also recommended that potential future grievances to
be monitored externally and by the Linkong District Management Committee. The due diligence
review reported and confirmed that all actions carried out were in compliance with Chinese land
laws, Hubei provincial land administrative management regulations and local regulations, and
were consistent with the objectives of OP 4.12.
In case of any land acquisition and resettlement activities associated with project modification or
project restructuring, these will be carried out in accordance with the Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF). The RPF includes the same entitlements as in the RAP.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There will be further urbanization development in the project area according to the city's master
plan, therefore, there will be significant land use change from current farmland to future urban
residential, commercial and industrial land. Ecological environmental will also shift from a rural
environment to an urbanized environment. Loss of farmland will lead to loss of agricultural
productivity and adverse impacts on livelihood of rural population. Development of urbanization
and industrialization will also lead to increased wastewater, solid waste and wastewater gas
emission in the area. To address such cumulative impacts, Xiaogan City has developed a Strategic
EIA for the development of the AEZ, which addressed the indirect/cumulative long term impacts
due to future development activities in the project area. The SEIA is in the final stages of its
approval process from the provincial environmental authority.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
With and without project analysis was conducted, as well as alternative for spoil disposal
approaches. The EIA includes a comparison between "roadside disposal" and "spoil ground
disposal" options. Roadside disposal is an existing practice in the area. However it can lead to
significant soil erosion. As an alternative, three sites of spoil disposal were selected. Currently
these sites are all fish ponds and are planned to be turned to construction land as per master plan.
Therefore, using these sites would not only reduce the soil erosion, but can also provide the spoil
as filling materials, so that the site can be prepared for future development use.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental safeguards
To address the environmental safeguard issues, an EIA, a stand-alone EMP and an EA Executive
Summary have been prepared for the project. The EIA thoroughly addresses the potential adverse
environmental and social impacts, including cumulative impacts for the overall development of
AEZ. Based on the findings of the EIA, a stand-alone EMP has been developed to specify
environmental management setup, mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting and budget
Page 7 of 12


﻿estimate. The preparation of the EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and
guidelines, as well as the Bank's safeguard policies and EHS General Guidelines. The EMP
specifies the institutional arrangements of environmental management and supervision, the
mitigation measures, the capacity training plan, the monitoring plan, and the budget estimates of
O
EMP implementation. It also includes a generic Environmental Code Of Practices (ECOPs) for
contractors for inclusion in the bidding documents and contracts.
The key mitigation measures in the EMP include:
-     Social impacts: The main social impacts include land acquisition and resettlement
(demolition of 9,768 square meters of private houses with 45 rural families to be resettled; land
acquisition of 35 hectares), as well as livelihood impacts due to land use change. To address such
impacts, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been prepared in line with relevant Chinese laws
and regulations, and World Bank OP 4.12. (see social safeguards section below for details). Other
measures addressing social impacts include proper relocation of public utility facilities without
interrupting the usual life of the local community; coordination with the police department, and
prior notice through public media; disclosure of project information and grievance channel on the
project sites; proper planning of road traffic diversion and arrangement of temporary access with
adequate safety measures (temporary bridge, protection net, night light etc.) for local residents.
-      Noise impact: use of low noise equipment and proper maintenance; installation of a
temporary noise reduction facility if necessary; proper arrangement of construction schedule to
minimize noise impact on communities; restriction of night-time construction, and prior public
notice as well as EPB approval required for activities that need continuous construction over
nighttime; proper arrangement of material hauling route to avoid communities, with speed limit
and no-homing requirement; periodic monitoring of noise impact, etc.
-      Dust: installation of fences around construction areas; frequent water spraying on
construction site and access road to suppress dust; bulk material storage sites away from
communities with proper covering; covering of trucks transporting bulk materials and timely site
clean up after construction; proper maintenance of construction machines and vehicles; purchasing
of commercial asphalt to avoid construction asphalt mixing plant; ban on burning waste, etc.
-      Waste management: careful balance of excavation and backfilling and reuse of spoil
material to the extent possible; prior selection of earth borrow and spoil disposal sites with prior
reclamation plan; timely disposal of spoil waste in the designated sites; timely restoration/
reclamation of borrow and disposal sites once completed; timely collection of garbage and
a           disposal through municipal collection/disposal system, etc.
-      Wastewater management: arrangement of camp sites away from water bodies; septic-tank
system used for camp sites; proper treatment of construction wastewater with sedimentation tank
and oil separation; ban on direct discharge of wastewater into farmland and water pond; feeding
wastewater from the management building during operation into the municipal sewage network,
etc.
-      Minji Water Supply Plant: construction activities will be strictly limited within the
boundary of the construction site; workers are not allowed to enter the plant;
-      Ecological environment: minimization of the area of disturbance within right-of-way;
reserve top soil for green belt plantation; timely removal of spoil material to minimize soil erosion;
proper disposal of spoil material in designated sites; enforcement of soil erosion control plan; new
plantation of trees and green space to off-set the green space loss; education of worker on wildlife
protection, etc.
-      Induced/cumulative impacts: An SEIA for the whole AEZ Master Plan has been
conducted by Xiaogan, which addressed the land use change, ecological environmental impacts,
with considerations of environmental and resources carrying capacities, and developed a series of
Page 8 of 12


﻿mitigation measures which will be implemented by relevant city governmental departments
according to their responsibilities, including farmland offset according to national land regulations,
construction of environmental infrastructures, industrial pollution control, resettlement of local
community, reemployment program/training etc. Key findings and recommendations of this
O
existing SEIA are summarized in the EIA and EMP.
Social safeguards
The project will relocate the displaced families at least three months before the demolition of their
houses. Three centralized resettlement sites are under construction and are expected to be
completed by December 2015, while the civil works are anticipated to start in June, 2016. This
mitigation measure will allow displaced families to move directly to their final resettlement sites
and avoid a transitional period.
The project supports the development of an innovative approach to safeguard compliance by
establishing information systems to monitor, inter alia, the existing pool of labor skills and match
them with market demand or training programs, with an emphasis on resettled people.
Xiaogan PMO will oversee project land acquisition and resettlement. An independent consultancy
group will be hired to monitor resettlement and provide bi-annual progress reports. Any land
acquisition and resettlement activities associated with project modification or project restructuring
will be carried out in accordance with the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). The RPF
includes the same entitlements as in the RAP.
The affected village and all affected families have been identified through the census survey
undertaken during project preparation. The PMO disclosed the RAP on the municipal website and
on a local newspaper on June, 3, 2015. Relevant project information has been provided to the
affected village through newspaper reports, posters and public meetings. A resettlement
information booklet providing details of compensation rates, social security policies, other
entitlement policies and grievance procedures will be distributed to the displaced people prior to
resettlement implementation.
Public consultations were carried out by a consulting institute and the project entity to: (a) address
a           the importance of the safeguard policy; (b) disseminate Bank requirements on social safeguards;
(c) mainstreaming gender development and citizen engagement; and (d) incorporate feedback and
concerns in the RAP.
Focus group discussions and key informant interviews were used to consult with potentially
affected persons and obtain their views and preferences regarding resettlement impacts and
mitigation measures, including land compensation, opportunities for employment, training
courses, and social security programs, etc. These views and preferences have been taken into
account during RAP preparation, and the majority of potentially affected persons agree that the
resettlement and rehabilitation measures planned under the RAP are adequate to address and
mitigate any adverse impacts.
The affected village will play a key role in determining and implementing the livelihood
restoration programs. For example, after land compensation amounts are calculated, each
community will determine how land compensation can best be used to improve, or at least restore,
local income-earning potential.
Page 9 of 12


﻿A gender im pact analysis was conducted during project preparation. Concerns raised by female
stakeholders during this analysis included: (a) potential for employment in the logistics park; (b)
availability of private career development programs; (c) women's education programs; (d)
Q)          provision of family living improvements in the relocation sites; (e) provision of education and
healthcare facilities; and (f) inclusion of community members in the decision making on
entitlements to resettlement schemes. These concerns have been incorporated in the RAP. Funds
have been allocated in the RAP to support women's career development and continued
engagement in economic activities. The progress of women's engagement to achieve the targets
will be closely monitored.
The section on grievance redress established processes and procedures to address any complaints
and concerns. The project authority will set up a team to deal with grievances in a transparent, fair
and efficient manner.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, two rounds of public
consultations were conducted in the project area following both national environmental and social
policies, as well as World Bank policies (OP 4.01 and OP 4.12). Consultations were conducted
through a combination of opinion surveys and public meetings in the project area, with
participation of local public and government agencies. Information about the project, potential
environmental and social impacts, and planned mitigation measures were disclosed to the public
prior to consultation. The main concerns from the public include land acquisition and
compensation, nuisance of noise (particularly night-time construction) and dust, traffic and
accessibility impact during construction, traffic safety etc. These concerns were addressed in the
EIA, and mitigation measures were developed in the EMP and embedded in the project design.
The draft EIA was locally disclosed on March 7, 2015 at the website of Hubei Provincial
Environmental Protection Department, with an announcement in Xiaogan Daily. The final EIA/
EMP have been re-disclosed in the same website again on May 12, 2015 and the RAP was
disclosed at a main local newspaper by June 3, 2015.
o
The English EIA was disclosed at InfoShop on July 8, 2015 and the English RAP was disclosed at
InfoShop on July 28, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           08-Jul-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    12-May-2015
Comments: http://www.hbepb.gov.cn/wsbs/gsgg/hpgs/hpdwhp/201505/t20150512_77197.html
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              04-Jun-2015
Page 10 of 12


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                            28-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                     03-Jun-2015
O
Comments: http://hbxgct.cn/bencandy.php?fid=64&id=310
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
O
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [  ]  TBD [
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Page 11 of 12


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Reda Hamedoun
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                  Date: 09-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                  Date: 11-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


