                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC13768

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Bhutan                          Project ID:       P156126
                            Project Name:        City Bus Access Project
                            Team Leader(s):      Dominic Pasquale Patella,Dechen Tshering,Tenzin Lhaden
                            Estimated Date       07-Apr-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GTI06                           Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Public administration- Transportation (20%), Urban Transport (80%)
                            Theme(s):            Other public sector governance (50%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
                                                 Delivery (50%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 4.4468                         Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Global Partnership on Output-based Aid                                                      4.4468
                            Environment         B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           to expand access to higher quality public transport and non-motorized transport services in Thimphu
                           C. Project Description
                           Component A - physical infrastructure:
                           This component will support: (i) bus stop infrastructure including shelters, turnouts, lighting, and
                           basic passenger amenities at 80 locations; (ii) pedestrian infrastructure connections to upgraded bus
                           stops; and (iii) development of the city bus terminal. In order to be eligible for verification and
                           disbursement of GPOBA subsidy, each new / upgraded bus stop will need to provide the following:

                           (i)     Direct access to a regular bus route served by the City Bus Co.;
                           (ii)    A covered space of not less than 102 meters;
                           (iii)   Seating for at least 5 waiting passengers under the covered space provided;
                           (iv)    Lighting in sufficient quantity to illuminate the entire covered area and adjacent pedestrian
                           access points to the stop;
                           (v)     A protected, vandalism-resistant location for basic passenger information on routes,
                         timetables, fares, and grievance handling;
                         (vi)    Drainage infrastructure as needed to move storm water away from the point of boarding /
                         aligning and to ensure that the stop remains free from standing water throughout all seasons;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (vii)   Improved footpaths linking the stop to all other improved pedestrian access points within a
                         50 meter radius;
                         (viii) Demarcated and safe pedestrian road crossings (i.e. zebra crossings, signage, and speed
                         control devices where appropriate) at all pedestrian crossings within a 50 meter radius of the stop.

                         GPOBA will disburse a fixed unit rate subsidy upon the verification of each standard stop as
                         summarized in E. Table 3. The upgraded city bus terminal will have a unique one-off subsidy
                         payment tied to its completion. The envisaged approach to upgrading the city bus terminal will seek
                         to use land value capture as a means for sourcing private investment to finance some portion of the
                         new terminal’s upfront costs. The portion of GPOBA subsidy tied to the central bus terminal’s
                         completion would offer a small capital grant to enable a greater level of investment than returns from
                         retail space might otherwise support. During implementation, GPOBA and the Bank’s team would
                         review and provide a ‘no objection’ to the city bus stop’s design specifications and conceptual
                         design. Verification against these agreed contract specifications will subsequently govern the
                         improved city bus stop’s eligibility for disbursement. The team is seeking to collaborate with the
                         International Finance Corporation’s Thimphu based team on this particular aspect of Component A.

                         (iii)   Thimphu Thromde will lead the implementation of Component A in close cooperation with
                         the Ministry of Finance and City Bus Co. This will include the development of pedestrian access to
                         bus stops, electricity connections to stops, and the establishment of safe pedestrian crossings across
                         roads as needed to meet verification criteria. Budget for these investments will come to Thimphu
                         Thromde from the Ministry of Finance and will be a covenant within GPOBA’s Grant Agreement.
                         Once developed, stop infrastructure will remain under Thimphu Thromde’s ownership and control in
                         perpetuity.

                         Component B - investments in service delivery assets:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will support the purchase and mobilization of: (i) 10 primary route buses; (ii) 7
                         secondary route buses; and (iii) a bus control system consisting of GPS monitoring and a centralized
                         data control system. In addition, Component B would support one-off fare subsidies to encourage
                         the adoption of cashless ticketing approaches that City Bus Co. is currently considering under
                         support from the United Nations Development Program (UNDP). Potential solutions may include
                         pre-paid punch cards, monthly / semi-annual passes, or full ‘smart card’ solutions. GPOBA
                         subsidies would help to drive uptake among low income households of whatever cashless ticketing
                         solution City Bus Co. choses to adopt following UNDP’s TA activity. During project preparation,
                         the team will also investigate ways of using GPOBA’s initial subsidy scheme to develop a longer
                         term approach to targeting subsidies at lower income bus customers. This may eventually help City
                         Bus Co. to improve its financial viability through higher fares whilst mitigating any adverse impacts
                         on lower income households.

                         The Ministry of Finance will procure all goods and services under Component B and will
                         immediately transfer all assets to the City Bus Co. for ownership and maintenance in perpetuity. The
                         City Bus Co. will lead implementation of service delivery using assets transferred from the Ministry
                         of Finance. Similarly, the City Bus Co. will lead the rollout of cashless ticketing systems and the
                         targeted fare subsidy scheme involving GPOBA funds.
                         Verification of the following outputs will serve to trigger release of GPOBA’s subsidy under
                         component B: (i) additional revenue-kilometers of bus services provided; (ii) additional paying
                         passengers carried on city bus services; (iii) sales of individual cashless tickets / cards. Technical
                         assistance during project preparation will serve to define the baselines for additional revenue-km and
                         paying passengers carried that will be attributable to the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component C – verification, auditing, and implementation stage technical assistance:
                         This component will support: (i) independent verification of Disbursement Linked Indicators; (ii)
                         annual audits of project funds; (iii) implementation stage technical assistance.
                         Implementation stage technical assistance will focus on two highly critical improvements that are
                         needed to achieve DLIs:

                         (i)     Improving maintenance of the bus fleet to make full use of operating assets. There is a
                         particularly acute need to develop a preventative maintenance regime for buses given the extensive
                         lead times often required for sourcing parts into Thimphu. To date City Bus Co has struggled with
                         effective maintenance. During 2014 there were periods where 1/3 of the bus fleet was inoperable
                         due to unplanned maintenance events and difficulties in sourcing spare replacement parts; and

                         (ii)      Developing a passenger information system and marketing campaign aimed at encouraging
                         more people to shift from private transport to public and non-motorized transport. As the quality and
                         reliability of Thimphu’s public transport network improves there may be an opportunity to expand
                         the target market for bus services to higher income households and non-resident visitors. These
                         higher income customers could eventually provide an important means for improving the financial
                         viability of high quality bus services. To date, City Bus Co. has undertaken basic marketing steps
                         such as branding buses with the recognizable logo “take a ride and be happy.” and reaching out to
                         parents of school children. However, there has been limited use of media, pricing incentives, and
                         other techniques to shape demand.

                         There is a key opportunity to give passengers more control over trip planning by leveraging
                         Thimphu’s rapidly developing mobile internet network. The Ministry of Information and
                         Communications reports that approximately there are approximately 117,549 people in Bhutan have
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a 3G internet connections via their mobile phones with the highest density of these connections in
                         and around Thimphu. During 2013 alone, mobile broadband subscriptions increased by 529%. The
                         team is therefore keen to purse potential web-based applications for trip planning and has engaged
                         with the Banks ICT team in this regard.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         City Bus Co., Thimphu Thromde (the city government), and MoIC have identified a long list of
                         locations for proposed bus shelters. The government, with World Bank specialist support, has
                         conducted an environmental and social screening of these sites to assess potential safeguards risks.
                         The sites are all along existing road right of ways, within the vicinity of the Thimpu urban area. The
                         proposed sites are all currently in use as bus stops, but lack shelter infrastructure. The bus terminal
                         to be upgraded is an existing facility in the urban core of Thimpu. Proposed upgrading activities at
                         the bus terminal include a shelter or passenger waiting, bus bays, shop and retail space, etc.
                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         Thimphu Thromde has already gained experience of IDA's safeguards requirements under the Bhutan
                         2nd Urban Development Project and its associated additional finance operation (P145392). This
                         project entailed environmental screening and environmental assessment following policies according
                         to OP/BP 4.01, Butan's Environment Assessment Act (2000), and various relevant RGoB Env.
                           Codes of Practice (ECoP). Borrower capacity will be re-evaluated during appraisal of this operation,
                           and necessary capacity strengthening measures will be included in the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Annu Rajbhandari (GENDR)
                           Govind Prasad Bhatt (GTI06)
                           Leanne Farrell (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes             The project will entail construction of bus
                           BP 4.01                                             shelters (approximatley 77), pedestrian
                                                                               infrastructure, and an upgraded city bus
                                                                               terminal. It will also finance the acquisition of
                                                                               new buses. There may be adverse
                                                                               environemtnal or social impacts associated with
                                                                               the civil works, and the potential
                                                                               decomissioning of some old buses as required
                                                                               by govermnent safety regulations. In addition,
                                                                               the proposed project will result in higher
                                                                               frequencies of bus services, which may also
                                                                               carry adverse social and environmental impacts.

                                                                               The government, with support from World Bank
                                                                               specialists, has already screened all of the
                                                                               potential investment locations for environmental
                                                                               and social issues. The specific investment
                                                                               locations (bus shelters, terminal, etc.) to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                               financed through the project will be selected
                                                                               from the longer list that has undergone
                                                                               screening during implementation. Prior to
                                                                               appraisal and based on the screening conducted,
                                                                               the project will develop an Environmental and
                                                                               Social Management Plan (ESMP), which will
                                                                               include: (a) minimum criteria for selection to be
                                                                               financed under the project (e.g., negative listing
                                                                               of any bus shelter locations which would cause
                                                                               involuntary resettlement, etc.); (b)
                                                                               recommendations for bus shelter and other
                                                                               facility design to minimize negative impacts and
                                                                               enhance positive benefits (as applicable); (c)
                                                                               environmental, health and safety requirements
                                                                               of contractors carrying out civil works activities
                                                                               to be financed, (d) ongoing operational and bus
                                                                               system EHS maintenance requirements
                                                                               (including requirements for decomissioning of
                                                                               old bus fleet if such need is identified); (e) a
                                                                           communications and grievance management
                                                                           system for the project; and (f) implementation
                                                                           arrangements, responsibilities, capacity building
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           measures, and budget for all of the above. The
                                                                           construction management aspects of the ESMP
                                                                           will be annexed to contractor bid documents.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No            Based on site screening carried out, all potential
                                                                           investment locations are in modified habitat or
                                                                           urban enviornments (e.g., along existing road
                                                                           right of ways or in built-up areas, etc.). No
                                                                           natural habitats will be impacted.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                No            Based on site screening carried out, all potential
                                                                           investment locations are in modified habitat or
                                                                           urban enviornments (e.g., along existing road
                                                                           right of ways or in built-up areas, etc.). No
                                                                           forests will be affected.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09           No            No pesticides will be procured through the
                                                                           project.
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No            The government has screened all potential
                           BP 4.11                                         investment locations. Based on findings from
                                                                           this screening, the policy is not triggered.
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No            There are no known indigenous peoples in the
                                                                           project area.
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No            Project investment locations to be financed will
                           4.12                                            be screened and selected so as not to involve
                                                                           any involuntary acquisition of private land, or
                                                                           displacement of existing households or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                           economic activities on government-owned land.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37        No             There are no dams associated with the project.
                           Projects on International        No             The project will not have any impact on
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                            international waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No             The project area does not include any disputed
                           7.60                                            areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation

                                ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  15-Dec-2015
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              January, 2016
                         IV. APPROVALS
                         Team Leader(s):                  Name: Dominic Pasquale Patella,Dechen Tshering,Tenzin Lhaden
                         Approved By:
                         Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                                           Date: 02-Nov-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/                Name: Karla Gonzalez Carvajal (PMGR)                               Date: 03-Nov-2015
                         Manager:



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
