INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR15616
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Paraguay                   Project ID:   P114971
Project Name: PY Energy Sector Strengthening Project (P114971)
Task Team       Sergio Augusto Gonzalez Coltrinari
Leader(s):
Estimated       04-Oct-20 10               Estimated     30-Nov-2010
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEO4                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (77%), Energy efficiency in Heat
and Power (20%), Public administration- Energy and min ing (3%)
Theme:          Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Other rural
development (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
Emergencies)?
O
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     125.00            Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
Borrower                                                        25.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
Total                                                          125.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The development objective of the proposed Project is to increase the quantity and quality of the
provision of electricity services by the Borrower, while improv               ing
Page 1 of 12


﻿the Borrower's performance.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The development objective of the proposed Project is to increase the quantity and quality of the
provision of electricity services by the Borrower, while improv                  ing
the Borrower's performance.
O
3. Project Description
ORIGINAL TEXT FROM APPRAISAL
The cost of the proposed Project is estimated to be US$125 million (including contingencies, taxes
and duties applicable to ANDE) of which US$100 million would be provided by IBRD. The
proposed Project would involve three components: the first component aims at providing ANDE
with a state-of-the-art Electricity Distribution Management System to enhance the quality of its
service, and the strengthening of the metering system to reduce losses and improve the utility's
performance; the second component supports the implementation of priority transmission
investments in substations and the installation of reactive compensation to increase the quantity and
quality of electricity supplied; and the third component aims at strengthening ANDE#s capacity in
investment planning and project preparation and at improving the sector and ANDE's performance
and transparency.
Component 1: Modernizing the Borrower's Distribution Management System and Installing an
Advanced Meter Infrastructure for Large Consumers. (Total cost: US$25 million; IBRD financing:
US$20 million). This component includes:
(i) Installation of a state-of-the-art integrated distribution management system (Sistema de Gesti6n
Integral de la Distribuci6n El6ctrica -SGIDE) integrating technical and commercial operations
through a turn-key contract procuring hardware, software, database set-up and maintenance,
including the installation of the following functional modules: (i) planning, projects and works of the
distribution system; (ii) supervisory control and data acquisition operating system and the
corresponding remote terminal units; (iii) maintenance, including the provision on of training of the
Borrower#s staff in the use, maintenance and upgrading of the integrated distribution management
system; (iv) technical and non-technical distribution losses; (v) client support (call center); and (vi)
implementation of an incidence recording and management system.
(ii) Installation of a 66kV and 23kV advanced metering system which allows remote consumption
metering and disconnection or reconnection of the Borrower's large customers.
Component 2: Improving the Performance of the Transmission Network (Total cost: US$96.25
million; IBRD financing: US$77 million). This component will provide resources to support:
(i) Construction of new substations below the existing transmission lines (excluding transmission
line investments), including: (i) the construction of a new 220 /23kV substation in the area of Barrio
San Pedro in the Paraguayan District of Guajayvi; and (ii) the construction of a new 66kV substation
in the Paraguayan Di strict of Minga Pord.
(ii) Extension of about ten (10) existing substations including the expansion of the transformation
capacity of said substations (excluding transmission line investments).
(iii) Installation of reactive compensation at the Guarambar6 substation in the Paraguayan Central
Department.
Component 3: Strengthening Paraguay's Electricity Sector and the Borrower's Institutional Capacity
Page 2 of 12


﻿(Total cost: US$3.5 million; IBRD financing US$2.75 million). This component will provide
resources to support:
(i) Improvement of the performance of the electricity sector and in particular, the Borrower, through:
Q)       (i) the carrying out of an independent institutional assessment of the legal framework, the
organizational structure and operational procedures of the electric sector in Paraguay; (ii) the
development of an action pl an (acceptable to the Bank); and (iii) the implementation of the key
priorities established in the action plan in a manner acceptable to the Bank and to the MH.
(ii) Institutional strengthening of the Borrower's capacity in investment and project planning and
implementation, through, inter alia: (i) strategic advice to the Borrower's Presidency on managerial
decisions that will enhance its performance; (ii) strategic support from international consultants with
successful experience in the implementation of a distribution management system during the first
three years of implementation of Part 1 of the Project; (iii) strengthening of the Borrower#s
environmental and social unit through provision of b est practice s and methodologies, and capacity
building to ensure oversight of transmission investments under Part 2 of the Project; and (iv)
strengthening of the Borrower's financial and asset management practices, its internal auditing unit,
and provision of external auditors for the Project.
PROPOSED CHANGES IN THE RESTRUCTURING
Component 1 - original US$ 35.5, proposed US$ 25.63
The new project investments proposed are:
a)     Supply and installation of SCADA/EMS for transmission  US$ 4,942,153
b)     Supply and installation of fiber optic network   US$ 7,690,000
c)     Supply and installation of active communication equipment  US$ 6,235,000
d)     Supply and installation of wireless meshed network  US$ 3,700,000
(v)    Supply and installation of digital carrier equipment  US$  928,000
Component 2- original US $76.03, proposed US$ 71.77.
New investments proposed are:
a)     Supply of 11 three-phase power transformers for additional 7 substations US$13,230,000
b)     Supply of mobile substation 66/23kV-30MVA                        US$ 2,500,000
c)     Purchase of 8x6 truck with modular trailer to transport power transformers  US$
1,900,000
d)     Purchase of mobile 23kv distribution center compact 23kv cells and SSAA  US$
1,600,740
Component 3 - Strengthening Paraguay's electricity Sector and the Borrower's Institutional Capacity
Original US$ 3.50, Proposed US$ 2.35million
During the mission of July 2015, the Borrower informed the Bank team that they did not see a need
to carry out the three studies originally contemplated under the above sub-component 3.1 given that
they have done several similar studies recently. Therefore, the Borrower proposes to replace the
studies under sub-component 3.1 with the following study:
Page 3 of 12


﻿a) Technical assistance for the analysis of ANDE's organizational structure and human resources US
$ 800,000.
As part of this component a defined budget for the environment management of the additional and
O
U        new works is incorporated to ensure proper environmental and social management of activities and
compliance with national legislation and the WB Safeguards Policies.
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
ORIGINAL TEXT AT APPRAISAL ISDS
All investment works are located in the Eastern Region of Paraguay within urban or peri-urban areas
of rural towns and Metropolitan Asuncion.
A list of the most critical substations within the Master Plan was screened as also being of low
environmental and social risks and impacts. These projects will be implemented mostly in rural or
peri-urban areas. Already identified projects to be declared eligible for financing at appraisal will be
developed in eight Departments, and include:(i) construction of two new rural substations (66 kV in
Department of Al to Parana, District of Minga Pora; and 220 kV in Department of San Pedro,
District of Guayaiby); (ii)addition of transformers to ten existing transformer stations in the
departments of Central, Misiones, Paraguari, Itapfia, Caazapd, and Caaguaz-6 Departments, two of
which are in urban areas; and (iii) installation of reactive compensation at the Guarambar6 substation
in the Paraguayan Central Department. No protected areas are near or around the proposed stations
and existing forests are highly fragmented and degraded in the region. As deforestation is prohibited
in this ecoregion, no forests or natural habitats will be impacted by the proposed works.
The construction of two new substations will require purchase of private land (one ha. in one and 2
has. in the second site). Agreements with the land owners with ANDE are under discussions in
accordance with OP 4.12 requirements. Both locations are within large mechanized farms of Eastern
Paraguay and relatively distant from the local populations. Concerns may be expressed by
neighborhood residents around their intended locations and perceived danger from substations due to
their associated electromagnetic fields, the possibility of causing fires, among others.
PROPOSED CHANGES IN RESTRUCTURING
The project area will be expanded from the original project area evaluated during appraisal.
Component 1. The majority of activities are related to the purchase of software equipment except the
installation of a fiber optic line which includes mainly the urban area of Del Gran Asunci6n, Coronel
Oviedo, Ciudad del Este and Encarnaci6n.
Component 2. The project will buy and install 35 three-phase power transformers of 80 MVA 220/23
kV, 66/23 kV 30 MVA and 50 MVA to increase the capacity in the national grid system. These
transformers will be installed in 17 existing substations: San Lorenzo, Luque, San Antonio, Itaugud,
Pirayfi, New City and Concepci6n. Seven (7) of these existing substations are added intervened
areas of the project as part of the ongoing project restructuring. The operation of these transformers
requires an operation licenses by the National Environmental Secretary (SEAM). ANDE has
requested these licenses.
In relation to the purchase of the special truck with a modular trailer to transport a large power
Page 4 of 12


﻿transformer, it is necessary to request a permit from the ministry of transport. This is due to the size
and the potential hazard of this type of equipment. The project area for this will be represented by the
route that is approved for the Ministry of Transport that the truck and transformer can use during
both: arrival and during operation. ANDE will coordinate with the municipalities and the Ministry
U         of Transport all preventive and information measures to inform the communities and to reduce the
risks of accidents and transit impacts.
The other proposed activities include the purchase of one 66/23kv-30MVA mobile substation. This
equipment also represent hazardous electrical material. The project area will be represented by the
approved transport route which is represented by the locations where the equipment will be stored (a
substation not known) to the location where will be installed according to demand and operation
requirements.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Elena Correa (GSU10)
Ruth Tiffer-Sotomayor (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
RESTRUCTURING
Page 5 of 12


﻿The main environmental impacts and risks of the new proposed activities to be included in the
restructuring request are related to:
O
i) Generation of waste from the packing of large and medium electrical equipment (wood, carton,
plastic, etc).
ii) Imported oil tanks to fill up the transformers (each transformer can require about 20 tanks).
iii) Risks of accidents in urban areas during transportation of the imported electrical equipment:
transformers, mobile substations, large truck, etc.
iv) Risks of explosions and fires during installation and operation
v) Management of hazardous residues - most residues from operations and/or replacement
activities (change of electrical, electronic, transformers, etc equipment) are sent either to other
substations .
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
RESTRUCTURING PERIOD
As with any energy rehabilitation project, the main indirect and long term environmental impacts
are associated with the generation of electrical and electronic residues (replacement of old obsolete
equipment), hazardous waste (oil and hydrocarbon based contaminated residues -oil containers).
ANDE stores the majority of electrical residues from its operations in the San Lorenzo substation,
therefore any electrical residues from this project is also expected to be stored at the San Lorenzo
substation. In September, 2015, a fire of high proportion occurred in the San Lorenzo Substation
causing the explosion of old transformers been stored in this area. This cause an emergency in
Asunci6n affecting the air, the surrounding communities and ANDE workers and reveal the need
to strengthen ANDE capacities to manage this type of contingencies.
ORIGINAL TEXT in the ISDS APPRAISAL
O
No long-term negative environmental and social impacts will ensue because of project activities
while positive effects will accrue from support and strengthening of ANDE's environmental and
O
social technical capacities, including their programs for proper management of hazardous wastes
and chemicals, and people's security. In the long term, these sub-stations will provide favor social
*           benefits though the availability of increased quantity and quality of the service and expansion of
the coverage in at least eight departments of Eastern Paraguay, where electricity is a key constraint
to social and economic development. The works that will be supported by the project would
increase electricity supply availability to households, commercial and industrial activities.It is
estimated that in 2015 about 1.3 million persons will directly benefit from the project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
RESTRUCTURING
No alternatives is applicable. An EMP for all new additional activities for the restructuring period,
following the ESMF, has been prepared to manage environmental and social risks during
implementation.
ORIGINAL TEXT in the ISDS APPRAISAL
A review and a rapid risk-assessment of potential sub-projects included in ANDE Master Plan
Page 6 of 12


﻿indicated that several packages might have greater social and environmental risks and concerns
associated. An initial screening of the Master Plan was done to prioritize sub-project groups of
high priority but of lesser environmental and social concern. As an added risk mitigation strategy,
an ESMF has been prepared and disclosed by ANDE and the Bank in case any changes occur
O
during implementation regarding site locations or if funds permit other infrastructure to be
constructed. The ESMF would ensure that high risk activities are screened-out and Bank
safeguards integrated into any environmental and social assessment process and management plan
to be developed.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Capacity of ANDE
The capacity of ANDE to handle environmental issues is moderate. ANDE has an Environmental
and Social Unit (ESU) with about 20 people working in different tasks (obtaining environmental
licenses, training activities, conservation of a natural reserve, providing environmental guidance to
the different departments, etc). The ESU is within the Planning Department. The Planning
Department is the PIU for this project. However, the construction of works under this project and
the future operation and maintenance of these installations are responsibilities of another
department within ANDE: the Technical Department (Gerencia Tecnica).
Therefore, a main issue has been to incorporate environmental management activities during the
construction works at the substations (the new and the rehabilitated) and to give the necessary
authority to ESU to supervise the works of the Technical Department. Compliance with the
safeguards policies with the current arragement has been difficult.
Main issues during project implementation:
a) CONSULTANTS. The Bank required ANDE to contract 2 consultants to support environmental
and social supervision. ANDE has complied with this requirement. However significant issues
were caused by this arrangement, among these: i) consultants are not seen as staff of ANDE and,
therefore, there is inadequate follow up to their recommendations by the contractors and ANDE
staff; ii) the Consultants lack authority to oversee contractors. The Bank recommended ANDE the
hiring of these consultants as permanent staff so these professionals can be part of ANDE's teams
*           - as originally envisioned by the Bank. ANDE has no responded to this proposal.
b) COORDINATION. The coordination has been very challenging in terms of environmental,
health and safety issues. The Technical Department supervises the civil works carried out by the
contractors through 2 environmental staff supervising the environmental related aspects in all civil
works developed in the country. These 2 professionals report to the Manager of the Technical
Department (Gerencia Tecnica). Since the beginning of the implementation of this project, the
Bank highlighted the need for both (Planning and Technical) departments to work together.
However, the coordination between the two departments has been limited.The Bank has
recommended that these 2 environmental staff from the Technical Department (Gerencia Tecnica)
be transfered to the ESU to ensure appropriate supervision to the Bank project and to also to
strengthen the Environmental Unit with experienced staff. ANDE has not responded yet.
c) SUPERVISION OF WORKs. Even though the rehabilitation works involved at the substation
(Gurambare) could be considered simple, environmental issues have been numerous due to the
Page 7 of 12


﻿intricacies of supervision arrangements between the Technical Department and the Planning
Department. The environmental management staff within the Environmental Unit of ANDE, as
well as the two Consultants hired at the Bank request, cannot request remediation actions directly
to the contractors. This arrangement has not only reduced the ability to resolve simple issues
O
during the construction but, also, prevents the contractors to pay attention to recurrent
environmental issues such as: sedimentation of main road next to the work site, weak solid and
hazardous waste management, poor drainage water measures, lack of coordination for the
reforestation plan, etc.
As part of the ongoing project restructuring period, the Bank has requested ANDE for the ESU to
have full responsibility over the environmental/social supervision of the Bank financed
investments. ANDE has no responded yet.
d)INSTRUMENTS. ANDE has prepared an EMP for the management of potential environmental
and social impacts following OP 4.01, guidelines of the existing ESMF and current EIA national
legislation. A Bank social specialist reviewed the proposed investments with the ESU team and
found that there no resettlement issues or potential negative impacts for indigenous people
expected from the new proposed activities for the restructuring period, therefore no RAP or IPP
was required to be prepared by ANDE.
e) INFORMATION and COMMUNICATION. Since the project involves several sites the
coordination of documentation, reports, contractor reports, has represented a significant challenge
to ANDE, and is important to resolve these issues. As part of the ongoing project restructuring,
the Bank has requested ANDE to install a digital platform to help monitor the Bank projects,
including:storage of information from each subproject, status of environmental licenses,
supervision reports, etc. ANDE has confirmed that it has contracted the development of such
system and it agreed to use it for the Bank project.
f) BIDDING Documents. In the EMP for the restructuring period, ANDE will include the
Environmental Clauses in bidding documents. ANDE has agreed.
g) BUDGET. The strengthening activities for the Environmental Unit within the Planning
Department have not been executed, mainly due to difficulties to assign a budget for said
0          activities. As part of the ongoing project restructuring, the Bank has requested ANDE: i) budget
for overseeing the restructuring activities (agreed budget $360,000 which will be financed by
ANDE as counterpart funding), ii) additional budget for the original project activities. Both
compromises are included in the EMP prepared for the restructuring period . The EMP has been
disclosed.
ORIGINAL TEXT in the ISDS of APPRAISAL
The EA has reviewed a number of weaknesses and opportunities for improving and strengthening
the social and environmental management capacity of ANDE including potential policy or
regulatory issues that may need to be considered for improved environmental and social
management. The institutional capacity-building plan is proposing specific actions including
support from an environmental and from a social consultant, training, and software and equipment
to strengthen ANDE's environmental and social unit (ESU) and project resources have been
allocated for project implementation. There is full agreement with the Borrower on the actions
required to strengthen institutional capacity, and staff with expertise in these areas have already
Page 8 of 12


﻿been hired, indicating commitment on the part of the Borrower to address these issues in an
integrated manner. This is also reflected in the organizational structure, where environmental and
social management is integrated with planning units rather than working in isolation.
O
Capacity-building of human resources, as well as support from an environmental and a social
consultant, to comply with the functions expected from ANDE's Environmental and Social Unit
(ESU), and the implementation of requirements previously described. This includes: (i)
supervision of compliance with social and environmental laws, decrees, instructions, procedures,
and manuals; (ii) preparation of TORs and budgets for the execution of the environmental and
social studies and works; (iii) support to ANDE's Procurement and Contracting units during
preparation and evaluation of bids, contracts discussions and compliance supervision of ; (iv)
coordination of the dissemination of informative publications, and their integration into the
institutional information system; (v) measurement of the results of the activities and comparison
with expected outcomes and results and if necessary; and (vi) proposal of corrective measures.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
RESTRUCTURING
ANDE,'s Environmental and Social Unit prepared an EMP with guidance from the Bank. This
new EMP will be applicable to the new activities incorporated as part of the project restructuring
and will support improvements to environmental and social management within ANDE.
The new EMP will be consulted and published following the agreed procedures in the ESMF. For
the consultation, ANDE will invite relevant stakeholders from some of the potentially affected
areas and incorporated recommendations from the stakeholders, the Ministry of Environment.
Ministry of Transport, Fire Department and municipalities.
The final EMP will be disclosed in the web site of ANDE and the World Bank.
ORIGINAL TEXT in the ISDS APPRAISAL
o
Public Consultation and Disclosure in Designing the EIA, ESMP, RP and ESMF, including IPF
and IRLAPF: The development of these instruments was informed by a consultative process
which sought feedback from key stakeholders including potentially consumers, municipalities and
departments involved, government institutions, and NGO's. Disclosure and consultation of these
environmental and social instruments was carried out.
Project preparation: Multiple stakeholder groups were involved in environmental and social
assessments defining the overall framework for environmental andsocial management scope both
for the plans (EIA, ESMF and RP) as well for the ESMF.
Consultation and Disclosure During Project Implementation: All documents are published in
ANDE's website and in the Bank's Public Information Center of Asuncion(Paraguay) and in the
Bank's website (Infoshop) in Washington. Disclosure will continue as required during the
implementation of the project. Disclosure and consultation were consistent with the national
regulations and the provisions of the Bank's Operational Policies.
Page 9 of 12


﻿B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              13-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Nov-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
a         "In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              13-Oct-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                           15-Oct-2010
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              13-Oct-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                           15-Oct-2010
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
Page 10 of 12


﻿OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X]  No[    ]  NA [
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA [
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes[X]  No[       NA
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
o          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 11 of 12


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sergio Augusto Gonzalez Coltrinari
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)            Date: 10-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Antonio Alexandre Rodrigues        Date: 11-Dec-2015
Manager:                     Barbalho (PMGR)
Page 12 of 12


