                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC17779

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Namibia                          Project ID:      P159953
                            Project Name:        Collection, Analysis and Dissemination of Household Survey Data in Namibia
                            Team Leader(s):      Precious Zikhali,Victor Sulla
                            Estimated Date       15-Jul-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GPV01                            Lending          IPF
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           General public administration sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Economic statistics, modeling and forecasting (50%), Other economic
                                                 management (50%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.5                              Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                  0.5
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The broad development objective of this project is to improve the collection, analysis, and
                           dissemination of household survey data in Namibia. The specific objectives of the grant are
                           threefold: (i) to introduce and pilot a Household Indebtedness and Financial Inclusion survey, (ii) to
                           conduct quality assessment, validation, and evaluation of the 2015/16 NHIES data, including post-
                           field assessment/evaluation of the implementation of the survey, (iii) to build and enhance the
                           agency➢❨ s analytical capacity through technical assistance and training to analyze NHIES data.

                           As a relatively young agency established in 2011, the agency is still developing capacity to ensure
                           quality and timely statistics and analytical products. The NSA has requested the Bank to assist in
                           building this capacity. Specific challenges that affect NSA as they build capacity include the need to
                           improve the quality and frequency of data collection, particularly for household surveys. Currently,
                           the NHIES was last conducted in 2009/10 although the most recent (2015/16) was completed in the
                           first quarter of 2016.
                           C. Project Description
                         The proposed project will be structured along three main components:
                         1.       Survey preparation, design, implementation and data collection of a pilot Household
                         Indebtedness and Financial Inclusion Survey. This component will constitute the bulk of planned
Public Disclosure Copy




                         activities. The pilot survey will collect information on both household indebtedness and the extent to
                         which the financial system is inclusive. The survey, though building on some limited indicators
                         included in the NHIES, will be an independent survey. However, in order to be able to make the link
                         to poverty measures, the sample used will be drawn from the Namibia Household Income and
                         Expenditure Survey (NHIES) sample. This component will constitute technical assistance on survey
                         design and preparation as well as data collection. It seeks to strengthen the NSA➢❨ s capacity to
                         prepare and implement new and specialized surveys in response to demands from stakeholders.
                         Collection of household indebtedness indicators is part of the NSA➢❨ s task to provide annual data
                         on household debt to the Bank of Namibia through household or other annual surveys. The collection
                         of financial inclusion indicators will help improve the NSA➢❨ s statistical support to the Bank of
                         Namibia, other commercial banks and financial institutions in the country. This component will
                         consist of two sub-components:
                         a.       Technical assistance on survey design and preparation. This component will bring in
                         knowledge, expertise, and skills on sampling, questionnaire design, field work organization,
                         supervision, data entry, and data collection. This component will also involve training on the use of
                         the Computer-Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI) tool as a possible option for the data entry
                         system. A system of data quality assurance will be built into the sub-component, along with data
                         dissemination.
                         b.       Data collection. Technical assistance will be provided to conduct the field work for the two
                         surveys. Activities under this sub-component will include training of interviewers and support in
                         piloting the surveys.

                         2.       Assessment and evaluation of the 2015/16 Namibia Household Income and Expenditure
                         Survey (NHIES). The 2015/16 NHIES is the fourth of this type of surveys to be conducted in
                         independent Namibia. The design of the 2015/16 NHIES is different from previous surveys. Some of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the differences include the following: reduction from 20 to 12 households in a PSU and an increase
                         the number of PSUs from 500 to 864 with the aim of reducing sampling errors and the design effects.
                         Data collection time of household transactions has changed from 28 days to 14 days. The Daily
                         Record Book (DRB) is recorded for a consecutive seven days by members of the selected households
                         with the assistance of team supervisors while the main questionnaire is administered by interviewers
                         using Tablets and CAPI application (Android). The survey is expected to cover a total of 10,368
                         private households (sample size) and 864 Primary Sampling Units (PSUs) during its one year cycle.
                         The selected representative samples from all 14 regions will allow for national, national urban,
                         national rural and regional disaggregation.

                         Given these changes, it is thus important to make an assessment of quality of the data as well as
                         processes around the survey implementation. Quality data is critical to evidence-based policy
                         making. Moreover, it is important to assess whether the 2015/16 NHIES meets the standards outlined
                         in the Data Quality Assessment Framework (DQAF), the Data Collection Processing and
                         Dissemination Policy and Practice as well as the Code of Practice: Professional and Ethical
                         Standards Applicable to Statistics Producers issued by the NSA in January 2015 in the Government
                         Gazette. These standards are aimed at guiding the statistics producers in the National Statistical
                         Systems in Namibia in the production of quality, relevant, and timely data and statistics. The NSA
                         has requested for technical assistance that will capacitate the Agency to fully implement the Data
                         Quality Assessment Framework (DQAF) in assessing the quality of the 2015/16 NHIES data and
                         subsequent designation as official statistics.

                         This component will accordingly be made up of two sub-components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a.        Post-field assessment and evaluation of the implementation of the 2015/16 Namibia
                         Household Income and Expenditure Survey (NHIES). The Surveys and Field Operation division
                         under Demography and Social statistics Department is expected to coordinate the production of a
                         Survey Methodology and Administrative Report for the 2015/16 NHIES. This report is expected to
                         document how the implementation of the survey was done in all stages of the survey from planning,
                         field operations, data processing (including data management), data analysis and report writing. The
                         assessment will provide recommendations on areas that need improvement and adjustment for the
                         next NHIES that is planned to take place during the 2018/19 financial year. Therefore, the NSA
                         would like to get technical assistance based on international standards and best practices. This is
                         critical to NSA because the revision of project document, methodology and budget for the upcoming
                         survey will be based on these findings.
                         b.        Quality assessment and evaluation of the 2015/16 NHIES data. The task in this sub-
                         component is to assess the quality and validity of the NHIES data with a view to make
                         recommendations to the Statistician General.
                         3.        Statistical analysis and training. This will comprise two sub-components:
                         a.        Analysis of survey data, largely the 2015/16 NHIES data. This will include an estimation and
                         validation of poverty lines; an assessment of poverty and inequality in Namibia which entails an
                         examination of the state of poverty and inequality in the country, and an identification of the drivers
                         and barriers to poverty and inequality reduction; an assessment of multidimensional poverty in
                         Namibia; a poverty mapping exercise; technical support to the Ministry of Gender Equality and Child
                         Welfare (MGECW) which has requested the NSA for support in conducting a study on the impact of
                         child grants on the wellbeing of children in Namibia; and an assessment of the distributional impacts
                         of policies.
                         b.        Training of NSA staff. Other sub-activities in this component will include training on
                         poverty analysis including training on the use of ADePT and Stata software. The training will be
                         extended to data users outside the NSA. Dissemination of findings as well as exchange of knowledge
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be supported via funding for study tours, conferences and workshops.

                         The project costs by component are as follows:

                         Project component        Amount
                         Component 1: Survey design, preparation, implementation and data collection $260,000
                         a.      Pilot Household Indebtedness and Financial Inclusion survey (entails sampling,
                         questionnaire design, field work organization, quality assurance, collection, and dissemination)
                         $200,000
                         b.      Pilot the use of World Bank➢❨ s Survey Solutions technologies largely the Computer-
                         Assisted Personal Interviewing (CAPI). Entails the purchase of tablets as well as training of
                         enumerators      $60,000
                         Component 2: Assessment and evaluation of the 2015/16 Namibia Household Income and
                         Expenditure Survey (NHIES) $60,000
                         a.      Post-field assessment and /evaluation of the implementation of the 2015/16 Namibia
                         Household Income and Expenditure Survey (NHIES)           $30,000
                         b.      Quality assessment and evaluation of the 2015/16 NHIES data $30,000
                         Component 3: Statistical analysis and training $180,000
                         a.      Analysis of survey data, largely the 2015/16 NHIES data $100,000
                         b.      Training of NSA staff, including purchase of software licenses $80,000
                           Total   $500,000

                           Investment Project Financing will be the grant instrument used for this project, financed with a
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Recipient-Executed Trust Fund (RETF) for Statistical Capacity Building at the amount of US
                           $500,000.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Kisa Mfalila (GEN01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):            Name: Precious Zikhali,Victor Sulla
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:        Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                      Date: 06-Jun-2016
                           Practice Manager/          Name: Pablo Fajnzylber (PMGR)                        Date: 07-Jun-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
