INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14082
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Aug-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Vietnam                     Project ID:  P152309
Project Name: Vietnam Dam Rehabilitation and Safety Improvement Project (P152309)
Task Team       Cuong Hung Pham,Marcus J. Wishart
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Jul-2015                 Estimated    29-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWA02                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Irrigation and drainage (35%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (30%),
Water supply (30%), Public administration- Water, sanitati on and flood
protection (5%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (35%), Water resource management (30%), Rural
services and infrastructure (25%), Infrastructure services for private sector
development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
ci 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     460.00             Total Bank Financing:   420.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           40.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                 420.00
Total                                                                       460.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve the safety of dams under the Government's Dam
Safety Program to protect downstream communities and economic activities through priority
Page 1 of 13


﻿investments and institutional enhancements.
3. Project Description
1.     The project is based on a framework approach that is intended to help strengthen the
Government system for dam safety and provide a flexible, responsive mechanism during
implementation for prioritizing dams for physical rehabilitation and safety improvements. The
number of dams to be financed under the project is not fixed, but an initial list of 450 dams has been
prioritized based on an assessment of risk using the modified index developed during preparation and
a        the estimated cumulative costs within the resources available. During implementation the initial
number of dams to be financed under the project will be reviewed, revised and updated annually
within the context of the framework. This process includes criteria for determining eligibility, the
process for prioritization and the assessment of individual sub-project readiness. The annual review
will be informed by resource availability taking into account the contract price for each of the sub-
projects the year before and update those prioritized dams identified through the screening process to
manage resource availability. This is intended to be an iterative process that will contribute to the
institutional enhancements as well as the physical rehabilitation envisaged under the Government's
dam safety program and is aligned directly with the provisions of Decree 72 governing the
management of dam safety in Vietnam.
2.     The project provides an optimized mix of both structural and non-structural measures
designed to improve dam safety. Structural measures include physical rehabilitation and upgrading
safety work of existing dams and appurtenant structures, including instrumentation and associated
dam safety planning instruments. Such physical works represent the large part of the IDA financing
(>80%). Non-structural interventions have been proposed to support a range of institutional and
regulatory measures, as well as pilot specific basin level measures. These basin level measures are
aimed at improving data collection platforms, inter-institutional information management and
integrating dam and reservoir operations within the basin context. To help manage the increasing
complexity, the project will also help improve institutional coordination mechanisms as an integral
part of those measures aimed at improving operational dam safety and supporting the regulatory
environment and instruments to guide future development and management of hydraulic
infrastructure.
3.     The majority of the 450 irrigation dams are classified as both small and large earth-filled
embankment dams, with embedded intake structure. This preliminary list of 450 irrigation dams from
34 Provinces have been identified through an iterative, consultative prioritization process with the
national and provincial authorities. Of the initial 450 dams prioritized for IDA financing, 334 (74%)
are less than 15m in height, whilst 116 (26%) are higher than 15m and defined as large dams. Of
these large dams, more than half are found in only ten provinces, with these ten provinces accounting
for roughly 37% of the preliminary cost estimate. In term of forecasting capacity, 431 (96%) of the
450 prioritized dams report having no upstream forecasting capacity or observation and monitoring
at the dam, while 85% report having less than 30% of the staff trained in operations and
maintenance. Through the annual review process those investments that have the necessary risk
assessments, engineering design and tender documents ready will move into implementation subject
to satisfactory review while the readiness filter will help ensure that those prioritized on technical
grounds are fast tracked through the preparation process.
4.     The three components proposed under the project are:
Component 1: Dam Safety Rehabilitation (US$405m of which IDA US$375m)
Page 2 of 13


﻿5.     This component will be implemented through MARD and the Provinces with the aim of
improving the safety of irrigation dams through physical rehabilitation of existing infrastructure. The
implementation includes two different approaches required for the rehabilitation of small and large
dams, community-managed dams. The difference between the two approaches relates not only to the
O
types of works and the regulatory framework involved, but also the institutional and implementation
arrangements required to undertake such works and ensure their sustainable operations and
maintenance. The activities would include: (i) detailed engineering design, safeguards policies
documents, supervision and quality control of rehabilitation works and associated safeguards
compliance for prioritized dams and associated infrastructure; (ii) rehabilitation works, including
civil works, hydro-mechanical works and installation of hydrological and safety monitoring system
equipment; (iii) preparation of Operation and Maintenance Plans, Instrumentation Plans and
Emergency Preparedness Plans; and (iv) preparation and adoption of standardized safety checklist for
community-managed dams. Financing under this component would be used for consulting services,
works, goods and non-consulting services. Implementation of a three steps process framework
applicable to this important component is presented in Annex 2.
Component 2: Dam Safety Management and Planning (US$40m of which IDA US$35m)
6.     This component will be implemented through MARD, MOIT and MONRE with the aim of
improving the planning and operational framework for dam management to safeguard the
downstream communities and socio-economic infrastructure. Three common and mutually
reinforcing sub-components are envisaged, including: (i) technical services and strategic studies; (ii)
institutional, legal and regulatory improvements; and (iii) capacity enhancement and professional
development. Technical services and strategic studies would include hydrological assessments;
installation of hydrological observation networks; development of an integrated information
management system for dam safety based on a common platform that will facilitate integration
within a scheme to inter-scheme within a basin and the national level; formulation and adoption of
emergency preparedness plans including dam break analyses, downstream flood mapping and
benchmarking; along with technical studies necessary such as hydrological study at basin level,
cascade operational procedures etc. to ensure compliance with internationally-accepted levels.
Institutional, legal and regulatory activities would include development of technical specifications,
safety norms and standards, including dam classifications, regular safety audit, emergency repair
procedures etc... Capacity enhancement and professional development would include specific
interventions to address operation and maintenance, enhance capacity, sensitize and simulate
execution of the emergency preparedness plans, coupled with community mobilization, awareness
and education. Financing under this component would be used for consultant services, works and
goods, equipment and non-consulting services. Detailed activities of and indicative budget allocation
for each participating ministries are presented in Annex 2.
Component 3: Project Management Support (US$15m of which IDA US$10m)
7.     This component will provide the necessary enabling environment to support project
implementation. This will include support for the following: (i) High Level Decis ion Making
Working Group (HLWG) composed of MARD, MolT and MoNRE, along with other relevant
Government agencies, to coordinate and oversee all project interventions; (ii) Project Management
Units (PMU) within MARD, MoNRE, MolT and the Provinces to provide the necessary support
services for timely and effective project implementation, including monitoring & evaluation,
procurement, financial management, safeguard monitoring, etc.; (iii) Technical Assistance for
Engineering and Quality Assurance; (iv) an Environmental and Social Service Provider; (v) an
independent international Panel of Experts (POE); (vi) Establishment and operations of a National
Dam Safety Review Panel; (vii) Technical Assistance for beneficiary departments within MARD,
Page 3 of 13


﻿MolT and MoNRE to provide the necessary support services for timely and effective project
implementation; and (viii) an Independent Third Party Monitor for construction and quality control.
Financing under this component would be used for consulting services, goods, equipment, non-
consulting services, and incremental operating costs associated with project implementation,
U        management and monitoring.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
analysis (if known)
An estimated 450 dams have been identified for inclusion under the project from 34 provinces in the
North, Central and Highland regions. The number of dams and provinces may vary due to the extent
of the rehabilitation and safety work and the availability of the budget. These prioritized under the
project have been identified through an iterative, consultative prioritization process with the national
authorities and provincial agencies in accordance with the framework developed during preparation.
The proposed project will be implemented in thirty four (34) provinces in the North, Central and
Highland regions. Fourteen (14) provinces (Ha Giang, Tuyen Quang, Yen Bai, Phu Tho, Quang
Ninh, Hoa Binh, Son La, Dien Bien, Cao Bang, Bac Kan, Bac Giang, Hai Duong, Ninh Binh and
Vinh Phuc) from North has been identified. The general topography of North is characterized by
mountainous terrain with narrow valleys and alluvial soil offering better opportunities for stable
agriculture. The variation in elevation and the unevenness of topography contribute to shaping an
environment that has diverse agro-ecological zones with specific development needs and priorities. It
stretches from the Red River valley to the Gulf of Tokin. Also fourteen (14) provinces (Ninh Binh,
Thanh Hoa, Nghe An, Ha Tinh, Quang Binh, Quang Tri, Thue Thien-Hue, Quang Ngai, Quang Nam,
Binh Dinh, Khanh Hoa, Phu Yen, Ninh Thuan and Binh Thuan) selected from Central part. This part
is sloping and narrow, its mountains, plains are closing to its coastline. The part is cut and divided by
rivers originating from western mountain ranges flowing into the South China Sea. Along the
coastline are small plains. Between sloping mountainsides are narrow and deep valleys. Another five
(5) provinces (Gia Lai, Dak Lak, Dak Nong, Lam Dong and Kon Tum) have selected Central
Highlands. The last one is Tay Ninh province in South-East region. Within the southern portion of
Vietnam is a plateau known as the central highlands approximately 51,800km2 of rugged mountain
peaks, extensive forests, and rich soil. Comprising relatively flat plateaus of basalt soil, the highlands
account for 16% of the country's arable land and 22% of its total forested land.
The first year twelve (12) subprojects have been selected from eleven (11) provinces. These are:
Tuyen Quang, Phu Tho, Quang Ninh, Hoa Binh (Northern); Thanh Hoa, Nghe An, Quang Binh,
Quang Ngai, Binh Dinh, Binh Thuan (Central) and Lam Dong (Highland). The ESIA of the 12 first
year sub-projects showed that the main functions of the dams are built to irrigation. Except Song
Quao Reservoir of Binh Thuan province that was constructed by penetrated asphalt concrete, the rest
of dams to be rehabilitated are earthen structures and are considered as small dams. Also, the small
and medium reservoirs were built since 1970s of the 20th century, some of them (Dai Thang
reservoir of Hoa Binh province) were constructed in 1960. The large dams are built in year 1990s
such as Song Quao (Binh Thuan province), Da Teh (Lam Dong province), Phu Vinh (Quang Binh
province) reservoirs.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Tuan Anh Le (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes         The physical rehabilitation works will be carried out in
Page 4 of 13


﻿Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 situ and mainly be limited to reshaping of the main and
auxiliary dams, slope stabilization by either concrete slab
or stone paving, strengthening or expansion of existing
spillways to increase the discharge capacity,
refurbishment of existing intake structures, replacement of
mechanical and electrical systems of intakes and
spillways, grouting for seepage control and improvement
of existing access management roads. Overall, the
environmental impacts of the project are expected to be
positive due to improvements of the safety of existing
dams and establishment of an effective system for
monitoring and ensuring the necessary operation and
maintenance. However, the subprojects will have several
construction related impacts and this policy has been
triggered to assess the environmental and social impacts
associated with the rehabilitation and safety improvement
work. Twelve (12) Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA) for 12 first year subprojects have
been prepared based on the agreed ToR. These ESIAs will
be further updated during preparation of the detailed
engineering designs of 12 subprojects particularly in
collecting additional baseline information as needed such
as waterways/river systems and aquatic flora. An ESMF
has been prepared and disclosed during preparation phase
given that the subprojects will be identified during project
implementation. Each subproject will go through
environmental and social screening. The full scale
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will
be carried out for all category 'A' subproject. Category
'B' subproject will require limited ESIA or ESMP.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         It is expected that no pristine or natural habitat area will
4.04                                  be inundated from rehabilitation and safety improvement
work. Also no significant change expected on
hydrological regime and ecosystems due to project related
activities. The first year subproject ESIAsindicate that
there will some loss of crops and trees. Also there is risk
associated with possible land and soil degradation in the
construction sites and vicinities including improper
disposal of construction wastes and spoils. The issue of
natural habitats will be addressed by subproject ESIA of
each subproject, which will assess the impact on aquatic
ecosystems and downstream users of dam.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           The proposed project will not have any impact on the
health and quality of forests, the rights and welfare of
people and their level of dependence upon or interaction
with forests; and the management, protection, or
utilization of natural forests or plantations. Subprojects
Page 5 of 13


﻿having negative impacts on forest will not be supported
under the project.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes           The project will not finance any procurement of fertilizers
and pesticides. However, some of the subproject activity
will result in increase of agriculture command areas. This
many lead to more uses of fertilizers and pesticides in the
project influence areas. Integrated Pest Management
(IPM) guidance has been included in the ESMF.
Physical Cultural        Yes          Since construction activities at dams will not be known a
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  priori, there is a possibility that due to excavation work,
property of historical, cultural or religious importance
may be found. ESMF has provided the guidance on
physical cultural properties.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes          Ethnic Minority peoples (as per OP 4.10) have been
BP 4.10                               identified as being present in some of the project areas -
as indicated in five of the twelve first-year subprojects.
Thus, an Ethnic Minority Policy Framework (EMPF) has
been prepared, as per OP 4.10, on the basis of the social
assessment, and free, prior, and informed consultation
with the EM present in first-year subprojects. EMPF is
used to guide preparation of EMDPs for first-year
subprojects, as well as subprojects to be identified during
project implementation. On the basis of free, prior, and
informed consultation with EM peoples from five first-
year subprojects, there is a broad community support from
EM peoples for these subproject implementation because
these subprojects aims to improve dam safety and ensure
reliable water access for irrigation. Where adverse impact
is anticipated, and is likely affecting EM peoples (i.e. Dai
Thang subproject, Hoa Binh province), mitigations
measures were developed (as part of subproject RAP) to
address adverse impact, and development activities were
developed (as part of EMDP) in consultation with the
affected EM to ensure affected EM receive development
supports that are culturally appropriate to them. During
project implementation, new subprojects to be identified
will be subject to social screening. This is to ensure new
subprojects will be financed only when there is a broad
community support from EM peoples at subprojects that
affect them. Broad community support will be obtained
on the basis of free, prior, and informed consultation with
EM peoples from the subproject area.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          The project will require (minor) temporary and permanent
OP/BP 4.12                            land acquisition. In addition, construction phase impacts
may affect the supply of irrigation water to agricultural
producers with some subprojects. Thus, a Resettlement
Page 6 of 13


﻿Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared in accordance
with OP 4.12. RPF has been used to guide the preparation
of 11 first-year subprojects, and subsequent RAPs to be
identified during project implementation. On the basis of
the 12 first-year subprojects, only 103 households are
permanently affected with their land and crops. Only 13
need to resettle. Most are temporary affected as a result of
land taking. Temporary water restriction is anticipated at
three out of 12 first year subprojects for which their
impact are compensated for through subproject RAPs.
Given the scope of dam rehabilitation and the nature of
impact, it is anticipated that the impact at the subproject
level are minor. Where adverse impact are not avoidable -
through engineering alternatives, compensation/support
will be made 0 as per project's RPF.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes          The project is focused on interventions aimed at
4.37                                 improving the safety of dams with identified rehabilitation
needs and at risk of structural failure and so the project is
designed to directly address the requirements of the
policy. Each subproject will prepare Dam Safety Report
(DSR) based on the Dam Safety Framework (DSF). The
DSR of 12 first year subprojects have been completed and
reviewed
Projects on International  Yes       It is expected that some of the dams may be located on
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 international river basins. As physical project activities
would be of rehabilitation nature, a waiver for notification
has been sought in accordance with the OP.
Projects in Disputed    No
U         Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The primary objective of the project is to improve dam safety. The project thereby increases
protection to people and socio-economic infrastructure downstream of dams facing high risk of
failure and improves dam safety management at national and scheme level. The project has been
designed to provide a comprehensive risk based, portfolio approach that provides a framework for
the identification, selection and prioritization of dams at risk. It includes structural measures to
support the physical rehabilitation of dams and appurtenant structures, along with non-structural,
institutional and regulatory measures to enhance the long term operational sustainability.
A comprehensive risk based, portfolio approach that provides a framework for the identification,
selection and prioritization of dams at risk has been developed during preparation based on
established techniques and standard approaches for dam rehabilitation and management to enable
implementation across a large number, distribution and type of dams. The approach is aimed at re-
Page 7 of 13


﻿enforcing the Government systems to guide the selection and prioritization of dams to be
rehabilitated under Component 1 of the project and has been developed using a three step process.
This is based on an a priori agreed set of selection criteria aimed at prioritizing those interventions
that address the risks within an explicit poverty and inequality framework, including those to: (i)
O
determine the eligibility for financing under the project; (ii) prioritize the interventions; and, (iii)
inform the level of readiness.
The proposed project is not intended to support significant structural modifications or expansions
beyond what is needed to ensure safety. The rehabilitation will be limited to reshaping of the main
and auxiliary dams, slope stabilization by either concrete slab or in-situ or stone paving,
strengthening or expansion of existing spillways to increase the discharge capacity, refurbishment
of existing intake structures, replacement of mechanical and electrical systems of intakes and
spillways, grouting for seepage control and improvement of existing access management roads.
However, the feasibility study indicates some dams may require an increase in height to improve
dam safety perspective. Nevertheless the increase in dam height does not necessarily mean
increase in the storage capacity unless the elevation of the spillway crest also increased. The
project will support the increase of height of a dam only after assessing the supporting evidence to
demonstrate the improved safety benefits.
The rehabilitation work will also not expect to modify the hydrological flow or regime. However,
there will likely be impacts during the implementation such as construction activities for
improving the access roads, worksite camp facilities, borrow pits, quarries and dumping sites. The
other environmental impacts may include temporary traffic congestion, construction related
worker health and safety, service disruption due to civil works and the potential temporary flood
risk in downstream during construction period etc.
A Social Assessment was conducted in an integral manner with environmental assessment for
twelve first-year subprojects. The findings confirm the overall project impact is positive. However,
some adverse impacts are not avoidable. These include minor permanent acquisition of land (for
most dams) and temporary impact on farming activities of the people downstream (for some dams)
where water supply are reduced/interrupted to allow rehabilitation activities. Impacts resulting
from land acquisition and water cut during dam rehabilitation are compensated for as per project's
RPF. In subprojects where ethnic minority peoples are present, as confirmed by ethnic minority
a           screening, an Ethnic Minority Development Plan is prepared on the basis of the results of social
assessments and consultations with ethnic minorities. Consultations with ethnic minority peoples
were conducted in a free, prior and informed manner with the aim to inform local ethnic minority
communities of the project activities, including its potential project impacts, and on the basis of
that, solicit their feedback, and broad community support from EM peoples for project
implementation. Since the overall impact for the twelve first-year subprojects is positive whereas
negative impact on ethnic minority peoples is overall small (only with one subproject of Dai
Thang, Hoa Binh province), ethnic minority peoples consulted (from five of twelves subprojects
having EM peoples) indicated their broad community support for subproject implementation.
Gender analysis was conducted as part of SA for each subproject, and gender action and
monitoring plan was developed to promote gender equality and community participation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The physical rehabilitation works will be carried out in situ and the proposed project is not
intended to support significant structural modifications or expansions beyond that required to
Page 8 of 13


﻿ensure dam safety. No major in-direct or long-term negative impacts are expected. Both the
structural and non-structural work will result in reducing dam failure. Since the rehabilitation of
dam will increase the agricultural command areas, the project may have some negative impact due
to application of fertilizers and pesticides. No potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible
O
social impacts that are envisaged - as forecast through the social assessment and environmental
assessment of the project activities.
O
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
All the subprojects will be reviewed with the context of 'no project' option. In addition, the other
facilities like the access road will be assessed with alternative routes, methods of construction etc.
All subprojects will consider various construction measures to avoid/minimize the need for land
acquisition, and avoid temporary impact on farming activities downstream the dam due to
temporary water cut for rehabilitation purpose. The ESIA will consider the technical, financial,
environmental and social aspects in carrying out the alternative analysis. All the alternative
analysis will also be considered with no subproject situation and also consider the increase of
height from safety perspective (if necessary).
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since sub-projects will be identified during the project implementation phase, a framework
approach has been adopted for the project. MARD has prepared the Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) by hiring consultant. The ESMF has been prepared based on
the: (i) reviewing the environmental and social policy requirement of the World Bank and the
requirement of the national legislation; (ii) environmental and social impact assessment of twelve
(12) subprojects of the first year; (iii) experience of similar kind of the World Bank supported
project implementation; (iv) stakeholders consultations during project preparation; and (v)
identification of the institutional barriers and capacity building needs for environmental
management. The ESMF also provides guidance on screening of social and environmental legacy
issues. It includes also guidance of screening for protected area, and how to prepare process
framework in cases new sub-projects are located in a protected area, and/or national parts. The
ESMF meets the requirements of the World Bank Environment Safeguard Policy and also the
requirement of the Government of Vietnam. The ESMF will be complemented by the Dam Safety
Framework (DSF), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and the Ethnic Minority Policy
Framework (EMPF). Fifty-four different safeguard instruments have been prepared during
preparation for the 12 first-phase sub-projects. These include 12 integrated ESIAs, 12 stand-alone
SAs, 11 RAPs and one Abbreviated-RAP, five EMDPs, 12 DSRs and one consolidated Executive
Summaries of all ESIAs.
MARD has reasonable experience in implementing the environmental management framework of
the World Bank funded projects. To support project preparation, a Project Preparation Team (PPT)
has been established under the Central Project Office of the Ministry of Agriculture and Rural
Development. The PPT is the formal and focal team responsible for preparation of safeguards
documents and obtain necessary approval from the Government for the prepared safeguards
document. For implementation of the project, a Central Project Management Unit (CPMU) will be
established under the Central Project Office of MARD with responsibility for implementation.
CPMU will be also responsible for guiding project provinces, reviewing and determining the
eligibility, prioritization and readiness of the sub-project investments, as well as capacity building
and compliance assurance with regards to the safeguards frameworks/requirements, and the sub-
project assessments. CPMU will hire the services from an International Environment & Social
Page 9 of 13


﻿firm to review the safeguards documents and also supervise the implementation of the
Environment and Social Management Pan. In addition, an Independent Third Party Monitor will
be engaged by CPMU to carry out regular, independent monitoring and evaluations of subproject
RAP, EMDP, ESIAs, EMPs, etc... to ensure safeguard compliance with the approved safeguards
O
frameworks.
A National Dam Safety Review Panel and an International Dam Safety Panel would be established
under the project to provide independent review and guidance to MARD and the Provincial
authorities during implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The principal project beneficiaries are: i) households relying on dams and associated appurtenant
for irrigated agricultural and aquaculture production, water supply and hydropower generation;
and ii) those downstream communities and economic activities that are at risk in the event of dam
failure.
The other stakeholders are different government ministries including Ministry of Agriculture and
Rural Development (MARD), Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT), Ministry of Natural
Resources and Environment (MONRE), Provincial People's Committee (PPC), private owners,
consultants, contractors etc. The ESMF and 12 subprojects have been developed through detailed
consultative process especially project affected people. All the relevant project stakeholders,
including project beneficiaries and project (adversely) affected households were consulted during
the social assessment exercises. EM peoples present in the subproject areas were also consulted in
a free, prior, and information manner to confirm broad community support from them for
subproject implementation.
The draft ESMF document and Executive Summary of twelve (12) subprojects ESIAs with
Vietnamese version has been disclosed both in the MARD website (www.mard.gov.vn) on May
29, 2015 and the Bank's Infoshop on May 28, 2015 for public comments. The hard copies of the
document have also been made available in provincial level DARD offices. The following social
documents were disclosed on Bank's Infoshop; RPF, EMPF (25 May 2015), 11 RAPs (26 May
2015), 5 SAs (23 June 2015), 5 EMDPs (25 May, and 27 June 2015). These documents were also
disclosed locally in Vietnamese; RPF, EMPF, 11 RAPs, 1 EMDP (29 May 2015), and 5 SA and 4
EMDP (3 July 2015).
The preparation of TOR for safeguards preparation was initiated in February 27th, 2015 by
MARD with participations of the relevant organization of MARD including Directorate of Water
Resources, Department of International Cooperation, non-governmental organizations such as
Committee on Large Dams and Water Development, Society of Irrigation, Water Resources
Association, Office of Water Partnership Network of Vietnam, Centre for Natural Resources and
Environment (CRES), Institute of Economics Ecology (ECO-ECO), Vietnam Association for
Conservation of Nature and Environment (VACNE), Institute of Environment and Resources
(IER), Representative staffs of Department of Agriculture and Rural Development of the first year
subprojects, Environmental and Social Consultants at central level, Environmental and Social
Consultants of the first year subproject.
Extensive consultation taken place at the provincial levels during the twelve (12) priority dam's
ESIA preparation. These consultations provided valuable information for the ESIAs preparation as
Page 10 of 13


﻿well as developing the ESMF. During the public consultation, the participants expressed their
strong supports for investments under the project. Sub-project investments have been proposed,
which will improve the safety of dam whereby resolve concerns of the locals people on potential
risks to ensure stable and safe production, life of the people, and improve the quality of life.
O
Q)          Besides, the participants also expressed their concerns about compensation related to land
acquisition and measures to minimize the impact of the construction (such as interrupting water
for irrigation and domestic users during construction phase, support and compensation,
compliance, etc.).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           29-May-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              25-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                        00000000
Date of submission to InfoShop                           00000000
"In country" Disclosure
0
a          Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                              //
Date of submission to InfoShop                           //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Physical Cultural Resources Policies have been covered under ESIA.
Page 11 of 13


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [    ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes     No        NA
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                     Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [    ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [    ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [    ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
Page 12 of 13


﻿OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                Yes[   ]  No[    ]   NA[   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Cuong Hung Pham,Marcus J. Wishart
Approved By
O
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Surhid P. Gautam (SA)               Date: 10-Aug-2015
Practice Manager!     Name: Almud Weitz (PMGR)                  Date: 10-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 13 of 13


