                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC15963

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Jan-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Caribbean                      Project ID:       P158239
                            Project Name:        SEMCAR Budget and Revenue Systems Enhancement Project
                            Team Leader(s):      Ruxandra Burdescu,Davide Zucchini
                            Estimated Date       29-Jan-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GGO16                          Lending           Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Central government administration (25%), Public administration- Information
                                                 and communications (50%), Information technology (25%)
                            Theme(s):            Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (50%), e-
                                                 Government (50%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 4.806                          Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              MDTF for SEMCAR Phase 1                                                                     4.806
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           SEMCAR's overall objective is to improve economic management, regional integration and
                           competitiveness in up to 12 Caribbean countries through more efficient, effective and accountable
                           public institutions, policies, processes and ICT systems. This is being achieved through the provision
                           of policy advice, technical assistance and selected ICT investments. The Project Development
                           Objective (PDO) of the proposed operation is to strengthen and modernize selected ICT systems in
                           Tax, Customs, and Public Financial Management used by targeted institutions in Antigua and
                           Barbuda, Belize, Dominica, Grenada, St. Kitts and Nevis, St. Lucia, and St. Vincent and the
                           Grenadines. The proposed operation is expected to contribute to SEMCAR’s key results through: (i)
                           improved revenue collection due to more efficient processing and clearance procedures, (ii)
                           enhanced investment climate and economic development due to efficiency gains, and (iii) greater
                           access to crucial information that will allow for the formulation of more sound macro-economic and
                           fiscal policies. Therefore, the ICT investments aimed for under the project will enable the Recipients
                           to institutionalize and operationalize key policies and processes developed under SEMCAR, and
                           thereby contribute to improved economic management in the region.
                         C. Project Description
                         The Project has the following three (3) main components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Strengthening the SIGTAS Tax Administration System

                         This component will contribute to establishing a common regionally consistent ICT application for
                         use in revenue administration. Specifically, the beneficiaries’ use of SIGTAS will be enhanced with
                         the introduction of a business intelligence (BI) tool and the implementation of a suite of performance
                         management reports to support effective operational management, in addition to timely and effective
                         decision making. The component will also support data quality improvement as well as effective
                         registration and maintenance of a reliable taxpayer database. Activities to be supported will include:
                         (1) acquisition and installation of necessary hardware components, software and licensing for
                         selected SIGTAS components; (2) migration of SIGTAS to Oracle 11G in selected beneficiary
                         countries; (3) purchase and installation of an updated BI solution and integrate it with SIGTAS in
                         targeted beneficiary countries; (4) carrying out of data analysis and cleansing of taxpayer registration
                         data; and (5) provision of training to technical staff on maintenance of SIGTAS and to business users
                         on utilization of the BI solution.

                         While the existing technical infrastructure will be replaced and a new system for BI will be
                         implemented, existing core SIGTAS functionalities will remain unchanged. The BI solution to be
                         implementation in all countries will be based on the solution that is already deployed in St. Kitts and
                         Nevis. This solution will be extended with implementation functionalities for data analysis and
                         quality improvement in SIGTAS.

                         Component 2: Infrastructure Equipment for the ASYCUDA World Customs Administration System

                         Component 2 will support Antigua and Barbuda in strengthening customs administration in its
                         territory through the implementation of ASYCUDA World. Given the Government's fiscal
Public Disclosure Copy




                         constraints, Component 2 will aid Antigua and Barbuda by funding the procurement of requisite
                         hardware and software that are needed for the successful implementation of ASYCUDA. To this end,
                         the component will cater to the acquiring of (1) hardware and servers for production applications,
                         databases, web and other ICT infrastructure; (2) software licenses for databases and associated
                         servers; and (3) computers, notebooks and other related goods.

                         Component 3: Strengthening the SmartStream Financial Management System

                         Component 3 will support the Governments of Belize, Dominica, Grenada, St Lucia and St. Vincent
                         and the Grenadines to enhance the technical comprehensiveness of their Financial Management
                         Information Systems by upgrading select hardware and software modules. Activities supported will
                         include: (1) a region-wide SmartStream Financial Application Review and other similar research; (2)
                         procurement of hardware, servers and licenses for production applications, databases and other
                         related ICT infrastructure; (3) migration of SmartStream to the present-day version in selected
                         countries; (4) provision of training; and (5) acquisition of computers, notebooks and other related
                         goods.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           M. Yaa Pokua Afriyie Oppong (GSU04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/                 No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Public Disclosure Copy




                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Ruxandra Burdescu,Davide Zucchini
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                                      Date: 21-Jan-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Arturo Herrera Gutierrez (PMGR)                              Date: 21-Jan-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
