                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Jul-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23120




                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                              Page 1 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Project ID                           Project Name                 Environmental Category    Country
                                                                 Entrepreneurship-focused
                                                                 socioemotional skills for    B - Partial Assessment
                            P165310                                                                                     Mongolia
                                                                 the most vulnerable youth    (B)
                                                                 in rural Mongolia
                            Team Leader(s)                       Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit             Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                        Investment Project
                            Rabia Ali                                                         GED02
                                                                                                                        Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                      2.75
                           Total Financing                                                                                                         2.75
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00

                           DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                               Trust Funds                                                                                                        2.75
                                  Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                   2.75


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           25.     The project development objective (PDO) is to empower 6,000 vulnerable, disadvantaged youth in 25 of
                           Mongolia’s poorest rural districts across five provinces with socioemotional skills for improved performance in school
                           and preparation for entry into the labor market.

                           The PDO will be achieved through a school-based, community-driven youth program for supporting acquisition of
                           socioemotional skills that are linked not just to success in school, but are also highly valued in the labor market. Older
                           youths will receive training targeted more specifically to enhancing entrepreneurial knowledge and skills. The project
                           will address the largely unmet need for socioemotional and entrepreneurship skills stemming from extremely limited
                           labor market opportunities that lead to high inactivity among youth in these locations and a job profile dominated by
                           traditional herding, unpaid work and self-employment in the informal sector.

                           C. Project Description

                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                                        Page 2 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                           28. The project will consist of three components. Component 1 will support development and introduction of
                           a community-driven, locally-tailored, innovative socioemotional skills program for vulnerable rural youth.
                           Older youths will receive training targeted more specifically to enhancing entrepreneurial skills and
                           knowledge. Component 2 will establish mechanisms for the target youth to practically apply
                           entrepreneurship knowledge to meet the local market needs and business opportunities. Component 3 will
                           enhance the policy environment in support of entrepreneurship education through evidence-based advocacy
                           and public outreach campaigns, and provide support for participatory M&E and project management.

                           Component 1: Development and implementation of an innovative community-driven program on
                           entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for vulnerable rural youth (estimated cost: US$993,025)

                           29. This component will undertake the following activities: (i) develop a hands-on, innovative
                           entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional learning (ESEL) curriculum and associated package of learning
Public Disclosure Copy




                           materials for use by youth and teachers in schools and LLCs in target soums; (ii) develop materials to train
                           teachers in target schools and LLCs on implementing the ESEL course, including counseling and mentoring of
                           students, and deliver the teacher training; (iii) design and implement community awareness information
                           campaigns in each year of the project; (iv) design and implement sensitization trainings for parents;
                           (v) establish a multi-stakeholder networking platform consisting of local councils at the aimag and soum
                           levels to undertake bottom-up design of all project deliverables, ensure alignment with local economic
                           conditions, and support implementation of project activities, including design of localized solutions to
                           challenges faced.

                           30. Link with PDO: These activities, targeted to the most disadvantaged and vulnerable adolescents in
                           Mongolia’s poorest soums, seek to empower beneficiaries economically by imparting to them a set of
                           socioemotional skills linked with success both in school and, in the longer run, the labor market. For the
                           subset of older beneficiaries of upper-secondary-school age, as well as adolescents who have dropped out of
                           school, additional entrepreneurship-focused training will help prepare for transition to a labor market
                           dominated by informal work and self-employment. Beneficiaries are expected to increase their self-efficacy,
                           need for achievement, and risk-taking propensity, and become more persistent, pro-active and creative. In
                           settings across the world, such skills and personality traits have proven to be associated both with improved
                           academic performance and superior labor market outcomes, particularly in relation to entrepreneurial
                           attitudes and intentions. In addition, the training delivered to teachers will improve teachers’ knowledge and
                           understanding of the significance of social emotional learning among children and adolescents, and build
                           their competencies in mentoring and shaping mindsets to exercise creativity, innovation and measured risk-
                           taking, and develop other soft skills needed to thrive academically and later in life.

                           Subcomponent 1.1 Development and piloting of an innovative, locally-tailored entrepreneurship-focused
                           socioemotional learning (ESEL) curriculum and training package (estimated cost: US$920,525)

                           31. The main activity of this sub-component will be development of a one-year course curriculum and
                           training materials for 8-12th grade students, to be delivered by teachers in schools and LLCs. Four experts
                           (two experts with extensive experience and knowledge of the education system, one of entrepreneurship,


                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                              Page 3 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                           and one of socioemotional skills) will develop a training package for both teachers and students. The course
                           content will be customized to the somewhat different needs of the lower- and upper-secondary-school age
                           youth. All participants will receive training on socioemotional skills (self-efficacy, perseverance, taking
                           initiative, risk taking, creativity, problem solving). But for older youth of upper-secondary-school age (16-19
                           years), as well as those who have already dropped out of school, additional course content will focus more
                           concretely on the school-to-work transition, through modules on technical knowledge for entrepreneurship
                           (e.g. basics of entrepreneurship, value creation, economic and financial literacy, etc.) and entrepreneurship-
                           specific skills (e.g. creation of business and financial plans, leadership, etc.). These technical knowledge and
                           skills training modules will draw on the abstract business concepts covered under MECSS’s existing business
                           course curriculum, and will customize it for practical application using real-world business scenarios relevant
                           for the rural settings in which the youth are resident. This will be done under MECSS’s supervision. The venue
                           and mode of training delivery will be designed to accommodate the specific constraints faced by vulnerable
                           youth in the target group. For example, for youth that have already dropped out of school, the training
Public Disclosure Copy




                           would be delivered in LLCs. The course materials will be made available in languages other than Mongolian in
                           the event of presence of ethnic minorities in the project’s target soums.

                           32. The training package will consist of a teacher training manual (teachers’ guide) that will cover pedagogy
                           methods for the targeted soum-level LLC and secondary school teachers, as well as a students’ workbook.
                           The teacher training will aim to develop teacher competencies related to creativity and entrepreneurship to
                           help inspire students, and to nurture entrepreneurial attitudes among them. A range of teaching, facilitation,
                           and learning methodologies (including presentations, individual assignments, group meetings with guest
                           speakers, case studies, real-life business simulations, group exercises, and internet-based learning) will be
                           introduced. Training of trainers will be organized at target aimag centers during school holidays, once
                           teacher training materials have been developed by the experts. The curriculum will be delivered annually
                           over the course of 35 weeks of the academic year. Training on entrepreneurship will also be provided for the
                           parents of youth enrolled in the ESEL course.

                           33. The ESEL course curriculum and the main components of the training package will be pre-tested in one
                           soum within 5 months after project initiation; based on the pre-test results, the content of the package will
                           be revised and finalized. For 8th -12th grade students enrolled in secondary schools in target soums, the
                           course will be offered as part of elective courses offered during the school year. For out-of-school youth,
                           including those attending catch-up “equivalency” programs, the course will be offered at the LLCs attached
                           to schools in target soums. The project will carry out community awareness and information programs prior
                           to rollout of the pilot, and prior to each subsequent school year of the project.

                           34. ESEL course participants will be provided with access to a designated counsellor at each target school and
                           LLC, available throughout the duration of the course and through its completion. The counsellors will be
                           trained to identify and develop strategies to work with youth most vulnerable to dropping out of school, e.g.
                           those from herders’ families. The mentoring will aim to prepare, coach, and encourage youth to complete
                           the ESEL course. The counselling will seek to identify and alleviate personal issues and dysfunctional
                           attitudes, as well as values and behaviors that could be a barrier to success both academically at the
                           secondary school and higher education levels and later on when entering the labor market through self-

                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                              Page 4 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                           employment or otherwise. Counsellors would support participants’ decision-making on schooling and life
                           transitions, liaising with parents when necessary. Referrals will be provided for further training opportunities,
                           including TVET and higher education, scholarship services for further education, and health and employment
                           services.

                           35. A total of 125 participants (i.e., three teachers and two counsellors from each of the 25 soums) will be
                           trained during the first year of the project implementation. These teachers and counsellors of secondary
                           schools and LLCs will be provided with monetary incentives, based on the rate set under teachers’ hourly
                           remuneration system. After the pre-testing and finalization of the ESEL course curriculum and the main
                           components of the training package, training of both teachers and counsellors will be organized at target
                           aimag centers. The UB-based project management team and consultants will travel to target aimags and
                           soums for training sessions and other project-related activities. Four field facilitators/trainers will provide
                           support for project implementation in close coordination with the UB-based project team, and aimag- and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           soum-based stakeholders. The project’s aimags and soums are some of the remotest locations in Mongolia:
                           In general, distance between soums ranges between 50 and 300 kilometers, while distance between aimags
                           ranges between 400 and 1500 kilometers.

                           Subcomponent 1.2 Establishment of a multi-stakeholder coordination and networking platform to support
                           implementation of the training program (estimated cost: US$72, 500)

                           36. Upon commencement of the project, local councils at the aimag level and at the soum level will be
                           established. The aimag-level council (ALC) will be comprised of technical experts including business
                           associations, private sector stakeholders, government officials including investment, local development
                           policy and planning department, education and labor departments, Mongolian National Chamber of
                           Commerce and Industry (MNCCI) and relevant NGOs. The ALC’s role is to provide inputs for development of
                           the ESEL curriculum and training package under subcomponent 1.1 as well as technical guidance to the
                           soum-based local councils (SLCs). ALCs will also be responsible for creation of panels of judges to organize
                           the soum-level competition for the award of grants under component 2. SLCs created under this
                           subcomponent will work under the direction of their respective ALCs and will consist of representatives from
                           among parents of the targeted youth, teachers and other school administrators, private sector stakeholders,
                           and soum government. SLC will support all project activities within soums. The SLCs and ALCs together
                           constitute a multi-stakeholder networking platform that will come together in quarterly meetings to review
                           project implementation and outputs produced, suggest improvements needed to fine-tune alignment of
                           project activities with local economic and school conditions, and brainstorm solutions to problems reported
                           by project school teachers and other school administrators. The project will provide support for the ALCs and
                           SLCs to build their capacity to conduct project monitoring activities. Special attention will be paid to ensure
                           that representatives of ethnic minority communities are represented on ALCs and SLCs, in soums where
                           these communities are resident.

                           Component 2: Introduction of a small grant mechanism to enable target youth to practically apply
                           entrepreneurship knowledge (estimated cost: US$809,900)



                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                              Page 5 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                           37. This component will undertake the following activities: (i) design and pilot an innovative seed capital
                           scheme to finance competitively-selected business proposals developed by youth teams in target soums who
                           would receive customized business training and personalized coaching and mentoring, and implement their
                           proposals under supervision of ALCs and SLCs; (ii) sensitize stakeholders to and align all project activities with
                           the Children's Rights and Business Principles (CRBP); (iii) disseminate the most successful business ideas
                           implemented under the seed capital scheme, including through experience sharing events for target youth
                           and community-based information campaigns; and (iv) conduct a comprehensive economic assessment and
                           market analysis to explore potential for creation of school-based enterprises (SBEs) in the project’s target
                           soums.

                           38. Link with PDO: The seed capital (or small grant) scheme will provide a mechanism to enable older youth
                           in the project’s target group to practically apply entrepreneurship knowledge and social emotional learning
                           acquired under component 1 to identify and harness unexploited business opportunities at the local level.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Thus, component-2 activities associated with the small grant scheme will deepen the development impact
                           of the ESEL training under component 1, further strengthening potential for self-employment and economic
                           empowerment among target youth through enhancement of entrepreneurial attitudes, intentions and
                           behaviors, leading to enhanced capacity of doing business.

                           39. To ensure that grants are used for exploiting untapped business opportunities available at the soum level
                           and proceeds directed towards activities with potential for economic productivity that allow practical
                           application of skills acquired under the ESEL course, the business idea selection criteria will be carefully
                           prepared in consultation with soum labor and economic development authorities. Aimag and soum
                           governments regularly publish economic development plans and priorities which identify sectors with
                           greatest potential for growth. Selected proposals will demonstrate adequate alignment with these soum-
                           level priorities. Ensuring this alignment will also allow for mobilization of supplementary resources available
                           at the soum level through the local government and through schools, and enhance potential for sustainable
                           implementation of successful business ideas. Close attention will be paid to the relevance of the business
                           proposal, its feasibility, and its approach to measured risk-taking and managing risks, given the economic
                           conditions of each soum. Together, these measures are intended to ensure that the grants are not
                           considered to be handouts or social transfers; rather, these are investments intended to nurture
                           entrepreneurial skills and mindsets through giving target youth a chance to creatively explore, assess and
                           harness business opportunities that they could have never explored or tapped in the absence of such grants.

                           40. Under a designated supervisor, ESEL course participants will work in teams to develop business plans for
                           submission in a soum-level competition, organized under the project, for a chance to win seed capital to fund
                           business ideas proposed. Team members will need to be at least of upper-secondary-school age (16-19
                           years). At the end of the ESEL course, each team would submit a proposal describing a business idea feasible
                           for implementation at the soum level, a basic marketing and primary customer assessment, and an estimated
                           budget. The business proposal template would be introduced to target youth as part of the ESEL course. Up
                           to 6 teams will be selected from each of the 25 soums to receive small project-financed grants of up to
                           US$1,000 per team each year to implement their business ideas over the course of one to two years, under
                           guidance of the team supervisor. Local trainers in each aimag will also receive coaching from UB-based

                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                               Page 6 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                           business consultants to build capacity to provide mentoring to successful teams. All teams preparing
                           proposals will receive business training and personalized coaching organized through school extracurricular
                           activities such as entrepreneurship clubs. Local stakeholders including private sector representatives will also
                           be invited to provide coaching and mentoring to support teams in development of their business plans.
                           Activities will be aligned with Children's Rights and Business Principles (CRBP)[9], which will be disseminated
                           during project workshops, meetings and campaigns to all stakeholders, including the youth teams.

                           41. Teams whose business ideas are selected for implementation will be partnered with relevant
                           stakeholders including the local government office and members of the Mongolian National Chamber of
                           Commerce and Industry (MNCCI), to improve quality of implementation. Where relevant, ALCs will work with
                           MNCCI and other stakeholders to develop relationships between the youth teams and potential markets
                           external to the team’s soum or aimag, and facilitate market linkages. Experience sharing events among
                           participating teams will be organized to observe the best business ideas in other soums. This hands-on
Public Disclosure Copy




                           approach will strengthen youths’ enthusiasm for the course by engaging them in a creative exercise that is
                           relevant to the economic life of their community. It will also give participating youth an opportunity to gain
                           the experience of working in teams and practically apply communication and other skills developed
                           throughout the course.

                           42. A grant manual will be developed and disseminated in order to clarify requirements for key
                           elements expected in youth’s business proposals, criteria and procedures for short-listing and selection of
                           proposals, youth team composition, beneficiary eligibility and selection criteria, the governance structure for
                           grant award and implementation, the grants’ expected outcomes, grant agreement signing and termination
                           procedure, and reporting and monitoring, among others. The manual will be made available in languages
                           other than Mongolian in the event of presence of ethnic minorities in the project’s target soums e.g. Khovd
                           soum of Khovd aimag. The following paragraphs of the PIN outline the key elements of the governance
                           structure and criteria for awarding grants, and these elements will be fleshed out in the grant manual.

                           43. Selection of proposals and grant awards: ALCs, set up under component 1 of the project, will establish an
                           independent panel of judges for each soum to organize soum-level competitions for the award of grants, and
                           to review and evaluate the proposals received, jointly with the SCJ project management team. The panel of
                           judges will consist of three individuals: two MNCCI or TVET representatives at the aimag center level, and
                           one representative of the business community in the respective soum. Organization of grant competitions at
                           the soum level is expected to attract more participants to the ESEL course. The selection criteria for
                           proposals include, among others, potential to improve the quality and productivity of economic activity
                           within the community and alignment with soum-level development priorities where beneficial, potential for
                           sustainability, strong environmental awareness, innovativeness, and potential for profitability. The judges
                           will score proposals that meet all the requirements and eligibility based on each selection criteria for short-
                           listing. Applicants whose proposals are short-listed will present their business ideas to the judges at the grant
                           competitions. Based on the teams’ presentation of proposals, the judges will select and award teams in
                           accordance with the grant manual’s guidelines and selection criteria, also jointly with SCJ. The judges will
                           receive a small daily remuneration to cover their per diem, accommodation, and transportation costs.
                           Eligibility criteria for the grants would include age restrictions, with all team members required to be

                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                              Page 7 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                           between 16-19 years old at time of grant application and resident in the project’s target soum. The grant
                           manual would also include a template for youth team business proposals.

                           44. Implementation and monitoring of grant activities and expenditures: A trilateral agreement will be signed
                           between SCJ, the selected school director (on behalf of the youth team), and the chairperson of the SLC. This
                           agreement will be a legally-binding document that clarifies the role and responsibilities of each signatory in
                           proposal implementation, monitoring and reporting on use grant of proceeds, and financial management.
                           The chairperson’s written declaration of such purpose and his/her responsibility of using the account for the
                           agreed purposes will be attached to the grant agreement. Overall, the roles and responsibilities will be
                           shared between the three parties in the following manner: (i) The SLC and the youth team supervisor will
                           monitor the day-to-day activities funded by the grant and carried out by the youth team, including
                           adherence to sound financial management practices including audits to ensure that grants are not subjected
                           to misuse and that expenditures exclude items from a negative list prepared in consultation with soum
Public Disclosure Copy




                           government and labor authorities; (ii) SLCs will work with ALCs to facilitate youth teams’ engagement with
                           MNCCI and other private sector stakeholders; (iii) SCJ, together with each ALC, will monitor implementation
                           of grant-financed business ideas through joint supervision missions. A template for tripartite agreements will
                           be included in the grant manual. The SLC will meet with youth teams at least once a month during the first
                           four months of implementation to brainstorm solutions to problems faced; thereafter the meeting frequency
                           will be reduced to once a quarter to receive an update from the team on implementation of activities,
                           expenditures and profits to date. Non- or low-performing business ideas will be identified within the first
                           quarter of implementation, reported to the respective ALC and SCJ, and will receive increased scrutiny and
                           handholding from the SLC, ALC, and counsellors. The SLC will update ALCs and SCJ on grant activities and
                           expenditures through quarterly reports mandated under component 3 of the project. The grant proceeds will
                           be transferred to the SLC’s account in three installments, constituting 40, 50, and 10 percent of the total
                           value of the grant, respectively. The transfer of the second and third installments will require joint approval
                           by SCJ and the respective ALC. Criteria for approval of transfers will also be stated in the tripartite
                           agreement.

                           45. Grant completion/closing formalities: A grant completion report describing achievement of business
                           objectives and lessons learnt would be prepared by the youth teams upon completion of activities. As part of
                           the counseling offered under the project, SLCs, in conjunction with ALCs and SCJ, would provide feedback to
                           youth teams whose business ideas were not selected and advice offered on how the proposals could be
                           improved for submission in the next round, and the teams would be encouraged to apply again in the
                           subsequent year. All interested youth would be provided referrals to existing micro-finance or credit
                           providers. Upon completion of grant implementation among youth teams whose ideas were selected,
                           counseling sessions will provide an opportunity for teams to reflect on the work and learning achieved, the
                           challenges faced, successful and unsuccessful strategies employed while implementing the grant, and
                           practical life lessons learnt or skills acquired during the experience.

                           46. A large share of grant proceeds are expected to go towards initial investments in small equipment, tools,
                           and materials, and operating costs at start-up, and youth team business ideas are expected to be
                           concentrated in (i) services and sales (e.g. tourism and hospitality – tour operation, customer welcoming,

                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                              Page 8 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                           sightseeing, theory of B&B; electrical product repair; tailoring; carpentry; vehicle repair/maintenance;
                           Internet cafés/IT services; produce vendors); (ii) small-scale, labor intensive production of goods (handmade
                           products from locally-sourced raw and other materials including those derived from livestock; leather crafts,
                           woolen products, dairy products, arts and crafts, clothing and textiles, toys and learning materials for young
                           children, shoes, etc.); and (iii) food production, agriculture and animal husbandry (e.g. running semi-settled
                           or intensive farming, animal health and breeding, farming management, animal feed e.g. making fodder,
                           greenhouse and food processing, vegetable planting, growing, cooking, pickling etc.).

                           47. A comprehensive economic assessment and market analysis will be conducted in each aimag by UB-
                           based experts, jointly with ALCs and SLCs, examining potential for leveraging untapped resources available in
                           schools to set up school-based enterprises (SBEs), and the role SBEs may play in advancing economic
                           opportunities among vulnerable youth in target soums. An SBE is an entrepreneurial operation in a school
                           setting that provides goods/services to meet the needs of the market. SBEs are managed and operated by
Public Disclosure Copy




                           students as hands-on learning laboratories that integrate national curriculum standards in marketing,
                           finance, hospitality or management. SBEs are effective educational tools in helping to prepare students for
                           the transition from school to work or college. For many students, they provide the first work experience; for
                           others, they provide an opportunity to build management, supervision and leadership skills. Therefore, SBEs
                           will allow the project’s targeted youth to apply their ESEL training and further strengthen their capacity to
                           put their business ideas into practice by increasing their exposure to business operations. SBEs, if
                           implemented successfully, could also serve as an innovative model for enhancing school-community
                           relationships and spurring growth of local businesses. In Mongolia, a draft amendment to the Law on Primary
                           and Secondary Education was recently submitted to the Parliament aiming to give school directors the
                           authority to rent out school canteen/food processing facilities for commercial purposes. Such a regulation
                           has the potential to provide a legal basis for establishment of SBEs; the proposed assessment would thus
                           explore opportunities for creation of such enterprises in target soums. If the assessment’s results (to be
                           made available in the second year of the project) are promising, the project will work with business
                           consultants to develop operational guidelines and provide coaching services to selected schools to pilot
                           establishment of one SBE during the third and fourth years of the project.

                           Component 3: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E), and
                           Knowledge Dissemination (estimated cost: US$949,369)

                           48. This component will undertake the following activities: (i) support operations of SCJ project management
                           team that will manage day-to-day activities and conduct M&E of project activities, including regular updating
                           of the project’s results framework (RF) and management of a project-level Grievance Redress Mechanism
                           (GRM); (ii) design and conduct the baseline and end-line surveys as part of the project’s final evaluation; (iii)
                           conduct an annual audit; (iv) conduct a mid-term Review (MTR) for the project; (v) produce an
                           implementation completion results report (ICR); (vi) provide training support for participatory M&E by the
                           project’s stakeholders; and (vii) undertake knowledge dissemination activities, including development of
                           communication materials, public outreach campaigns, and consultations and fora at the local and national
                           levels.



                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                               Page 9 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                           49. Link to PDO: Together, these activities will allow measurement of progress towards the PDO, and will
                           support achievement of the PDO through participatory M&E and project management, generation and
                           dissemination of information to hold all stakeholders involved in implementation of the project accountable
                           for progress, including the implementing agency SCJ, and enhance the policy environment in support of
                           entrepreneurship education through evidence-based advocacy and public outreach campaigns.

                           Subcomponent 3.1 Project management and administration (estimated cost: US$653,641)

                           50. Day-to-day implementation and operational support for the project will be provided under this
                           subcomponent. In addition to operational costs, it will finance the staffing required for the project’s
                           implementation, which will include, among others, a Project Manager, two Project Officers and four Logistics
                           Assistants, as well as 25 percent of staff time of a Human Resources and Administrative Manager, a Finance
                           Manager and a Finance and Grant Management Officer providing procurement and financial management
Public Disclosure Copy




                           oversight and other support (see Annex 1: Stakeholder Mapping, which describes the roles of each
                           stakeholder, including the members of the UB-based project team). A total of four annual audits are planned
                           for the duration of the project, and an Implementation Completion Results Report (ICR) will be produced at
                           project closing. A project-specific GRM will be established and project stakeholders will be sensitized to the
                           GRM. The goal of the GRM is to ensure that project activities are implemented transparently and
                           accountably, that voices and concerns of targeted groups and other stakeholders are heard, and that the
                           grievances raised are resolved effectively and expeditiously at the SLC or ALC level.

                           Subcomponent 3.2 Participatory M&E system (estimated cost: US$164,000)

                           51. This subcomponent will support data collection to establish baseline and end-line values for the project’s
                           RF indicators, and the MTR and final evaluation, all of which will feed into the ICR. The baseline survey will
                           also collect data from local stakeholders to confirm presence of non-Mongolian speaking ethnic minorities in
                           project soums; the findings of the survey will inform the decision of whether to translate ESEL course and
                           grant scheme materials into Kazakh and/or Tuvan languages. This subcomponent will also finance activities
                           that will provide training support for participatory M&E by the project’s stakeholders, including ALCs and
                           SLCs. Each SLC will have a designated M&E focal point, who will be responsible for monitoring
                           implementation progress, which will include the number of trainings delivered, program uptake, attrition,
                           and academic performance, and providing regular implementation updates and data to the respective ALC
                           and the SCJ project management team. Report formats will be designed to ensure that data are available to
                           the SLC and other stakeholders to monitor progress and fix problems in a timely manner, and that challenges
                           faced at the soum level and lessons learnt are adequately documented. Quarterly reports will be generated
                           for MECSS and MLSP, who will jointly review performance and provide oversight. In order to ensure
                           availability of an objective account of the impact of the grant upon completion, the final evaluation will
                           include reporting of outcomes in a credible comparison group of youth similar to the project’s target group,
                           but who are not able to participate in the project’s activities.

                           Subcomponent 3.3 Knowledge generation and dissemination (estimated cost: US$131,728)



                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                              Page 10 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                           52. To sustain community ownership of the intervention and prepare for sustainable implementation and
                           possible replication in other parts of Mongolia, this subcomponent will develop communication materials
                           based on the project’s progress and intermediate results to conduct consultations and public outreach
                           campaigns on the importance of early-age entrepreneurship education and its potential contribution to local
                           economic development and employability of rural youth. ALCs will play the lead role in organizing advocacy
                           and campaign work at the aimag level. The campaigns will draw on in-house evaluation of the project’s
                           effectiveness, intermediate results, and outcomes, which will be conducted jointly with SLCs, ALCs, and other
                           community-level and national stakeholders involved in the project’s implementation, through the
                           dissemination of project results and best practices to policymakers, government and private sector
                           stakeholders, and the Mongolian public, at national and regional fora. Successful business ideas and their
                           implementation will be documented and disseminated through the media. The overall objective for this
                           subcomponent is to document and disseminate evidence on the need for curricular and pedagogical reform
                           at the national level and development of a roadmap for integration of contextually-relevant employment and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           entrepreneurship skills with foundational academic skills currently taught in schools.

                           53. Note on the project's focus on gender: All activities will be gender-sensitive as they will be designed to
                           address the different skills needs of young men and women. Project activities will aim to empower female
                           students with entrepreneurial skills and attitudes mitigating the impact of gender-related constraints that
                           lead to poorer labor market outcomes among rural Mongolian women when they exit school as well as low
                           participation in self-employment. Specific activities include gender awareness modules in all student, teacher
                           and parent trainings offered under the project, gender-sensitive counseling and mentoring, development of
                           female-centered social and business networks and linking female students to these networks, and
                           prioritization of financing and promotion of business proposals led by female students. The full set of gender-
                           sensitive actions will be finalized at the appraisal stage, and will seek to build female students’ confidence
                           and real-world experience of what it means to be an entrepreneur. Key outputs from these activities will be
                           monitored via gender-disaggregated indicators in the Results Framework. Outcomes expected under the
                           project include an increase in the number of female students with enhanced capacity of doing business and
                           better market linkages, and improved engagement at school and strengthened life aspirations among female
                           students.

                           Footnotes:

                           [9] Developed by the United Nations Children's Fund, the United Nations Global Compact, and Save the
                           Children, CRBP is the first comprehensive set of principles that provide guidance for businesses and firms on
                           how they can take the full range of actions in the workplace, marketplace, and community to respect and
                           support children’s rights.




                           SAFEGUARDS




                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                              Page 11 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will target youth in 25 soums in Gobisumber aimag (Central region); Zavkhan and Khovd aimags
                          (Western region); Uvurkhangai (Khangai region); and Sukhbaatar (Eastern region). The location of the project
                          triggers Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 due to presence of ethnic minorities. The project will not finance civil
                          works, and is expected to have minimal or no adverse environmental impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          While the implementing the “Improving Primary Education Outcomes Among the Most Vulnerable Children
                          in Rural Mongolia” project (P130760) between 2012 and 2017, SCJ gained significant experience with World
                          Bank Safeguards policies. Building on this foundation, training on overseeing the adherence to relevant
                          safeguards policies will be offered to SCJ’s project implementation team as part of the Bank’s project
                          implementation support.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Erdene Ochir Badarch, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Xiaodan Huang, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                   Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes                      As OP 4.10 on indigenous peoples is
                                                                                                      triggered (see below), the project is a
                                                                                                      category B project and OP 4.01 is triggered
                                                                                                      as the Bank’s umbrella safeguards policy.
                                                                                                      Overall, the project does not finance civil
                                                                                                      works under any component. Component 1
                                                                                                      of the project will support development
                                                                                                      and implementation of an innovative
                                                                                                      community-driven education program on
                                                                                                      entrepreneurship skills for vulnerable, rural
                                                                                                      youth. There is thus no adverse
                                                                                                      environmental impact expected under this
                                                                                                      component. Under Component 2, the
                                                                                                      project will finance and oversee

                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                                     Page 12 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia



                                                                                                     implementation of a competitive small
                                                                                                     grants scheme (up to $1,000 per grant) to
                                                                                                     enable older youth in the project’s target
                                                                                                     group to practically apply entrepreneurship
                                                                                                     knowledge and social emotional skills
                                                                                                     acquired under component 1 to identify
                                                                                                     and harness unexploited business
                                                                                                     opportunities at the local level. Youth team
                                                                                                     business ideas are expected to be
                                                                                                     concentrated in (i) services and sales, e.g.
                                                                                                     in tourism and hospitality; (ii) small-scale,
                                                                                                     labor-intensive production of hand-made
                                                                                                     goods; and (iii) food production, agriculture
                                                                                                     and animal husbandry. The screening
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                     process for grants will weed out those
                                                                                                     ideas that that pose substantial
                                                                                                     environmental risks. To reduce potential
                                                                                                     for adverse impacts for activities linked to
                                                                                                     agriculture and animal husbandry,
                                                                                                     preference will be given to ideas that
                                                                                                     convert processed raw materials into an
                                                                                                     end product. Additional risk mitigation
                                                                                                     measures include (i) sensitization of youth
                                                                                                     as part of the ESEL training to laws,
                                                                                                     regulations and good practices related to
                                                                                                     environmental management and
                                                                                                     sustainability in the context of key business
                                                                                                     areas of interest; (ii) The grant proposal
                                                                                                     template will include (a) mandatory
                                                                                                     justification that the implementation of the
                                                                                                     business idea will have no adverse impacts
                                                                                                     on the physical and social environment; (b)
                                                                                                     description of the practices to be employed
                                                                                                     to manage and minimize adverse impacts,
                                                                                                     including production of noise, congestion,
                                                                                                     refuse or litter; and (c) measures for
                                                                                                     safeguarding the well-being of workers and
                                                                                                     family members involved in the businesses.
                                                                                                     Mitigation measures approved for each
                                                                                                     business idea will be monitored by SLCs
                                                                                                     and reported quarterly in SLC reports to
                                                                                                     ALCs and SCJ. Overall, thus, no significant,
                                                                                                     irreversible, or major environmental
                                                                                                     impacts are anticipated under the project,
                                                                                                     but each grant proposal will be screened


                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                                    Page 13 of 15
                                  The World Bank
                                  Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia



                                                                                                     and the decision to proceed with the
                                                                                                     business idea (or to continue its
                                                                                                     implementation) will be made on a case-by-
                                                                                                     case basis and through ongoing monitoring.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                            No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11             No
                                                                                                     This Policy is triggered due to presence of
                                                                                                     ethnic minorities in the project's target
                                                                                                     locations. During the appraisal stage,
                                                                                                     consultations targeting IP
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                     communities/youth will be conducted to (i)
                                                                                                     ascertain whether training materials need
                                                                                                     to be translated into a language other than
                                                                                                     Mongolian (e.g. Kazakh or Tuvan); (ii)
                                                                                                     explore measures to enhance the project’s
                                                                                                     benefits for IP communities (e.g. an
                                                                                                     assessment of particular issues that should
                                                                                                     be considered when designing particular
                                                                                                     activities during project implementation);
                                                                                                     (iii) explore ways to ensure that the project
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      Yes                     includes representatives of IP communities
                                                                                                     (e.g. trough IP NGOs or NGOs that have
                                                                                                     worked closely with IP communities) in the
                                                                                                     multi-stakeholder networking platform
                                                                                                     consisting of local councils established
                                                                                                     under the project. An Environmental and
                                                                                                     Social Safeguards Framework (ESMF) will
                                                                                                     be prepared for the project. One of the
                                                                                                     ESMF chapters will include an Indigenous
                                                                                                     Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) that
                                                                                                     captures relevant dimensions of the project
                                                                                                     to ensure that IPs benefit in culturally
                                                                                                     appropriate ways, with social safeguards
                                                                                                     measures proposed proportional to the
                                                                                                     project’s activities and potential risks.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                No
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                          No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50     No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60              No



                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                                    Page 14 of 15
                                   The World Bank
                                   Entrepreneurship-focused socioemotional skills for the most vulnerable youth in rural Mongolia




                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           17-Sep-2018
                              b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              An ESMF will be prepared for the project, and will be shared with the RSS two weeks before appraisal. One of
                              the ESMF chapters will include an IPPF that captures relevant dimensions of the project to ensure that IPs
                              benefit in culturally appropriate ways, with social safeguards measures proposed proportional to the
                              project’s activities and potential risks. In addition, a baseline survey will be conducted within the first month
                              of project implementation to re-confirm official demographic data on presence of non-Mongolian speaking
                              ethnic minorities in project soums; the findings of the survey will inform the decision of whether to translate
Public Disclosure Copy




                              the ESEL course and grant scheme materials into Kazakh and/or Tuvan languages. The baseline survey would
                              also help establish whether any of the other social groups in Mongolia covered by OP 4.10 are present in
                              project soums, and if so, how they can benefit from the project. These include small Mongol groups with
                              distinct dialects and cultures such as the Durbet Mongol, Bayad, Buryat Mongol, and Dariganga Mongol;
                              small groups of Turkic-speaking minorities in the western and northern parts of Mongolia (Uyghurs, Uzbeks,
                              Tuvinians, Urianhais and Hotons); Tuvinian-speaking Tsaatan (also known as Dukha) reindeer herders the
                              Sayan Mountains around Lake Hovsgol in northern Mongolia; and the Evenk who speak a Tungusic language.


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Rabia Ali

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Peter Leonard                                     26-Jun-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Harry Anthony Patrinos                            26-Jun-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Jul 06, 2018                                                                                                                            Page 15 of 15
