                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR15570
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Egypt, Arab Republic of                      Project ID:           P117407
                            Project Name:      EG - Helwan South Power Project (P117407)
                            Task Team          Paul Baringanire
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          12-Sep-2012                                  Estimated   27-Jun-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEE05                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:           Thermal Power Generation (86%), Oil and gas (14%)
                            Theme:            Infrastructure services for private sector development (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                               No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:       2404.40                  Total Bank Financing:      585.40
                            Financing Gap:                0.00
                                Financing Source                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                           921.80
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                              585.40
                              Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development                                                      193.50
                              Islamic Development Bank                                                                           449.90
                              KUWAIT Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development                                                   213.80
                              OPEC FUND                                                                                           40.00
                              Total                                                                                             2404.40
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives

                                                                                Page 1 of 10
                         The project development objective is to help maintain reliable and sustainable electricity supply
                         within the Borrower’s territory.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project development objective is to help maintain reliable and sustainable electricity supply
                         within the Borrower’s territory.
                         3. Project Description
                         The total project amount is US$2.404 billion, with other financing sources, including: (i) Borrower
                         (US$921.8 million); (ii) Arab Fund for Economic and Social Development (US$193.5 million); (iii)
                         Islamic Development Bank (US$449.9million); (iv) Kuwait Fund for Arab Economic Development
                         (US$213.8 million) and (v) OPEC Fund for International Development (US$40 million).The IBRD
                         Loan is financing two main components, including: Component (1) The Helwan South Power Plant
                         (IBRD: US$ 503.8 million) and Component (2) Gas pipelines (IBRD: US$ 81.6 million).

                         The project was approved by the Board on June 27, 2013 with an IBRD loan of US$585 million, and
                         was declared effective on April 30, 2014. The latest ISR (December 2015) rated progress towards
                         achieving the PDO as Moderately Satisfactory (MS) and the Overall Implementation Progress (IP)
                         Moderately Unsatisfactory (MU) mainly due to the delays in the implementation of the gas
                         component which could compromise the satisfactory attainment of the PDO. US$64.46m has been
                         disbursed to date (April 2016), which represents 11% of the total project amount. The pre-
                         commissioning of the power plant is forecasted for June 2018 and full operations by end December
                         2018, which is within the project closing date of June 30, 2019.

                         The original project consist of the following components:

                         Component (1) - The Helwan South Power Plan - Under this component, the Bank is financing three
                         packages, including: Steam Generator (boiler), Power Transformers, and Distributed Control System
                         (DCS). As of end February 2016, the power plant construction was on schedule at about 38.2 percent
Public Disclosure Copy




                         progress compared to the planned progress of 40.6 percent. Procurements of all major contracts,
                         including those financed by the IBRD loan, are completed and all contracts effective.

                         Component (2) - Gas pipelines - This component will not be implemented as originally planned due
                         to the change in the scope of the gas supply to Helwan, arising from the significant reduction in the
                         pipelines from 158km to 1.2km at a cost of about US$7m vis-Ã -vis approved loan of US$81.6m.
                         The original 158km pipelines were considered no longer relevant due to a reprioritization of gas
                         expansion plan. Accordingly, GASCO decided to tap into existing network to secure gas supply for
                         the plant. The reduction in the length of pipeline to supply the power plant also reduces the risk of
                         the gas component which could compromise the satisfactory attainment of the PDO.

                         In line with the original PDO, the proposed loan restructuring aims to utilize the financial savings
                         from the original project component 2, to fund procurement of materials and equipment for the
                         construction of the proposed 70 km Raven (Idku)- Western Desert Gas Complex (WDGC) aimed at
                         transferring rich gas from the Raven gas fields in north Alex to the WDGC in Alexandria where
                         hydrocarbons will be extracted from the rich LNG. This is in accordance with the national plan of
                         developing natural gas fields and the new explorations to meet the national gas demand as the main
                         energy source, the Western Mediterranean & Northern Alex fields are scheduled to commence
                         production starting from 2019 with an expected production of 900 MMSCFD. The proposed gas
                         pipeline is one of those pipelines expected to transport about 600 MMSCFD of rich gas through a

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         70km, 28 inch pipeline from Raven (Idku) to WGDC including compressor stations with a minimum
                         pressure of 40 bar and a maximum pressure of 70 bar.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         About 90-95% of the natural gas entering the WDGC will be released to the national gas network of
                         which over 80% would be used for electricity generation after processing which takes place in the
                         WDGC. WDGC receives feed gas to recover and produce the following products: (i) Methane (sales
                         gas), which will be injected in the natural gas national grid: (ii) Ethane/propane mixture, which is a
                         feedstock of petrochemicals plants; (iii) Commercial Propane product; (v) Butane (LPG) product
                         which is highly needed for domestic use and households and also eliminates the imported quantities;
                         and (vi) Condensate product.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The planned 70 km route of the new gas pipeline (connecting Raven field to WDGC) will mainly
                         traverse agricultural lands and inhabited areas and also in desert areas. The route will cross several
                         major roads, railways and waterways (Line route map attached separately). The route starts from
                         Rashid Petroleum Company 1 km away from the Mediterranean sea coast and then it deviates south
                         till km (1) ,then deviates southwest parallel to a canal till km (3.800) at the intersection of the canal
                         with the international coastal road then it deviates west parallel to the international coastal road from
                         the northern side parallel with ADCO ➢❨ El-Madya pipeline 20 " for a distance of 14 km and passes
                         through ADCO lake and fish farms for a distance 7 km from km (18.800) until km (25.700) and
                         intersect with (petroleum companies road ➢❨ Abokeer - Rasheed road and railway - a number of
                         canals and drains) and then intersects with the international coastal road at km (32.500) , extends
                         parallel to it from the south side and intersects with El-Mahmudiyah Canal at km (34.400) ,then
                         intersects with Cairo / Alexandria agricultural road and railway at km (35.400) , it continues parallel
                         to the road till km (42.500) where it cuts New Mariout canal and Al-Dashody drain ,then it deviates
                         southwest parallel to the canal and the drain from the western side till km (50.200), where it
                         intersects with El-Emoom drain, a canal and an asphalt road, then extends parallel to El-Hares El-
                         Omomy drain from the southeast till km (57.300), where it cuts Elhares elomomy drain and Elhares
Public Disclosure Copy




                         drain no. (1), then it extends parallel to and extends parallel to Elhares drain no. (1) from the south
                         side and parallel to Nubaria navigational canal from the south-east side inside farmlands till km
                         (66.500) where it deviates West cutting Nubaria navigational canal ,West Nubaria drain and Railway
                         till it reaches the end inside the Western desert gas complex of the Egyptian natural gas Company
                         (GASCO)."
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Africa Eshogba Olojoba (GEN05)
                         Amal Nabil Faltas Bastorous (GSU05)
                         Chaogang Wang (GSU05)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09     No



                                                                       Page 3 of 10
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The original parent project, with all its components, was classified as Category A project.
                              The Power Plant component:
                              In accordance with the requirement of a Category ➢❨ A➢❨ project, a comprehensive ESIA was
                              carried for the Helwan South Power Plant. The Power Plant site belongs to Upper Egypt
                              Electricity Production Company (UEEPC), which has been allocated to the UEEPC by a
                              Presidential Decree dated 14 February 2010 for the development of the Helwan South power plant.
                              The proposed power plant consists of three supercritical thermal steam units, with a nominal
                              electricity generating capacity of 650 megawatts (MWe) each. The overall generating capacity of
                              the power plant will be 1950MWe. The power plant will utilize natural gas as its primary fuel, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                              also have the capability to operate using mazout (heavy fuel oil).

                             The Power Plant site is located on the east side of the Nile, about 8 km south of the Kureimat
                             power plant complex. Two physiographic zones occupy this area: a floodplain adjacent to the Nile,
                             and a rocky desert plateau east of the floodplain. The overall proposed site area is approximately
                             378,000 m2. The site is predominantly desert with some agricultural land adjacent to it located
                             between the planned plant and the Nile river. There are no human settlements within two
                             kilometer of the power plant site and no evidence of past industrial or commercial activity. The
                             field surveys have indicated that there are no floral and faunal communities and/or species are of
                             conservation value (rare or threatened), including natural habitats or cultural properties within the
                             project's area of influence.

                             The ESIA of power plant indicated that environment and social impacts will not be significant or
                             irreversible. The identified environmental and social impacts will be mitigated by effective
                             implementation of an Environment and Social mitigation and monitoring plan. Most impacts will
                             be construction related, which will include dust from construction activities, noise and vibration
                             from construction activities and traffic disruptions to road users. These impacts are temporary,
                             short-term and reversible.

                             The environmental impacts of linked infrastructure such as gas pipeline, transmission lines,


                                                                       Page 4 of 10
                         potable water connections and access road are expected to be localized, short lived, and reversible.
                         Mitigation measures have been provided by adequate institutional arrangements and budget for
                         effective implementation, supervision and monitoring. Mitigation, monitoring and management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         measures proposed to be adopted by UEEPC are detailed in the ESIA report. These requirements
                         were included as conditions of contract on the contractor and any sub-contractors employed to
                         build or operate any part of the power plant.

                         The construction of the Power Plant is in its early stages where civil works and excavations have
                         already started and erection of some structures is ongoing.

                         The land acquisition needs for this project do not require relocation of anyone (no housing) and
                         OP 4.12 related impacts are minor. The project triggers the Bank➢❨ s social safeguard policy, OP
                         4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, and the implementing agencies (EEHC/UEEPC and GASCO)
                         have prepared two Resettlement Policy Frameworks (RPFs), covering their respective project
                         components. The largest land requirement is about 90 feddan (1 feddan = 1.03 acres) for the power
                         plant itself. There is no need for permanent land acquisition for the gas pipeline that supplies the
                         power plant or for the electric transmission line carrying away the electricity generated by the
                         plant to the national electric grid. There is a strip of farm land ➢❨ 35 fedans, 1 quirat, and 9 sahm
                         in size -- between the plant site and the Nile river, owned or used by 32 families. (One fedan has
                         24 quirats, and one quirat has 24 sahms. Twenty nine plots, with total size of 29 fedans, 13 quirats,
                         and 8 sahms are owned by the respective 29 families. Two plots, one 20 quirats in size and the
                         other 1 fedan and 17 quirats large, have been traditionally used by two families, but the families
                         have not been able to present proofs of ownership, so the plots are for the time being listed as
                         government-owned. One plot of 2 fedans 23 quirats and 1 sahm in size was given to a family
                         under the ➢❨ agrarian reform➢❨ ). UEEPC purchased this land on a ➢❨ willing-buyer/willing-
                         seller➢❨ basis. If for some reason UEEPC is unable to acquire the land through ➢❨ willing-buyer/
                         willing-seller➢❨ transactions, it will resort (to the extent necessary) to the process of involuntary
                         acquisition and will prepare a RAP, consistent with the RPF which has already been prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Gas Pipelines component:
                         Originally, a separate comprehensive ESIA was prepared by GASCO for two underground gas
                         pipelines (Dahshour ➢❨ Atfeeh & Abu Homous ➢❨ Nubaria) with a total length of 158 Km
                         which were supposed to feed the Power Plant. This ESIA was reviewed by the Bank, cleared and
                         disclosed. At later stage, an amendment of the routes and lengths of the pipelines to be just one
                         underground pipeline of length 1.2 km took place. This 1.2 km line will pass across state-owned
                         desert lands which don➢❨ t have significant environmental resources or host any sensitive
                         habitats. Most of the environmental impacts will be associated with the construction phase.
                         Therefore, these impacts are temporary, short-term and reversible. A Quantitative Risk
                         Assessment study was also prepared to identify any potential public health and safety hazards or
                         risks which may be associated with the gas pipeline operation.
                         On the social side, there is no anticipated land acquisition since the 1.2 km pipeline will pass in a
                         desert state-owned land which is not currently utilized or inhabited.

                         The new proposed gas pipeline (Raven Gas Facility ➢❨ WDGC) ➢❨ 70 Km
                         The environmental classification of the new proposed gas pipeline will remain Category ➢❨ A➢❨
                         which requires conducting a comprehensive Environmental and Social Impact Assessment.
                         GASCO has updated the existing ESIA to include the new proposed gas pipeline which will
                         connect Raven Gas Field to West Delta Gas Complex.


                                                                    Page 5 of 10
                         The majority of the environmental impacts of the proposed project are mainly associated with the
                         construction phase. There are potential negative impacts on air quality, noise levels, soil quality
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and fresh water bodies. Generation of solid and hazardous wastes during construction is also
                         expected. In addition, workers health and safety should be carefully considered. Since the gas
                         pipeline routes will pass through desert lands as well as agricultural lands, loss of crops and
                         temporary land acquisition are anticipated. During operation, risks of fires or explosions should be
                         carefully assessed and mitigation measures should be determined.

                         GASCO has determined the pipeline routing in accordance with normal international practice,
                         which seeks to avoid, as far as possible, the crossing of major infrastructure/ natural features
                         (roads, railways, rivers, etc.) and to minimize disturbance to the agricultural land. The gas
                         pipelines will be mostly buried underground along the identified route. However, according to the
                         information provided by GASCO to the Bank, the route of the proposed gas pipeline to be
                         financed by the savings have been preliminary identified and temporary acquisition of private
                         owned agricultural land will not be avoidable.

                         Construction of the gas pipeline will reportedly require 20 meter right-of-way during construction,
                         which may result in temporary inconvenience for farmers and residents in such areas. The
                         environmental and social impacts are expected to be limited to construction stage, and may in
                         certain areas include loss of top soil due to excavation, debris disposal, use and disposal of
                         concrete and brick waste, use and disposal of lubricants and waste oil, dust and noise generation
                         during construction, and potential damage to existing community/village roads due to
                         transportation of heavy machinery. The pipeline will be buried below the ground level at a depth
                         of 2-3 meters. After completion of works, the land will be fully restored to original condition, and
                         farmers will be allowed to cultivate. There will be some restriction within the right of way with
                         respect to any future construction of structures that may have potential to damage the pipeline. All
                         river and water body crossings for the pipeline will use horizontal directional drilling technique to
                         pass under the river bed, which is an internationally accepted standard practice to minimize
Public Disclosure Copy




                         environmental obstruction to water course. The farmers would be compensated in line with
                         established practice in Egypt, prior to initiating any construction works for any temporary loss of
                         agriculture, in case the losses are unavoidable. The exact alignment of the pipeline is not yet
                         finalized but communities have been consulted, and are reportedly supportive of the project.

                         Since the proposed gas pipeline will connect the Raven gas field facility (currently under
                         development) to the Western Desert Gas Complex (has been in operation for many years) via a gas
                         pipeline, both facilities are considered as ➢❨ associated facilities➢❨ . This will require GASCO to
                         conduct environmental and social due diligence to ensure that both facilities have gone through an
                         environmental and social assessment process, prepared ESIA➢❨ s and have been nationally
                         approved. The Terms of Reference for the environmental and social due diligence was prepared
                         and reviewed by the Bank and was included as annexes to the updated ESIA.

                         The construction of WDGC has been completed. Although the Raven gas field is still under
                         construction, the land acquisition has also been completed. In consideration that the land
                         acquisition process has been completed for both WDGC and Raven field, a land acquisition audit
                         will need to be carried out as part of RAP preparation to determine if there are pending issues
                         related to land acquisition involved in WDGC and Raven gas field. In case there are pending
                         issues, action plan and/or mitigation measures shall be included in the RAP.


                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                           ESIA and RPF studies were prepared for the original project (Helwan South Power Plant) and are
                           now updated to reflect the changes in the purpose and route of the new gas pipeline. The draft
Public Disclosure Copy




                           updated ESIA and updated RPF were disclosed on GASCO website on April 1st, 2016. In
                           addition, GASCO has prepared ToRs for conducting site specific ESIA (including environmental
                           and social due diligence studies for associated facilities) and site specific RAP. Updated ESIA and
                           RPF were publically consulted upon in April 5th, 2016. The final updated ESIA (including the
                           ToRs) and the final updated RPF are Bank cleared on April 25th, 2016 and disclosed in country on
                           April 28th, 2016 and on the Bank InfoShop on April 28, 2016.

                           Prior to any construction activities of the new gas pipeline, GASCO will recruit an independent
                           consultant, based on the approved ToRs, in order to prepare the site specific ESIA, RAP and Due
                           Diligence for Associated Facilities according to Bank requirements as well as national
                           requirements.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            The updated ESIA for the project indicates that the environmental and social impacts associated
                           with the power plant (original project) and the gas pipeline including infrastructure, if mitigation
                           measures are implemented, will not be of major significance, unprecedented or irreversible. The
                           indirect impacts of the infrastructures are summarized as follows:

                           The proposed additional works include the construction of a gas pipeline in order to strengthen the
                           national natural gas grid to be able to deliver natural gas as primary fuel to the electricity power
                           plants. In principle, this will result in improving the overall air quality due to fuel switching from
                           fuel oil to natural gas.

                           Waterways, main roads and railway crossings: The construction of the pipeline will cross
                           waterways, regional and local roads as well as railway tracks in some parts. This may result in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           traffic congestions and increased air emissions and noise levels especially when passing across
                           human settlements. The environmental impacts during construction will be mitigated and
                           monitored using the site specific ESIA.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             A ➢❨ no action alternative➢❨ is environmentally undesired since the existing and newly
                           constructed power plants in Egypt need significant quantities of natural gas. The only alternative
                           would be the dependency on imported fuel oils which will have significant negative impacts on the
                           environment.

                           The proposed route for the gas pipeline was chosen according to clear criteria which take into
                           consideration the shortest distances and maximum avoidance of passing through privately owned
                           agricultural lands as well as completely avoiding passing through any protected areas or locations
                           which may have any cultural importance. GASCO has also made a systematic effort to avoid any
                           buildings and structures, including graveyards, religious sites and any possible historical areas.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            For the new gas pipelines constructed from savings and as a result of the close working
                           relationship with the Bank in the ongoing Giza North and Helwan South power plant projects,


                                                                      Page 7 of 10
                          GASCO has established a PMU fully staffed with competent full time environmental and social
                          staff.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           GASCO Project Management Units will have the overall responsibility for implementation of
                           Environment and Social Management Plans and the RPFs. The PMU has already in-house
                           expertise and personnel who are competent to supervise the ESIA studies, RAP studies and the
                           implementation of the ESMPs. GASCO also has the capacity to prepare, supervise and implement
                           QRA studies and recommendations. GASCO nominated staff members who will work closely
                           with contractors and subcontractors to ensure that all environment and social impact mitigation
                           measures including occupation, health and safety guidelines are mainstreamed into the project
                           design; monitored and supervised.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             GASCO prepared an updated ESIA and RPF in addition to ToRs for route/site specific ESIAs/
                           RAPs. Key stakeholders to the project are identified as follows:

                          1.      Relevant Government authorities:
                          -       Affected governorates
                          -       Directorates of agriculture, irrigation, social solidarity, environmental affairs, railways,
                          roads
                          -       Electricity sector
                          -       Petroleum sector

                          2.      Civil society organizations

                          3.      Project Affected Persons
                          -       These people are primarily the land owners and farmers utilizing the lands which will be
                          temporarily acquired during construction phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          -       GASCO has a well experienced social and compensation committee which will undergo
                          the actual census of affected persons prior to construction
                          -       The compensation will be determined based on a fair and transparent process which will
                          be comprehensively described in the RAP study.

                          At this stage, prior to appraisal, GASCO has conducted a pubic consultation session in April 5th,
                          2016 where all relevant stakeholders were invited and voiced their ideas and concerns. The
                          outcomes of the consultation session were documented and included in the updated ESIA which is
                          publically disclosed.
                          The ToRs for the site specific ESIA/RAP, and environmental/social due diligence were also
                          presented during the public consultation session.

                          Before the construction phase, GASCO determined that at least two public consultation sessions
                          will take place in addition to ongoing consultation process which will be undertaken throughout
                          the specific ESIA/RAP preparation phase. Since GASCO has previously prepared ESIAs/RAPs
                          according to Bank guidelines, GASCO has gained experience in carrying out public consultation
                          events, identifying affected people and properly addressing any grievances through its established
                          GRM.
                          GASCO is also familiar with the national and Bank requirements concerning disclosure



                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                           requirements. GASCO will prepare a disclosure/communication plan through which all produced
                           documents will be publicly disclosed to the general public and directly affected people.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Aug-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Aug-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      29-Aug-2011
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          20-Jul-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Aug-2011
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Aug-2011
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Egypt, Arab Republic of                                          20-Jul-2011
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?

                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paul Baringanire
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                 Date: 09-May-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Paul Baringanire (PMGR)                       Date: 11-May-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
