                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA18183
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Ghana                            Project ID:   P152171
                            Project Name:     Economic Management Strengthening (P152171)
                            Task Team         Dilek Aykut,Deryck R. Brown
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         16-May-2016                      Estimated   15-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GMF01                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General finance sector (25%), Capital markets (25%), Public administration-
                                              Financial Sector (25%), Central government administratio n (25%)
                            Theme(s):         Debt management and fiscal sustainability (25%), Macroeconomic management
                                              (25%), Public expenditure, financial management and procur ement (25%),
                                              State-owned enterprise restructuring and privatization (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      15.00           Total Bank Financing:              15.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                    Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                     0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                           15.00
                              Total                                                                                 15.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to strengthen the Government of Ghana➢❨ s
                           institutional capacity for revenue and expenditure management.


                                                                     Page 1 of 5
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed operation will take a problem-driven approach to address key binding constraints that
                         affect the Government➢❨ s institutional capacity to better manage fiscal revenues and expenditures.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As noted above, domestic revenue mobilization can be a key driver for creating the fiscal space
                         necessary to finance critical infrastructure investments and unlock Ghana➢❨ s development
                         potential; however, tax revenue performance has remained significantly below comparator countries
                         in the sub-Saharan Africa region. In the absence of growing domestic tax revenues, public debt has
                         increased ➢❨ and with it, a growing debt-service burden ➢❨ which puts the economy at high risk of
                         external debt distress and makes it particularly vulnerable to exogenous macroeconomic shocks. At
                         the same time, quality and productivity of public expenditures has been low, with poor management
                         of public investment projects often resulting in huge variations in cost and time over-runs, which
                         further limits already scarce fiscal resources. Finally, as noted above, many Ghanaian SOEs continue
                         to underperform in relation to their objectives, which has high economic and financial costs, resulting
                         in inefficient service delivery, wasted resources, financial losses, and an accumulation of debt.

                         In order to address these interrelated and mutually-reinforcing challenges, the proposed operation has
                         been designed to make selective interventions to simultaneously improve revenue management and
                         control, and enhance the management and efficiency of government expenditures. On the revenue
                         side, Component 1 seeks to improve the functioning of the GRA by establishing an integrated data
                         warehouse for capturing a greater number of small, medium, and large taxpayers. By developing
                         more accurate and reliable taxpayer information, as well as improving knowledge of potential
                         taxpayers, GRA should be able to reduce tax non-compliance and revenue leakages, improve the
                         efficiency of tax administration, and improve risk management and fiscal planning. As such,
                         improved revenue management and control may even function, in the medium to long term, as a
                         critical support to wider efforts to enhance the mobilization of domestic revenues.

                         In addition to addressing upstream revenue management and control, the operation aims to enhance
                         the overall efficiency and management of expenditures through three critical components, namely: (i)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2, which seeks to improve debt management and transparency through the
                         institutionalization of a credible annual borrowing plan, improving cash-flow forecasting,
                         strengthening debt reporting and transparency mechanisms, and improving operational risk
                         management; (ii) Component 3, which seeks to improve PIM capacity through targeted investments
                         to develop a comprehensive PIM strategy and to enable government entities (e.g. MoF, MDAs,
                         NDPC, SOEs, etc.) to better assess economic, financial, social, and environmental aspects of public
                         investment projects; and (iii) Component 4, which seeks to address SOE governance challenges
                         through a study of government equity, the establishment of a single SOE management entity, as well
                         as piloting the introduction of corporate governance policies in a number of SOEs.

                         Underpinning this proposed theory of change (described in detail in Annex 6) are a number of
                         assumptions, the absence or presence of which will determine whether outputs are translated into
                         intended outcomes and impacts. With respect to Component 1, a critical assumption is that the
                         improved revenue management and control supported by the project will not be accompanied by
                         deteriorations in other areas of tax policy and administration, which could undermine long-term
                         objectives of increasing tax revenues and compliance. With regard to Component 2, it is assumed
                         that improved debt management practices will reduce Ghana➢❨ s cost of borrowing and overall risk
                         of the debt portfolio. Better debt management builds on better forecast of cash flows, contributes to a
                         credible annual borrowing plan, avoids arrears, improves the debt reporting in a more transparent and
                         effective way, and increases confidence, especially with investors. With respect to Component 3, it is

                                                                      Page 2 of 5
                           assumed that improved PIM frameworks and capacity will result in better prioritized and more
                           efficient public investment decisions; however, this capacity is contingent upon sustaining human
                           resources in critical institutions even after project closure. Finally, with respect to Component 4, it is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assumed that better SOE management and corporate governance will result in better SOE portfolio
                           performance and less fiscal risk. However, reforming governance alone will not solve all SOE
                           problems, and lessons from the past suggest that corporate governance reforms should be
                           accompanied by other reforms such as SOE restructuring and privatization. The proposed equity
                           study under this component will enable GoG to make decisions about which SOEs to divest or
                           privatize, which could be listed on the Stock Exchange to give Ghanaian citizens and investors an
                           opportunity to become shareholders, and which to wind up. As the project is further developed, these
                           and other assumptions will be treated as key risks to the achievement of the PDO, and relevant
                           mitigation measure will be provided by the systematic risk assessment tool (SORT).
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project will not have a physical footprint or prepare activities that may have a physical footprint.

                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Demba Balde (GSU01)
                           Gloria Malia Mahama (GSU01)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               No              This project will not invest in activities likely to affect the
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       natural environment
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No              This project activities will not pose any threat to the
                            4.04                                        natural habitat
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No              No impacts on forests are expected as the project will not
                                                                        be located on or close to any forest areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No                  The project will not finance the purchase or use of
                                                                        pesticides
                            Physical Cultural           No              The project will not have impact on sites with any cultural
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                        significance.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No              There are no indigenous peoples in the project area
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No              The project does not involve any physical works that will
                            OP/BP 4.12                                  require the taking of land.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No              The project does not involve dam construction or rely on
                            4.37                                        any such structures.
                            Projects on International   No              The project does not involve international waterways
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No              The project is not located in a disputed area.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify

                                                                          Page 3 of 5
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project consists of technical assistance activities. There will be no design or feasibilities
                              studies of future infrastructure. Since the project does not have a physical footprint, there are no
Public Disclosure Copy




                              foreseen negative impacts on the physical and social environments.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Not applicable.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Not applicable.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              Not applicable.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Not applicable.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                         Page 4 of 5
                         Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dilek Aykut,Deryck R. Brown
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)           Date: 11-May-2016
                         Practice Manager/    Name: George Addo Larbi (PMGR)      Date: 20-May-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Page 5 of 5
