                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA15056
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                             Project ID:    P152698
                            Project Name:      National Hydrology Project (P152698)
                            Task Team          Anju Gaur
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          01-Aug-2016              Estimated     23-Nov-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWA06                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       350.00           Total Bank Financing:    175.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                  175.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     175.00
                              Total                                                                                     350.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to improve the extent, quality, and accessibility of
                           targeted water resources information and to strengthen the capacity of targeted water resources
                           management institutions in India.
                            3. Project Description
                           Based on the successes of previous phases of project, the Government of India (GoI) wishes to
                           expand these efforts to cover the entire country including the states of the Indus, Ganga and
                           Brahmaputra basins. The Project will further improve and expand monitoring systems for water


                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         availability and water use. It will emphasize real-time monitoring for operations, flow forecasting,
                         integrated water resource planning on a river basin basis and strengthening of community-based
                         groundwater management. The Project - will contribute to the GoI Digital India initiative by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         integrating across state and central agencies. The project will consist of the following four
                         components:

                         Component A: Water Resources Monitoring Systems

                         This component will finance the establishment/modernization of new and existing hydromet
                         monitoring systems including meteorology, streamflow, groundwater and water storage
                         measurements and construction of Hydro informatics centers that capture both water resources and
                         uses. This component will be implemented by all states/UT with the support of core central
                         agencies. The major activities will include establishment of Hydromet observation network;
                         Supervisory control and data acquisition systems for water infrastructure; and establishment of
                         Hydro informatics centers.

                         Component B: Water Resources Information Systems

                         Component B will support strengthening of National and sub-national water information centers with
                         web-enabled water resources information systems through standardization of databases and products
                         from various data sources/departments; and make comprehensive, timely and integrated water
                         resources information available to decision makers for effective planning, decision taking and
                         operations. The sources of data/information will include the real time data acquisition networks and
                         centers under Component A, remote sensing data, topographical maps and knowledge products
                         developed under Component C.

                         Component C: Water Resources Operation and Planning Systems

                         This component will support the development of interactive analytical tools and decision support
Public Disclosure Copy




                         platform that would integrate database, models and scenario manager for hydrological flood
                         forecasting, integrated reservoir operations and water resources accounting for improved operation,
                         planning and management of both surface and groundwater. Component C has three sub-
                         components: (C1) Development of analytical tools and decision support platform (river basin
                         modeling; streamflow forecasting and reservoir operation systems; and irrigation design and
                         operations); (C2) Purpose-driven support; and (C3) Piloting innovative water resource management
                         solutions.

                         Component D: Institutional Capacity Enhancement

                         Component D aims to build capacity for knowledge-based water resources management. It would
                         support establishment of water resources knowledge centers, professional development, project
                         management and operations.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Samuel Thangaraj (GSU06)

                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         Suryanarayana Satish (GSU06)
                         Tapas Paul (GEN06)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        Potential environmental impacts in the Project arise from
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               implementation of Components A and C; Project
                                                             Components B and D will not have any environmental
                                                             impacts. Component A, which will set up monitoring
                                                             stations, data centers, and associated facilities and
                                                             infrastructure, may have minor construction-related
                                                             environmental impacts. These construction-related
                                                             impacts will be managed by application of National
                                                             Building Codes in designing and construction of the small
                                                             buildings; and careful in-situ disposal of all construction
                                                             wastes. The chances of overlooking water quality issues
                                                             has been analyzed by the environmental assessment, and
                                                             as a result, the project has mainstreamed substantial
                                                             investment in augmenting water quality monitoring in the
                                                             country. Component C may have impacts when plans or
                                                             operation DSS are implemented. These issues were
                                                             analyzed as part of the environmental assessment, and the
                                                             project design ensures that all planning and operation
                                                             DSS tools including their subsequent application will
                                                             include a process of identification and incorporation of
                                                             the relevant environmental issues, such as water quality
                                                             and environmental flows.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No         No direct or indirect impact on natural habitats will result
                         4.04                                from the project. Only Component C (which includes
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             activities such as sub-basin plan preparation) may have
                                                             indirect impacts on natural habitats that will need to be
                                                             avoided. The process of preparation of sub-basin plans
                                                             ensure that all possible impacts on natural habitats will be
                                                             avoided, and as such natural habitat areas will be deemed
                                                             as "no-go" areas, and excluded from any development
                                                             unsuitable for natural habitats in the sub-basin plans; and
                                                             as such the sub-basin plans will support conservation as
                                                             per applicable laws and regulations.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No         No direct or indirect impact on forests or livelihood based
                                                             on forests. Only Component C (which includes activities
                                                             such as sub-basin plan preparation) may have indirect
                                                             impacts on forests that will need to be avoided. The
                                                             process of preparation of sub-basin plans ensure that all
                                                             possible impacts on forests will be avoided; and non-
                                                             forest activities within forests, or any activity that may
                                                             promote logging will be excluded from the sub-basin
                                                             plans, as per applicable laws and regulations in India.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project does not finance any chemical or synthetic


                                                               Page 3 of 8
                                                       pesticide. In fact rational and balanced use of pesticide,
                                                       avoidance of WHO Classes I and II pesticides, and
                                                       adoption of IPM and NPM will expected to be promoted
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       by the sub-basin level water resources arrangement plans.
                         Physical Cultural        No   No direct or indirect impact on physical cultural resources
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11          is expected.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No   The Project, even when implemented in Scheduled Areas
                         BP 4.10                       5 and 6 and covered by Forest Rights Act, 2006, will not
                                                       trigger this OP/BP as forest and/or any land on which the
                                                       Scheduled Tribes depend to meet their social, economic
                                                       and cultural needs will not be used for the Project.
                                                       However, they will enjoy the benefits of community-
                                                       based water resource management program, if
                                                       implemented in the Scheduled Areas. When required,
                                                       such community-based water resources management
                                                       plans in the Scheduled Areas will be prepared as an
                                                       outcome of free, prior and informed process of
                                                       consultations with tribal communities.
                         Involuntary Resettlement No   OP/BP on Involuntary Resettlement will not be triggered
                         OP/BP 4.12                    as the Project will not require expropriation of any private
                                                       land or any government land under encroachment or
                                                       under private use, for civil works. Civil works, where
                                                       required, will be on existing land belonging to states and/
                                                       or departments that are free of any encumbrances on
                                                       within existing campuses or as addition to existing
                                                       buildings. A participatory and transparent process of
                                                       screening will be undertaken to identify such government/
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       public land available free of encroachments. However, if
                                                       suitable government land is not available, telemetry
                                                       rooms (requiring about 5 square meter of land) could be
                                                       built on private titled land, after leasing such land on
                                                       payment of rent mutually agreed between land owners
                                                       and the relevant government departments. The process of
                                                       leasing of land will be transparent in which they terms of
                                                       lease would be explained to landowners who will have the
                                                       option of declining the lease if not satisfied with terms
                                                       and conditions of the lease. In addition to the lease rent, if
                                                       required, a member of the family of the landowner may be
                                                       appointed as a watchman/security guard to take care of
                                                       the telemetry room and its equipment.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP     No   The project will finance data and analytical tools, such as
                         4.37                          reservoir operation system that may suggest improvement
                                                       of operating rules for some reservoirs (that will be
                                                       selected depending on the success of components A and B
                                                       during implementation). The project will examine the
                                                       need for specific examination of all dams of these



                                                        Page 4 of 8
                                                                      reservoirs, and as required, will (i) accept selection of the
                                                                      dams where the borrower's dam safety review and
                                                                      management processes are deemed to be adequate and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      appropriate, for consequent preparation of reservoir
                                                                      operation plans; or (ii) in the event when the borrower's
                                                                      dam safety review and management were not found to be
                                                                      adequate and effective, will hire services of an
                                                                      independent panel of experts on dam safety, and/or
                                                                      implement the requisite inspection, remedy or any other
                                                                      dam safety measure. These mechanisms are covered by
                                                                      the operation manual of the project.
                            Projects on International   Yes           OP 7.50 on International Waterways has been triggered
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      because the Project includes activities in the Indus and
                                                                      Ganga-Brahmaputra-Meghna basins, which are
                                                                      international waterways to which OP 7.50 requirements
                                                                      are applicable. The Project meets the criteria defined in
                                                                      paragraph 7(b) of OP 7.50 that no riparian notification is
                                                                      required as: (a) the Project will provide technical
                                                                      assistance and localized support to Project implementing
                                                                      entities and it therefore does not involve any detailed
                                                                      design and/or engineering studies that may involve use or
                                                                      pollution of water, and (b) the aforementioned activities
                                                                      and expected negligible impacts will not adversely change
                                                                      the quality or quantity of water flow to other riparian
                                                                      countries, and will not be adversely affected by the other
                                                                      riparians possible water use.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            No known locations of the project's footprint is in the
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          disputed areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Of the four components of the Project, two Components B and D will have no environmental
                              impacts. Component A, which will set up monitoring stations, data centers and associated facilities
                              and infrastructure, may have minor construction related environmental impacts. However, there
                              was a need to integrate monitoring of water quality issues in the overall monitoring program.
                              Component C may have impacts when plans or operation DSS are implemented, and therefore, it
                              will be important to develop these through a process that identifies all relevant environmental
                              issues, minimizes impacts and mitigates and manages these impacts. Other than OP/BP 4.01, the
                              Project does not trigger any other Bank's safeguard policies. Further, the project activities do not
                              have any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible negative impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The project interventions and outcomes will contribute to more sustainable environmental
                              management, and as such be considered as part of the overall national capacity building for


                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                           environmental management. By (i) setting in operation a reliable and accessible hydrological
                           knowledge base of meteorology, surface and ground water resources and water quality; and by (ii)
                           promotion of use of hydrological models and analytical tools. Any potential indirect and/or long
Public Disclosure Copy




                           term consequences due to anticipated future activities in the project area will be beneficial to small
                           and marginal farmers, those who depend on water resources for their livelihood and also those
                           who live along the rivers/river basins including women, Scheduled Tribes and other vulnerable
                           people. The benefits include, among others, better information at community and individual levels
                           facilitating improved access to irrigation and drinking water, and improved resilience to floods and
                           droughts.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project alternatives are not relevant as the Project will not have any adverse impacts that need to
                           be avoided and addressed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrowers have prepared an Environmental Assessment, which mainly identifies the
                           enhancement opportunities in the project (in addition of the plans for mitigating the small negative
                           impacts that could arise from construction of monitoring stations, data centers, and associated
                           facilities and infrastructure). As a result, monitoring of water quality, and incorporation of good
                           environmental principles in the process of preparation of basin plans are mainstreamed in the
                           project. The implementing agencies have some of the requisite capacities for undertaking water
                           quality monitoring; and preparation of basin/sub-basin plans. Capacity gaps, with respect to
                           analyses of water quality information and undertaking special purpose water quality studies, where
                           relevant, has been identified, and the necessary capacity building plans are essential elements of
                           the project. The Environmental Assessment including its Executive Summary has been disclosed
                           in-country on June 16, 2016, and can be accessed from the website of the Ministry (www.mowr.
                           nic.in).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           There is no project-affected people; and therefore, the key stakeholders include state and federal
                           level managers responsible for preparation of state/basin level plans; for provision of irrigation and
                           related other information services; for provision of drinking water and related information
                           services; and for provision of information relevant for managing floods, droughts, water shortages.
                           At state levels, multiple rounds of consultations were organized prior to preparation of the plans
                           for water quality monitoring. At national levels, consultation workshops were organized to design
                           the project, where design of the water quality and basin/sub-basin plans were discussed. The EA
                           document had been prepared based on stakeholder inputs received from each participating state;
                           and the Draft EA was discussed with responsible select state agencies, experts and academia on
                           May 22, 2016. The final draft EA was publicly disclosed in the MoWR,RD&GR website on June
                           16, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          15-Jun-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       28-Jun-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              India                                                            16-Jun-2016
                              Comments: EA is available at the website of the Ministry of Water Resources and Ganga
Public Disclosure Copy




                                            Rejuvenation.
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                             Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                             Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                             Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS


                                                                       Page 7 of 8
                         Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anju Gaur
                         Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/    Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)   Date: 01-Sep-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 8 of 8
