INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA14642
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jan-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Azerbaijan                  Project ID:  P155110
Parent        P122943
Project ID:
Project Name: Additional Financing to IDP Living Standards and Livelihoods Project
(P155110)
Parent Project IDP Living Standards and Livelihoods Project (P122943)
Name:
Task Team       Michelle P. Rebosio Calderon,Nijat Valiyev,Rebecca Emilie Anne Lacroix
Leader(s):
Estimated       01-Feb-2016                 Estimated     13-Jul-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU03                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Other social services (100%)
Theme(s):       Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (40%), Participation and
civic engagement (20%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterp rise support (20%),
Rural services and infrastructure (10%), Other urban development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      78.53             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                     28.53
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        50.00
Total                                                                        78.53
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 8


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The objective of the Project is to improve living conditions and increase the economic self-
reliance of targeted internally displaced persons.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The project will continue to have 4 components, with some changes made to each component as
described below:
Component A: Micro-projects (AF: US$20 million; Parent Project: US$15 million): This component
will continue to finance demand-driven economic and social infrastructure investments in
communities with a significant proportion of IDPs. Micro-projects may include (a) repair or
rehabilitation of basic infrastructure (e.g., water supply, power supply, access roads, drainage
systems); and (b) repair or rehabilitation of social infrastructure, such as schools and health centers.
The only changes that will be made to this component are: (1) the component will expand in
geographic scope; (2) the ceiling for the value of infrastructure supported will be raised from US
$250,000 to US$300,000 (while SFDI board approval will continue to be sought for projects above
US$150,000). Community contributions will continue to be set at 3 percent of the total value for the
component. Operations and maintenance activities will be significantly strengthened under the
Additional Financing, as will community engagement throughout the sub-project implementation
cycle.
Component B: Infrastructure support to IDP communities (Original Component Title: Housing
Renovation. AF: US$30 million; Parent Project: US$33 million). Component B will undergo the
most changes in scope during the Additional Financing stage. In the Parent Project, the component
financed the renovation of IDP collective centers that were in a state of disrepair. The GoA, however,
is now aiming to resettle a large number of people currently living in IDP collective centers to 'New
Settlements' and has therefore asked for this component to change focus. The GoA will be financing
new 'New Settlements' using other financing, but has stated that there is a great need to rehabilitate
social and economic infrastructure in New Settlements built before 2005. Component B under the AF
will therefore finance multiple small-medium sized infrastructure investments in each of
approximately 30 locations, including repair of social infrastructure (e.g., school, health care center)
and repair of basic infrastructure (e.g., access roads, water supply). Selection will be based on an
infrastructure needs assessment analyzing (a) the extent of infrastructure needs in each settlement;
and (b) whether addressing specific infrastructure needs is likely to promote economic development.
During project implementation, SFDI will create or revitalize community groups, will present to
them the assessment of infrastructure needs in their community, and will then help them develop a
final priority list of infrastructure investments to be supported by the project.
Component B will also finance ongoing operations and maintenance of all infrastructure supported
by the project. This will help ensure the sustainability of investments. Currently, the GoA does not
have an agency with the capacity to maintain IDP-focused infrastructure, so operations and
maintenance will be contracted out. This arrangement is focused on lessons learned during the parent
project, where maintenance that took place was not of optimal quality and needed greater allocation
of financing and capacity-building.
Page 2 of 8


﻿Component C: Livelihood support (AF: US$24.5 million; Parent Project: US$11 million): This
existing component will be scaled up and expanded geographically. Targeting for the component
will also be modified to be more integrated with Components A and B - the component will
specifically target communities benefitting from infrastructure investments. In addition, a new sub-
component will be added to Component C that will focus on providing integrated economic support
to beneficiaries. The component will therefore comprise four subcomponents: (a) Youth Training and
Business Development; (b) Income Generating Activities; (c) Provision of Micro-Credit for IDPs;
and (d) (new) Integrative economic support pilot (offering support from (a), (b) and (c)). Activities
under each sub-component are as follows: a)  Youth Training and Business Development: This
sub-component will continue to provide skills training (technical and computer skills) to young
people. The sub-component supports skills training graduates with tools that allow them to start
income generating activities.; b) Income Generating Activities: This sub-component will continue to
support vulnerable IDPs to form groups to carry out income generating activities. Income generation
groups that have been successful in developing activities with previous project financing will also be
encouraged to apply for a second round of support, which can finance groups to add value to their
products or to be able to benefit from more complex technology for income generation. c)Provision
of Micro-Credit for IDPs: Microfinance institutions that carry out activities under this sub-
component currently select IDP and non-IDP beneficiaries (80 percent IDP) to receive up to US
$3000/group or US$1000/per individual in microfinance funds. The repayment rate for these
microloans is currently 100 percent, which indicates both that microfinance institutions have been
able to successfully select viable enterprises, as well as that there is scope to encourage microfinance
institutions to take greater risk by targeting more vulnerable individuals. Under the AF, this sub-
component will focus increasingly on vulnerable individuals. Microfinance institutions will be
required to ensure that at least 50 percent of the recipients of microloans have either (a) never
received a loan in the past; (b) have an annual income that does not exceed US$1200; (c) are female;
or (d) have benefitted from sub-components C(a) (Youth Training and Business Development) or C
(b) (Income Generating Activities). 80 percent of recipients of microloans will continue to be IDPs.
These changes are expected to significantly increase the poverty reduction impacts of this sub-
component, which, although currently performing well, may not be benefitting the core target group
for this project. d)  Integrative Economic Support Pilot: This subcomponent will work in New
Settlements supported under Component B and will provide beneficiaries access to integrated
economic support. Under this sub-component, young residents of New Settlements will be eligible to
apply for training and business development support, adults will be eligible to benefit from income
generating activities, and the beneficiaries of these two activities will also be eligible to receive
micro-credit. This pilot will be carefully evaluated to make it possible to see whether integrated
support significantly boosts income generation and sustainability of livelihoods.
Component D: Implementation Support and Capacity Building (AF:US$4 million): This component
will finance project management and capacity building as well as monitoring and evaluation
activities. The only change expected under this component is the financing of an impact evaluation.
Currently, the project has successfully gathered data on outputs, but there are indications that broader
outcomes and impacts of the project are not being successfully captured. Because of this, the project
will support a firm to carry out an impact evaluation measuring impacts of the Additional Financing
stage only. The firm hired to carry out this evaluation will also take over some of the more complex
monitoring and evaluation activities currently carried out by the PIU, also making it possible for the
PIU staff currently carrying out these activities to focus on other aspects of project implementation.
Page 3 of 8


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The original project operates in 32 administrative regions of Azerbaijan where IDPs are located. The
original project particularly prioritizes communities with a high proportion of IDPs. IDP
vulnerability and poverty levels, for example IDPs living in worse conditions in small towns and
rural areas, are used as criteria for selection for investments.
The AF will extend delivery of community infrastructure to 10 new administrative regions.
Component B will change from housing rehabilitation in the current project (discontinued) to social
and economic infrastructure in new IDP settlements. Similar selection criteria to those in place under
the original project will continue to be used to ensure communities selected are those with a high
proportion of IDPs and those with the most urgent socio-economic needs. The social and economic
infrastructure will be constructed in new IDP settlements constructed by the Government since 2005.
It is expected that under the AF 270 eligible communities in 42 administrative regions will be
serviced, with an anticipated 180.000 new beneficiaries (IDP as well as non-IDPs).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (GEN03)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  Yes       The policy is triggered but the exception to riparian
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 notification was approved by VP on Jan 13, 2016.
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment OP 4.01: Due to the scale and nature of the eligible investments, the
Page 4 of 8


﻿original project is not resulting in significant environmental impacts. Instead, the experience with
the activities under the original project indicates that many of the micro-projects produced
environmental benefits (improved water supply, improved sewage collection system, etc.) Because
the investments for the project are not pre-identified, specific environmental impacts are identified
in the course of project implementation. Therefore, a framework mechanism for screening
environmental impacts, developing mitigation plans and monitoring environmental progress has
been developed. Since the AF is proposed for scaling up the development effectiveness, without
introducing changes to the eligibility criteria of proposed activities, the nature of the impacts
remains similar to those that have already been considered for the original project. Therefore, the
Environmental Management Plan Framework (EMPF) used under the current project remains
applicable for the purposes of the AF. However, the EMPF has been updated by the Borrower to
accommodate extended geographical coverage and focus of Component B on social and economic
infrastructure instead of housing rehabilitation. The updated EMPF has been consulted upon, and
re-disclosed. Examples of potential environmental impacts include excessive dust or noise during
construction/rehabilitation, waste disposal, and aesthetic degradation of a landscape. Such impacts
will be temporary, occurring during implementation of micro-projects, can be mitigated and are
manageable.
Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12: Because of the increased scope of Component B, OP 4.12 is
triggered as part of the Additional Financing. Although state-owned land is expected to be
available to municipalities for these investments, informal occupants or minor impacts upon
livelihoods cannot be ruled out. SFDI has developed a Resettlement Policy Framework that has
been consulted upon and disclosed in country and in the Operations Portal. SFDI will screen
proposed project investments for potential impacts covered under OP 4.12 and will prepare
Resettlements Action Plans where necessary.
International Waterways OP7.50: The project will support implementation of micro-projects on
water supply and sanitation systems for beneficiary communities. However, the scale of the
investments will be rather small and will occur in a form of rehabilitation and repair of the existing
infrastructure (ongoing schemes). Although new connections to existing water supply systems
may occur for a limited number of new investments, these are not of a nature to have adverse
impacts on the quality and quantity of water flows to the riparian states. An exception from OP
7.50 had been issued by the VP office for the original project. As the AF will continue to support
the investments of the same nature and scale, such exception for the purposes of AF was sought
and approved by VP on Jan 13, 2016.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
As the project interventions are focused on improvement of social, economic and sanitation
infrastructure of IDP settlements, long-term impacts in the project area are assessed to be generally
positive. In the long-term perspective the participating communities are expected to benefit from
improved water supply and sanitation, rehabilitated roads, improved medical services etc. Similar
impacts are expected in relation to the AF.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The precise location of the micro-projects or social and economic infrastructure are not known at
this stage. However, the Environmental Management Plan Framework and the Resettlement Policy
Framework will contain measures to minimize impacts. Micro-projects are community-driven and
determined directly by communities. The social and economic infrastructure will be determined in
Page 5 of 8


﻿close consultation with communities.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Over the last 15 years of implementing Bank funded projects, SFDI staff have demonstrated
satisfactory safeguard performance and developed strong capacity in Bank safeguard policies and
procedures. The Project will build upon this existing implementation experience, and sufficient
project resources are allocated to SFDI staff to maintain and enhance skills in safeguard actions.
SFDI has updated the existing safeguard guidelines and manuals including the Environmental
Management Plan Framework (EMPF) and relevant sections of the Operational Manual (OM).
These are being updated as necessary to accommodate the extended scope of the AF compared to
the original project. In order to enhance in-house capacity to deal with more diverse micro-
projects, SFDI is finalizing recruitment of a dedicated environmental specialist to oversee EMPF
compliance. SFDI has hired the necessary expertise to prepare the RPF. The retained safeguards
specialist will also be trained to oversee RPF compliance and will carry out screening at project
sites.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Communities with a mix of IDP and non-IDP populations around the country, local governments,
municipalities, NGOs, the local environmental authorities are considered the key stakeholders for
the original project and proposed AF. SFDI has facilitated public consultation meetings with
stakeholders in selected districts of the projects area to familiarize stakeholders with the World
Bank safeguards policies, disclose the EMPF and RPF provisions and obtain public feedback and
comments. The records of these meetings were enclosed in the EMPF and RPF respectively and
made publicly available as part of the documents.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                05-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                             08-Jan-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Azerbaijan                                                 05-Jan-2016
Comments: Updated EMPF discussed at the public consultation meetings in November-
December 2015, and disclosed on SFDI official web-site in Azeri and English (http://
sfdi.gov.az/?options=content&id=124)
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                19-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             04-Jan-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Azerbaijan                                                 18-Dec-2015
Comments: Disclosed on SFDI official website in Azeri and English (http://sfdi.gov.az/?
options=content&id= 122)
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Page 6 of 8


﻿Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [  ]  TBD [X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ]  No [   ]   NA [ X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [X] No [     ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Page 7 of 8


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]   No [   ]  NA [
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michelle P. Rebosio Calderon,Nijat Valiyev,Rebecca Emilie Anne
Lacroix
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Nina Bhatt (PMGR)                     Date: 30-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


