INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12986
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Samoa                      Project ID:  P154839
Project Name: Pacific Resilience Program (P154839)
Task Team       Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
Leader(s):
Estimated       16-Mar-2015                Estimated    19-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSURR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (30%), General
water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (40%), Natural disaster management (60%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      13.94            Total Bank Financing:   13.79
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.15
IDA Grant                                                                  13.79
Total                                                                      13.94
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the Project is to strengthen early warning, resilient investments and financial
protection of Samoa.
3. Project Description
Economic instability in Samoa has been compounded significantly by a number of recent natural
Page 1 of 7


﻿disaster events, including the September 2009 earthquake and resultant tsunami, and Tropical
Cyclone Evan (TCE), which struck the country in December, 2012, resulting in total damage and
losses of approximately US$210 million (30% of annual GDP). The impacts of these disasters have
been significant, and given the extreme vulnerability of Samoa to climate change and natural
)         hazards, there is a risk that similar and possibly increasing losses will be experienced in the future.
Despite recent progress in Samoa in terms of national level plans and policy to respond to disaster
and climate risk, translating national climate change and DRM policy into sector policies and
resilient investments has been a significant challenge. The PREP will build synergies with existing
initiatives which aim to minimize the impact of climate change and natural hazards in Samoa. These
include: (i) initiatives to strengthen climate resilience under the GEF Least Developed Countries
Fund (LDCF); (ii) the Strategic Program for Climate Resilience, under the Samoa Pilot Program for
Climate Resilience (PPCR); and (iii) support from other donors such as the Climate and Oceans
Monitoring Program for the Pacific (CoSPAC) from Australia and the Adaptation Fund; and (iv) the
World Bank funded Samoa Agriculture and Fisheries Cyclone Response Project. The four main
components of the project are: (1) strengthening early warning and preparedness; (2) risk reduction
and resilient investments; (3) disaster risk financing; and (4) project and program management.
Some of the specific sub-projects under consideration in Samoa with environmental management
implications include:
*      Reconstruction and refurbishment of facilities, including the National Emergency Operations
Centre (NEOC) and Samoa Meteorological Division (SMD) Seismic Operations Center.
*      Installing real-time connectivity (GSM) to hydrology network and monitoring stations in
target water catchments (e.g. 18 rain gauges and 16 river flow in Samoa);
*      stockpiling of emergency goods and potential refurbishment of prepositioned supply hubs in
provinces/districts;
*      constructing, strengthening and/or expanding the reach of existing communications networks
(VHF/HF radio and mobile telecommunications); and
*      installing, connecting and/or refurbishing seismic monitoring stations with GPS and motion
sensors including a new volcanic station at Savai'i.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Independent State of Samoa is made up of nine volcanic islands, two of which (Savai'i and
Upolu) make up more than 99 per cent of land. More than half of the population lives on Upolu,
where the capital Apia is located. Samoa is highly vulnerable to natural disasters, particularly
cyclones occurring between November and April. In late 2012, Samoa was severely affected by
Tropical Cyclone Evan which killed 12 people and displaced thousands. Samoa is also susceptible to
strong earthquakes, with the linear island chain situated directly northeast of the Tonga-Kermadec
trench, which is the main source of seismic activity. Earthquakes can also generate tsunamis
impacting the many villages located along the coastlines. In September 2009, Samoa was struck by a
tsunami that killed 143 and injured 310 people. Over 12,000 people were affected by waves that
wiped out large stretches of the south and south-east coasts of the main island of Upolu.
Specific locations for the instrumentation and monitoring equipment listed in Section 3 have not been
determined, however hydrological monitoring equipment will necessarily be sited adjacent to
drainage lines and seismic stations will likely be situated in upland locations. Government-owned
land will be preferentially chosen to site these monitoring stations.
Page 2 of 7


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
o
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
O
Environmental            Yes          This policy is triggered because project-specific civil
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 works from sub-projects may generate negative
environmental or social impacts. While these impacts are
expected to be minor
(eg. retrofitting of buildings, installation of monitoring
stations) they will need to be appropriately managed. An
ESMF is the key safeguard instrument and contains
guidance on EMP preparation for specific activities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          Project activities are not expected to involve significant
4.04                                  loss or degradation of natural habitats, however this
policy has been triggered as a precaution since specific
sites are not yet known.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes          The project will not support any civil works that encroach
or adversely impact upon forests. However this policy is
triggered as a precaution because limited incidental forest
clearing may occur for small-scale civil works to establish
new monitoring/communications infrastructure in rural
areas or outer islands.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            The Project does not involve procurement or use of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural        Yes          The project is not expected to finance any large-scale civil
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  works that could affect Physical Cultural Resources.
However building refurbishment may include retrofitting
of historical buildings, and civil works may involve
chance finds of historically or culturally important
resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          Based on prior country-level social analysis undertaken as
BP 4.10                               part of preparation of the Environmental and Social
Safeguard Procedures for the Pacific Island Countries, OP
4.10 is not typically triggered in Samoa. Indigenous
Peoples are defined by four characteristics: self-
identification as members of a cultural group, collective
attachment to habitats/territories, customary institutions,
and indigenous language. All four characteristics must be
present to trigger the policy.
In Samoa, virtually all of the population is ethnic Samoan
and there are no significant ethnic cleavages among them;
therefore, they do not self-identify as members of a
distinct indigenous cultural group within their own
country. Similarly there are no customary cultural,
Page 3 of 7


﻿economic, social or political institutions that are separate
from the dominant society and culture because they are
the dominant society and culture. There also is no
indigenous language different from the official language
of the country
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Although it is expected that the majority of project
OP/BP 4.12                            activities will be undertaken on state-owned or Crown
land, there is potential for certain project activities (e.g.
construction of monitoring stations) to encroach on
customary or private lands. A Resettlement Policy
Framework has been prepared to cover this eventuality.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed     No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The overall environmental and social impact of the PREP is expected to be positive and none of
the eligible investments on the menu of options include activities that would generate significant
risk or irreversible adverse environmental or social impacts. The first investment type includes
eligible minor works activities to be funded under Components 1 and 2. While the specifics these
activities are not yet determined, these activities are likely to include monitoring stations and
construction/rehabilitation/ retrofitting of public buildings and community evacuation centres
amongst others. Environment and social impacts from these activities would be only minor and the
types of mitigation measures are well-known and proven.
The overall social impact of the project is also expected to be highly positive, as the PREP will
support poor and vulnerable communities to make informed decisions on disaster prevention and
preparedness by: (i) supporting the provision of early warning mechanisms and improving disaster
risk-awareness; and (ii) supporting risk-informed planning and investments to reduce disaster
impacts on societies, manage residual risk and uncertainties, and strengthen the capacity of people
and institutions to prepare for and respond to disasters. As such, prevention of the social impacts
created by natural disasters and climate change underlies the purpose of the Program.
An ESMF will ensure that any potential adverse environmental impacts that are generated as a
result of the project are identified, and appropriate safeguard instruments are prepared to avoid,
minimize, mitigate and, in such cases where there are residual impacts, offset there impacts. No
large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are anticipated.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The proposed activities under the PREP are likely to have widespread indirect and long-term
Page 4 of 7


﻿positive impacts. Strengthened early warning, resilient investment planning and financial
protection capacity in Samoa will allow increased ability to prevent impacts from, and respond to,
disaster events. Samoa will undertake specific activities to contribute towards its increased climate
resilience thereby mitigating residual social and environmental impacts, and enhancing recovery,
O
Q)         from natural disasters
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
O
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Projects will be implemented and coordinated through a Project Management Unit (PMU). The
PMU will be headed by a National Coordinator (NC). In Samoa the project components will be
implemented by an entity within the Ministry of Finance, with input from Samoa's Disaster
Management Office led by Filomena Nelson (Principal Disaster Management Officer, Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment (MNRE)). Samoa's NC will be supported by the Regional
Coordination Unit (RCU) within the Pacific Islands Forum Secretariat (PIFS). In addition, prior to
commencement of Project Implementation, the PREP will provide funds for social and
environmental safeguards support and oversight as needed. The ESMF will be the main instrument
for Samoa to screen subprojects for potential environmental impacts. Adherence to the screening
procedures and development and implementation of relevant safeguard instruments (eg. ESMPs
and RAPs) will allow Samoa to implement required measures.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultation with key stakeholders took place in Apia from 2-5th December 2014. A second
consultation session took place on the 13th February 2015 with the draft ESMF. The purpose of
the public consultations was to gather stakeholder input and feedback into subproject development
and design, and discuss the effectiveness of mitigation measures. Consultation sessions involved
specific outreach measures, tailored to the needs of vulnerable groups such as women, children
and the elderly.
Two-way mechanisms for ongoing consultation may be necessary throughout the life of the
project, to disclose information and seek feedback. Consultation with relevant government
officials, the business community, and civil society (NGOs etc) will assist in providing a different
perspectives and needs, and provoke discussion on practical alternatives relevant to the local
context. lAs will establish dedicated channels for information dissemination to ensure consistent
communication at national, subnational and local levels for the Program duration.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Samoa                                                    05-Mar-2015
Comments:
Page 5 of 7


﻿Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Samoa                                                   05-Mar-2015
O
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Feb-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Samoa                                                   05-Mar-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[  No[X]     NA
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes    No        NA   X
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Page 6 of 7


﻿Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[    ]  NA[    ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
O
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)               Date: 27-May-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


