                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                         APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA16011
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                               Project ID:    P153173
                            Project Name:       Anhui Road Maintenance Innovation and Demonstration Project (P153173)
                            Task Team           Jens Christian Helbech Hede
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           09-May-2016             Estimated     01-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI10                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       296.40           Total Bank Financing:    150.00
                            Financing Gap:              1.62
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                       144.78
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                          150.00
                              Total                                                                                          294.78
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve highway maintenance delivery and asset
                           management capacity in the participating municipalities and county in Anhui Province.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will focus its activities in six selected jurisdictions in Anhui Province - the municipalities
                           of Hefei, Chuzhou, Suzhou, Anqing, and Xuangcheng, and Guangde County. The project comprises
                           five components: Component A focuses on providing better systems for decision-making and reform
                           business processes to adopt these improved capabilities; Component B focuses on improving


                                                                         Page 1 of 10
                         maintenance delivery through better contracting models and improving work quality and value-for-
                         money; Component C focuses on improving maintenance delivery through better technologies and
                         thus increase value-for-money; Component D focuses on improving the time taken to respond to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         emergency events and restoring road service promptly; and Component E will provide relevant
                         training to stakeholders.

                         The project comprises the following five components:

                         Component A: Road Asset Management System Upgrade. This component will finance
                         improvements in business processes through, inter alia: (a) the preparation of analyses and studies,
                         system design, and provision of technical assistance; (b) the development and/or upgrading of
                         computerized asset management systems, including road databases, asset management applications,
                         and information publishing systems; (c) systems operation and management; and (d) training related
                         to systems' operation.

                         The backbone of the system will be based on commercial-off-the-shelf systems (COTS); however,
                         two of the modules will be bespoke developed (project management module and public information
                         system). The systems upgrade will include integration of different management systems as well as
                         features to engage road users in road asset monitoring. Based on lessons learned from similar
                         activities, this component will focus on issues beyond computerized systems and will hence include
                         the development and implementation of a "to be" model - i.e. of revised work organization and
                         business processes, which will support better decision-making for maintenance planning and
                         programming.

                         Component B: Road Maintenance Commercialization. This component will finance: (a)
                         rehabilitation, upgrading and maintenance of about 775 km of selected roads in the participating
                         municipalities/county (such as base reconstruction, resurfacing, paving and/or asphalt concrete
                         overlaying, as the case may be, including associated shoulder, sidewalks, drainage, masonry,
                         signage, lighting and ancillary works plus road safety improvements), utilizing a Performance-Based
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Contracting modality; and (b) provision of technical assistance, including the carrying out of related
                         studies.

                         Each PBC contract will be of a five-year duration and will comprise about 50-150 km of roads,
                         forming contiguous networks. The contracts will include provisions for input or output based works,
                         including selected emergency works (1 percent of contract value) and implementation of road safety
                         measures (2 percent of contract value).

                         Component C: Innovative and Preventive Maintenance Technologies. This component will finance:
                         (a) application of innovative maintenance technologies for improvement, rehabilitation and
                         resurfacing works on about 447 km of selected national and provincial roads, using traditional ad-
                         measurement contracting models; and (b) provision of technical assistance, including the carrying
                         out of related studies.

                         Pavement technologies will include technologies already tested on a small scale but are not yet
                         incorporated in the Anhui portfolio, as well as technologies not yet tested in Anhui. Roads covered
                         by this component will not be included under the PBC contracts. Studies of the performance of each
                         tested technology will be undertaken to determine, which technologies are the most promising for
                         provincial roll-out.



                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         Component D: Emergency Response Capacity. This component will finance: (a) construction of
                         maintenance emergency response centers in Hefei and Chouzhou municipalities; (b) installation of
                         required maintenance emergency equipment in six (6) emergency centers; and (c) development of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         emergency management systems in the participating municipalities/county, and provision of related
                         technical assistance.

                         Component E: Institutional Capacity Building. This component will finance provision of Project
                         implementation support, including technical assistance activities, carrying out of sector strategic
                         studies, monitoring and evaluation, as well as project management-related training, capacity
                         building, and study tours.

                         Strategic studies will include: (i) assessment of funding requirements for the provision of sustainable
                         funding for maintenance in Anhui; as well as (ii) strategies for the dissemination of experience on
                         PBCs to support potential provincial and national roll-out.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Peishen Wang (GENDR)
                         Zhefu Liu (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The project will include physical activities of road
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      maintenance and construction of emergency response
                                                                     centers in participating municipalities and a county of
                                                                     Anhui Province. The road maintenance will include
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     typical activities such as repairing potholes and cracks,
                                                                     road surface overlays and pavement rehabilitation. The
                                                                     emergency response centers are storage warehouses for
                                                                     emergency response equipment, vehicles and materials
                                                                     standing by for emergent road repair needs.

                                                                     All maintenance works will be conducted on existing
                                                                     roads and within the existing right-of-way, and
                                                                     maintenance materials (e.g. aggregate, sand, cement,
                                                                     asphalt etc.) are to be purchased from market suppliers, so
                                                                     there will not be new quarry sites or borrow pits involved.
                                                                     It is envisaged that the main environmental impacts of the
                                                                     road maintenance works will be construction related
                                                                     impacts, such as disturbance of road traffic, nuisance of
                                                                     dust and noise/vibration, management of wastes, worker
                                                                     and community safety, and impact on existing green belt
                                                                     etc. Therefore, the environmental and social impacts will
                                                                     be site-specific, temporary in nature, and can be readily
                                                                     managed with known mitigation measures and good
                                                                     construction management practice. The main social


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                        impacts are workers who will be relocated to new job
                                                        functions, as their current job will be outsourced to the
                                                        private industry. However, the head counts are low and no
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        layoff is envisaged. Therefore, the project is classified as
                                                        Category B as per OP4.01. An EIA and an EMP have
                                                        been prepared. Meanwhile, a dedicated Social
                                                        Development Plan has also been developed which
                                                        includes measures to mitigate potential impacts on
                                                        workers.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   There are nine ecological sensitive sites (one nature
                         4.04                           reserve, three scenic areas, three forest parks and two
                                                        wetland parks) identified where maintenance will be
                                                        conducted on existing roads in/or along the boundary of
                                                        these sites. One road is located in the experimental zone
                                                        of a Yangtze alligator nature reserve. However, the
                                                        project activity will only involve maintenance of existing
                                                        roads, and the location is outside the core zone and buffer
                                                        zone of the reserve, therefore the project activity will not
                                                        lead to degradation or conversion of natural habitat. Eight
                                                        other roads are boundary roads of parks, tourism zones,
                                                        lakes and reservoirs, but as all maintenance works are to
                                                        be done on existing roads for specific locations or by
                                                        specific sections within ROW, little impacts are envisaged
                                                        to these sites.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The road maintenance works within the right-of-way on
                                                        the existing roads will not have impacts on forests;
                                                        therefore this policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project will not involve procurement of pesticide or
                                                        have any impact on pest management practice. This
                                                        policy is not triggered.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   As all the road maintenance works will be within the
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           right-of-way on the existing roads, there are no physical
                                                        cultural resources (including ancient trees) involved.
                                                        Nevertheless, the chance-find procedures is included in
                                                        the EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    The Bank Policy OP 4.10 Indigenous People is not
                         BP 4.10                        triggered. All of the proposed maintenance work will be
                                                        carried out within the right-of-way of existing highways
                                                        in five municipalities and one county. There is no ethnic
                                                        minority communities in those municipalities and county.
                                                        The IP screening of the proposed roads and the interviews
                                                        with the departments in charge of the ethnic minorities in
                                                        the municipalities and county concluded that the project
                                                        areas are predominantly Han Chinese and there are no
                                                        ethnic minority groups as defined by OP4.10 present in,
                                                        or have collective attachment to the project areas.



                                                         Page 4 of 10
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              All of the road maintenance will be carried out within the
                            OP/BP 4.12                                right-of-way of existing highways. Furthermore, the
                                                                      upgrade and construction of emergency response centers
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      are confirmed not to require any additional land. As no
                                                                      land acquisition and resettlement relocation will be
                                                                      required, a resettlement action plan has not been
                                                                      requested. Due diligence review was conducted to
                                                                      determine whether there were any links between the
                                                                      Bank-financed sub-projects and other construction
                                                                      activities on the proposed roads. It was found that no new
                                                                      proposals for civil works, which are linked to the Bank
                                                                      loan supported project, are anticipated. The due diligence
                                                                      review to linked projects will continue regularly
                                                                      throughout the project period.

                                                                      In case there are any project modifications causing land
                                                                      acquisition and resettlement relocation prior to the
                                                                      Closing Date of the Bank Loan, a resettlement policy
                                                                      framework has been prepared and locally disclosed to
                                                                      guide possible project modifications. As a result, OP 4.12
                                                                      was triggered.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project will not involve any dams. Therefore, the
                            4.37                                      policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International   No            The project will not involve any international waterways.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The project will not involve any disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental safeguards

                             The project will include physical activities of road maintenance and construction of emergency
                             response centers in five municipalities and one county of Anhui Province. The road maintenance
                             will include rehabilitation works (repair of significantly damaged pavements and roadside
                             facilities for full restoration to the original, or better, technical standard), resurfacing works
                             (periodic repair and reinforcement of damaged parts of the pavement and roadside facilities), thin
                             surfacing (typically addition of 1-2 cm thin surfacing layer on existing road surface), and routine
                             maintenance (cleaning, crack sealing, shoulder mowing, side ditch dredging, and repair of traffic
                             facilities). All these activities are on existing roads and within the right-of-way. The emergency
                             response centers are storage warehouses for emergency response equipment, vehicles and
                             materials standing by for emergent road repair needs.

                             Based on the environmental impact assessment, there are nine ecological sensitive sites (one


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                         nature reserve, three scenic areas, three forest parks and two wetland parks) identified where
                         maintenance will be conducted on existing roads in/or along the boundary of these sites. One road
                         is located in the experimental zone of a Yangtze alligator nature reserve, therefore OP4.04 is
Public Disclosure Copy




                         triggered. Since the project activity will only involve maintenance of existing roads, and the
                         location is outside the core zone and buffer zone of the reserve, the project activity will not lead to
                         degradation or conversion of natural habitat. Eight other roads are boundary roads of parks,
                         tourism zones, lakes and reservoirs, but as all maintenance works are to be done on existing roads
                         for specific locations or by specific sections within ROW, little impacts are envisaged to these
                         sites. Maintenance materials (e.g. aggregate, sand, cement, asphalt etc.) are to be purchased from
                         market suppliers, so there will not be new quarry sites or borrow pits involved. All emergency
                         response centers are using existing road maintenance stations sites (two empty sites owned by
                         local transport bureau and reserved for maintenance centers). The main environmental and social
                         impacts of the road maintenance works will be common construction-related impacts, such as
                         disturbance of road traffic, nuisance of dust and noise/vibration, management of wastes, worker
                         and community safety, and impact on existing green belt along the roads etc. The EIA concludes
                         that potential environmental impacts of the project are found to be site-specific, temporary in
                         nature and insignificant, and can be readily managed with known mitigation measures and good
                         construction management practice. The project is classified as Category B as per OP4.01.

                         Due to road maintenance works under component B being outsourced to the commercial sector,
                         281 maintenance workers will be affected (188 permanent staff and 93 contracted staff), as their
                         current job functions will be transferred to the commercial sector. A social impact analysis has
                         been carried out to evaluate the impacts on these workers and a mitigation plan been developed to
                         ease the transition. Permanent staff will be offered new positions either doing the same job, but on
                         other road sections where maintenance is not commercialized, or being assigned new jobs at the
                         maintenance centers. Staff still under contract will be relocated to other road sections, while other
                         staff will be provided training opportunities.

                         Social safeguards
Public Disclosure Copy




                         While the project as designed will not involve resettlement the Bank Policy OP 4.12 Involuntary
                         Resettlement, the RAP was not requested, but it was triggered since a resettlement policy
                         framework is prepared for unanticipated land acquisition and resettlement relocations that may
                         arise due to any project modification during the project implementation. The resettlement policy
                         framework also covers any potential temporary impacts on land use and businesses loss that may
                         not be avoidable during construction.

                         The Bank Policy OP 4.10 Indigenous People is not triggered. All of the proposed roads to be
                         rehabilitated will be carried out within the right-of-way of existing highways in five municipalities
                         and one county. There is no any ethnic minority community in those municipalities and county.
                         The IP screening of the proposed roads and the interviews with the departments in charge of the
                         ethnic minorities in the municipalities concluded that the project areas are predominantly Han
                         Chinese and there are no ethnic minority groups as defined by OP4.10 such as Manchu and
                         Mongolian communities present in, or have collective attachment to the project areas.

                         Due diligence reviews were conducted by the national consulting team. Those six emergent
                         centers will be built on the state owned land. The latest land that was converted from collective
                         land to state owned land was incurred 5 years ago from now and the earliest land that was
                         converted from collective land to state owned land was incurred 10 years ago. The land policy
                         carried out by local land department was in consistence to national and provincial land regulations

                                                                    Page 6 of 10
                           and also consistence to the subject to the Bank policy. It was integrated into RPF. Please review
                           the annex of RPF.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           There is no major potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           envisaged.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           As a category B project, the project only supports maintenance and rehabilitation of existing roads
                           and construction of emergency response centers in existing road maintenance center sites,
                           therefore, the alternatives for locations and alignments are not a main concern of the project.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To address the potential environmental and social impacts, an EMP has been developed which
                           specifies environmental management organization setup with clear responsibilities and capacity
                           requirement, management of contractors and environmental supervision arrangement,
                           environmental mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting plan, capacity training plan, and
                           budget estimate.

                          The EMP includes environmental mitigation measures for environmental and social issues related
                          to the road maintenance and construction activities, including traffic disturbance, community and
                          occupational health and safety, utility disruption, noise, dust, wastewater and solid waste
                          management, water conservation and erosion control, etc. These measures will be incorporated
                          into bidding documents and construction contracts for implementation.

                          All project maintenance roads are identified during the preparation stage. However, it is possible
                          that one or some sections under the Innovation Maintenance Technologies Component
Public Disclosure Copy




                          (Component C) may be adjusted during implementation stage. Therefore, the EMP also includes a
                          framework procedure to guide the screening and any follow-up EA preparation for such changes,
                          which will exclude any road sections falling into major environmental and social sensitive areas,
                          require EIA preparation for major or medium repairs, or directly apply the existing EMP for
                          simple activities of small repairs.

                          The PMO will be responsible for safeguards implementation, and monitoring and reporting to the
                          Bank. A dedicated liaison staff for environmental management will be hired. The Highway
                          Bureaus of the respective pilot municipalities and county will serve as the Project Implementing
                          Units (PIUs), and will be responsible for direct supervision of the performance of contractors
                          within their jurisdictions. Environmental management units are in place within PIUs, with
                          dedicated staff. Project supervision contracts include the environmental supervision clause that
                          ensure daily on-site supervision.

                          The updated social assessment shows that 281 workers will be affected by the outsourcing of road
                          maintenance works to the commercial sector, including 188 permanent staff and 93 contracted
                          staff. As per the Chinese labor law, and as confirmed through interviews with local government,
                          none of the affected workers, including the contracted staff, will lose their jobs. Instead those
                          workers will be offered similar work on other road sections or areas, or be transitioned into new
                          job functions within current locations. Further broad public consultations will be undertaken in


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           order to ensure that the maintenance reform will be satisfactory to all effected staff. Furthermore
                           provincial policies will be developed to ensure the reform, if rolled out provincially, will not affect
                           staff negatively.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The proposed project will generate benefits to road users, residents, businesses and government
                           agencies in the participating municipalities and county in Anhui Province.

                           During the EA preparation process, public consultations were conducted in all the project
                           municipalities/county through a combination of opinion surveys and public meetings along the
                           major selected roads and response center sites. Information about the project, potential
                           environmental and social impacts, and planned mitigation measures were provided to the public
                           during consultation. Main concerns from the public (i.e. traffic disturbance, safety, nuisance of
                           noise etc.) have been adequately addressed in the EIA, and necessary mitigation measures were
                           developed in EMP and the project design.

                           The EIA/EMPs have been disclosed on the local governments➢❨ websites of all project
                           municipalities/county, and will also be disclosed through the InfoShop.

                           Through focus group discussions and key informant interviews, potentially affected workers have
                           been consulted and obtained views and preferences regarding the impacts and mitigation
                           measures, including training and job options and the budget to be supported by the municipal
                           highway bureau. The highway bureaus in the municipalities will play a key role in determining
                           and implementing their job transfer programs.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Mar-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Jun-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            22-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      24-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   20-Jun-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            22-Mar-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         NA


                                                                      Page 8 of 10
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jens Christian Helbech Hede
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 22-Jul-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                          Date: 25-Jul-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 10 of 10
