INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                               Report No.: ISDSC14185
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Ethiopia                   Project ID:   P156400
Project Name:     Ethiopia: Supporting Open Data Initiative
Team Leader(s): Elsa Araya
Estimated Date    30-Jul-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GGODR                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Public administration- Information and communications (50%), General public
administration sector (50%)
Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (50%), e-Government (50%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   0.3                  Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                    0.3
O
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
0
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of this Recipient Executed trust fund is to enhance transparency through
the implementation of actions and recommendations emanating from the country's Open Data
Readiness Assessment (ODRA) and the action plan. This will:
(i)   improve the legal and policy framework around open data;
(ii)   create the necessary governance structure to manage the open data initiative;
(iii)  enhance the national open data portal and link it with innovative information and
communication technology and data-based mobile services delivery in the education, health and
transport sectors which are directly related to the day-to-day activities of the citizens;
(iv)  train technical staff of the Ministry of Communication and Information Technology (MCIT)
and participating agencies on various aspects of open data, including maintenance, management and
use.
C. Project Description
The project will have 3 component, detailed below:


﻿COMPONENT 1: National Open Data Guidelines Formulation (US$ 96,000.00)
Despite the enactment of the Information Act, implementation of open data has so far been
O
)       inconsistent across agencies. Lack of implementation guidelines is recognized by the Government of
Ethiopia as one of the barriers to consistent and full implementation of the Act. In acknowledgment
of this shortfall, the Government has been trying to initiate the development of the directive but so
far there has been little progress. This component will support the drafting and finalization of the
National Open Data Guidelines in participatory manner involving all relevant stakeholders and its
dissemination following its approval. The National Open Data Guidelines is expected to i) be built
on the main proclamation; ii) clarify the roles and functions of the different actors along with the
rules of the game; and iii) incorporate open data principles. It will involve recruitment of
consultants, conducting study tour and workshops to help draft, validate and disseminate the
Guidelines. It will also support the establishment of the Open Data Initiative Steerring Committee.
COMPONENT 2. Ensuring the Quality of Open Data Portal Development and its Utilization (US$
179,000.00)
2.1. Ensuring Quality of Open Data Portal: The Government of Ethiopia has already commissioned a
local consulting firm to develop the national data portal and select national data sets. This
component will support the recruitment of international consultants to ensure the quality of the
national open data portal. The international consultants will supervise the national data portal
development project by reviewing the requirement study, the design document and the final open
data portal to ensure international standards are appropriately reflected. In addition, training will be
provided to ICT staff at MCIT and other sector ministries. Furthermore, necessary goods including
servers and computers will be procured to operationalize the open data portal.
2.2: Strengthen the Demand Side for Open Data Initiative: The Open Data Readiness Assessment
shows that the capacity of the demand side for open government is weak. There seems to be no
active demand for data from civil society organizations, the private sector or the media; as things
stand these parties usually report on the data that is provided by various ministries and agencies
without further analysis. This can be attributed mainly to lack of awareness and capacity. This
component will conduct a number of awareness raising exercises and trainings such as boot camps.
o       It will among others conduct technology innovation boot camps to develop applications and services
by accessing the open data portal.
COMPONENT 3: Implementation Support to the Project (US$ 25,000.00): This component will
support the recruitment of a local consultant to coordinate daily operation of activities and carry out
monitoring and evaluation. It will also support an external audit of the project at the end of the grant
period.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Asferachew Abate Abebe (GENDR)
Chukwudi H. Okafor (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   No            The project only provides technical assistance
BP 4.01                                      and does not involve civil works, prearation of
civil works or any type of physical planning
therefore, will not have any adverse
environmental and social impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No
Forests OP/BP 4.36             No
Pest Management OP 4.09        No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No
Projects on International      No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):       Name: Elsa Araya
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                Date: 14-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Guenter Heidenhof (PMGR)                Date: 15-Jul-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


