INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14637
o
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jul-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jul-2014, 25-Oct-2014, 13-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Honduras                    Project ID:  P148737
Project Name: Corredor Seco Food Security Project (P148737)
Task Team       Eli Weiss
Leader(s):
Estimated                                   Estimated    30-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFAO4                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Agro-industry, marketing,
and trade (10%), Irrigation and drainage (25%), He alth (15%)
Theme(s):       Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%), Nutrition and food security
(40%), Rural non-farm income generation (30%), Rural s ervices and
infrastructure (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      37.80             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      5.80
Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                 30.00
LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                           2.00
Total                                                                        37.80
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the Project is to enhance food and nutritional security of vulnerable households in
Page 1 of 15


Selected Areas of the Corredor Seco.
3. Project Description
The proposed operation is fully aligned with government priorities and fills an important financing
gap of a multi-donor Alliance for the Dry Corridor (Alianza para el Corredor Seco, ACS). The
proposed project is part of the ACS, the government flagship program under the Country Investment
Plan for the Agri-food Sector (PIPSA) and National Food Security and Nutrition Strategy (ENSAN)
to support interventions for vulnerable people in 25 contiguous municipalities in a large dry strip of
a        land called the Corredor Seco. The programmatic goal of the ACS is to reduce poverty and hunger in
a sustainable manner in the Corredor Seco of Honduras. The ACS aims to lift 50,000 families from
extreme poverty between the years 2014 and 2019, reduce undernutrition by 20 percent in target
communities, and lay the foundation for continued rural growth.
The project proposal was submitted by the GOH to the Global Agriculture and Food Security
Program Trust Fund (GAFSP) and was competitively awarded a grant of US$30.0 million in
September 2013. The ACS currently comprises four co-investors: the U.S. Agency for International
Development (USAID) (US$54 million), the Central American Bank for Economic Integration
(CABEI) (up to US$90 million), the GOH (US$40 million), and the GAFSP (US$30 million). Each
co-investor will finance specific geographical or thematic areas of intervention. The European Union
(EU) and the Canadian International Development Agency (CIDA) have committed to join the ACS
partners. The ACS integrates evidence-based research and best/good practices from all major food
security donors/investors in agriculture and health in Honduras. The ACS partners will follow similar
approaches from previous successful interventions in the area as specified under Lessons Learned in
the Project Appraisal Document. USAID has supported integrated nutrition, sanitation and income
generation investments. It will continue its support in the departments of La Paz, Intibucd, and
Lempira. CABEI will finance rural roads throughout the Corredor Seco. GAFSP will fund activities
that enhance food and nutritional security in parts of Francisco Morazdn, Choluteca and El Paraiso.
The GOH will finance investments in irrigation and monitoring of food security programs. CIDA and
EU support are still under discussion.
0
The Project will assist approximately 12,000 households (HH) in 25 municipalities of three
departments (Francisco Morazdn, Choluteca and El Paraiso). Some 10,000 HH will participate in the
Food Production and Rural Household Income Generation component. About 6,000 HH will
participate in the Nutrition Education and Household Hygiene component. The Project will seek the
highest possible overlap, and it is estimated that around 4,000 HH will participate in both
components, resulting in a total of 12,000 HH. GOH selected the municipalities based on food and
nutrition insecurity criteria and the division of geographical areas with other ACS partners. The
Project will focus mostly on: (i) poor and extreme poor HH, beneficiaries of the Bono Vida Mejor
(conditional cash transfer) program and who pass an additional poverty verification test (many of
these HH have difficulties meeting their responsibilities in health, education and nutrition); (ii)
highly vulnerable HH that have low food stocks and have no stable means of income (including
remittances, lack of employment); (iii) female-headed HH or HH with presence of pregnant women,
nursing mothers and children under five years of age or other children with nutritional risks; (iv)
people with access to land (owning, renting, sharecropping, communal land, etc.), possibly with
potential for access to water resources (for agricultural subprojects only); (v) a limited number (less
than 500) of recognized leaders of community-based organizations (SLS, water boards, community
councils "trustees" among others), who can influence other members of the community to participate
in the Project. Detailed characteristics of the beneficiaries are specified in the Project Operational
Manual (POM).
Page 2 of 15


Project Components:
Component 1: Food Production and Rural Household Income Generation ($28.6 million; $22.2
O
million GAFSP; $4.8 million GOH; and $1.6 million beneficiaries' co-financing).
The component's objective is to increase household availability of quality food and revenues of poor
and extremely poor rural residents in 25 municipalities as a basis for improving nutrition and in the
long-term for reducing child stunting.
Under this component the grant will finance: (i) technical assistance (TA), training and extension
services and (ii) agriculture and business development subprojects (SPs), including works, goods and
services, to enhance agricultural (including livestock) production and marketing and to foster non-
farm revenue generation.
Subcomponent 1.1. Agricultural production and marketing
Technical assistance, training and extension services. Agricultural extension agents and marketing
specialists will assist, train and build the capacities of individual producers, producer groups and
market intermediaries (traders, transporters) to increase their production, productivity and marketing
efficiency. The Project will enhance the capacities of producers and market agents through TA and
training in:
a.     Developing: (i) Business Plans for high-value crop (HVC) and marketing investments aimed
at increasing HH incomes to access food; and (ii) Food Security Plans for subsistence crops aimed at
increasing food availability for poor HH with insufficient assets or existing capacity to introduce
HVC.
b.     Assisting and training producers in the technical implementation of the business and food
security plans and corresponding SPs to ensure that they remain viable and that the producers get
access to the materials and equipment needed to implement the SPs.
c.     Introducing new production technologies, good agricultural practices (GAP), environmental
management, climate smart technologies;
d.     Accessing new markets, adapting production to market demand and standards, obtaining fair
trade and organic farming certifications, forming marketing alliances with buyers, improving
negotiation skills, liaising with institutional buyers and organizing transport and other logistics;
a        e.      Creating and managing rural organizations including producer cooperatives, producer
groups, water users associations, savings and loan societies (SLS) and women's groups and assisting
informal groups to obtain legal status as well as leadership and financial literacy training;
The TA and training under this subcomponent will also include the promotion and monitoring of
Agricultural SPs, the participation in the evaluation process, and the assurance of citizen engagement.
Business Plans (BPs). The Project will support the producers with sufficient access to productive
assets (land/water/labor) and capacity to handle improved technologies to reach higher levels of
productivity, move away from subsistence farming and diversify into higher value products such as
vegetables, fruit, coffee and livestock. Producer groups and their linkages to the markets will be
strengthe ned. The extension agents and marketing specialists will help producer groups to develop
viable BP to reach these goals and to implement the plans through investments SPs.
Food Security Plans (FSP). The Project will help the extreme poor with little access to land or other
productive assets to increase food security through simple technologies and post-harvesting
Page 3 of 15


processes that can enhance yields, production and food diversity. These technologies will increase
food quantities as well as the duration of their availability. These FSPs will have to be developed
with the assistance of Project staff, showing that the technological improvements can be sustained
over time by those extreme poor HH with very small and achievable annual cash injections. The
O
technologies embedded in the FSPs will include intensive inter-planting, animal manure composting
for fertilization, and water distribution systems with low maintenance costs, simple soil conservation
techniques, biological pest and disease control.
Agricultural SPs. The Project will channel funds for investments in production and marketing
through the implementation of SPs based on the above-mentioned business and FSPs. Agricultural
SPs will consist of small infrastructure works (irrigation), the provision of production equipment
(including post-harvesting), agricultural inputs and some product specific services. Their
implementation will be based on viable BPs or FSPs. The SPs based on BPs will be mainly for fruit
and vegetable production, coffee and livestock and will only be provided to producer groups. This
type of SP can also finance marketing linkages investments such as small works and equipment for
produce packing units, associative produce storage and similar marketing related investments. The
SPs based on FSPs will be mainly for the production of subsistence crops (maize, beans) and
nutritious garden vegetables and will be open for both producer groups and individual HH.
Subcomponent 1.2. Non-farm income generating activities
Technical assistance and training. Similar to subcomponent 1.1, the Project will support non-farm
revenue generation by providing TA and training to groups (minimum three HH) who want to set up
rural businesses mostly for business start-ups and in particular for women and young people. As
under component 1.1, the Project's small business development specialists will provide TA and
training to (i) develop the BPs and to implement the Business Development SPs resulting from these
plans; (ii) accessing new markets, adapting production to market demand and standards, forming
marketing alliances with buyers, improving negotiation skills; and (ii) strengthen the enterprises to
obtain legal status as well as leadership and financial literacy training. Moreover, the TA and training
under this subcomponent will also include the promotion and monitoring of Business Development
SPs, the participation in the evaluation process, and the assurance of citizen engagement.
Business Development SPs. The Project will finance the implementation of Business Development
a        SPs under BPs. Investments will consist of small works, equipment and tools to be implemented for
groups of beneficiaries and farmers organizations. Examples of such SPs are agro-processing units
(dried fruit, juice, and maize meal), leather works, rural supply stores, manufacturing of water filters,
and eco-stoves needed under component 2, and other rural businesses.
Component 2. Nutrition Education and Household Hygiene ($4.8 million; $4.1 million GAFSP; $0.3
million GOH; and $0.4 million beneficiaries' co-financing).
In addition to increasing food security through the production side, the Project aims to improve
nutrition and nutritional practices especially for children and women. The component's objective is
to improve the consumption of nutritious foods and the nutrition status of pregnant and lactating
women and children less than five years of age in selected communities of the 25 municipalities.
Under this component the grant will finance: (i) technical assistance (TA) and training, and (ii)
community nutrition and household hygiene subprojects (SPs), including works, goods and services,
to improve nutrition status and consumption of a nutritious diet.
Page 4 of 15


Subcomponent 2.1. Nutrition education and growth monitoring.
This subcomponent is aimed improving nutrition education and the ongoing Growth Monitoring
Program at communities and will create awareness among all stakeholders about: (i) the impacts of
O
U        malnutrition on pregnant and lactating women and the cognitive development and future productivity
of infants and young children; and (ii) the importance of nutritious food consumption and production.
The subcomponent will finance: (i) the development and production of communication materials to
raise awareness on chronic malnutrition and its implications; and (ii) the development and carrying
out of education training, including the development and provision of teaching materials for
stakeholders including among others, agriculture extension agents, health workers, community
leaders and nutrition volunteers. The material will focus on the recommended diet for pregnant
mothers and children below five years and the need for consumption of locally produced nutritious
foods among other topics. Additionally, the subcomponent will be financing TA and training for: (i)
strengthening and expanding the ongoing Integrated Community Child Health Program (AIN-C)
activities in communities and rural health centers; (ii) training to health workers, health supervisors
and nutrition volunteers. Technical assistance will also be provided to assist beneficiaries for the
development of Community Nutrition Plans. Moreover, the TA and training under this
subcomponent will also include the promotion and monitoring of Community Nutrition SPs, the
participation in the evaluation process, and the assurance of citizen engagement.
Community Nutrition SP. Based on these plans, the project will finance the implementation of
Community Nutrition SP, including minor works, small equipment, goods and materials for
communities and rural health centers, the establishment of community and school gardens, and the
provision of (non-monetary) incentives for nutrition volunteers.
Subcomponent 2.2. Household hygiene.
The benefits of increased food availability and improved dietary consumption will not be realized if
children continue to suffer from diarrheal and respiratory diseases. Therefore, this subcomponent will
finance the implementation of Household Hygiene SPs to improve HH hygiene by financing HH
improvements to avoid water borne and respiratory diseases (water filters, eco-stoves, cement floors,
and latrines). These SPs will be based on Household Hygiene Plans and will be accompanied by the
provision of technical assistance and extension services, including the promotion and monitoring of
a        these SPs, the participation in the evaluation process, and the assurance of citizen engagement.
Component 3: Monitoring, Evaluation and Project Management ($4.4 million; $3.7 million GAFSP;
$0.7 million GOH).
This component will finance a share of Project management and monitoring and evaluation activities,
including, among others: (i) carrying out Project supervision, including field visits; (ii) carrying out
Project audits; (iii) monitoring and evaluation of Project activities, (iv) the carrying out of: (A) a
baseline evaluation; (B) a mid-term evaluation; and (C) an impact evaluation; and (v) the financing
of Operating Costs.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Honduras' endowment of water, forests, and soil is one central foundation for much of the country's
economic activity, but it is vulnerable to natural shocks, mismanagement, and depletion. Poverty and
natural resource depletion are strongly linked. About half of the population of Honduras is rural, 80
Page 5 of 15


percent of which live in environmentally unstable hillside areas practicing subsistence agriculture,
and affecting the sustainability of the natural resources. Deteriorating natural resources fail to
provide a minimal livelihood to the poor. Rural poverty accounts for 70 percent of all poverty and 58
percent of extreme poverty which is concentrated mostly in the western and southern areas of
O
Honduras.
The population of the extended Corredor Seco region is overwhelmingly of mixed Spanish and
indigenous ancestry, although some indigenous peoples (primarily Lenca) live in the western and
central regions. A number of factors contribute to the severe social vulnerability across the region:
environmental shocks, resource mismanagement and depletion, extreme poverty, limited access to
public infrastructure and services, a nutrient-deficient diet (largely corn and beans), high out
migration, among others.
The project area covers 25 municipalities in three departments within the Corredor Seco: Alubar6n,
Curar6n, La Libertad, Lepaterique, Reitoca, and San Miguelito in Francisco Morazdn; Apacilagua,
Concepci6n de Maria, Duyure, El Corpus, El Triunfo, Morolica, Namasigiie, Orocuina, Pespire, San
Antonio de Flores, San Isidro, San Jos6, and San Marcos de Col6n in Choluteca; and Liure, San
Antonio de Flores, San Lucas, Soledad, Texiguat, and Vado Ancho in El Paraiso. Investments in
some geographical locations of the municipalities of Lepaterique and Curar6n, will be financed by
other development partners of the ACS, as further defined in the Project Operational Manual.
Within the selected municipalities, the operators will be in charge of the selection process of the
communities to be targeted for implementation of project activities, which will be approved by
INVEST-H. The operators will prioritize through a participatory methodology some 120 to 160
communities within the municipalities that meet the following criteria: (i) communities within 10
kilometers from secondary roads; (ii) existence of a micro watershed; (iii) population greater than
400; and (iv) land use is viable for agriculture. The communities covered by Component 1 will also
be covered under Component 2.
Taken the project objective and design, the two key environmental characteristics of the project area
are soil characteristics in Corredor Seco and the hydrological capacity of the existing soil types.
Regarding the first, the most area represents the agrological classes VI and VII that don't allow
cultivation of annual crops. The latter has such severe limitations that it only allows management of
a         primary or secondary natural forest. This emphasizes importance of addressing promotion of non-
agricultural production and related market assessments. Regarding permanent crops, fruit trees such
as plums, cashews, nance, mango, and avocado have been identified as adapted to the soil and
climate characteristics of the area and are valued by consumers. Consequently, feasibility studies on
related production and small-scale processing will be considered during project implementation.
Further, another recommended project activity is identification of potential for alternative, forestry-
based livelihood options that would involve both environmentally and financially sustainable
management processes to generate related interest among the targeted communities. Regarding the
hydrological capacity of the soil types present in the project area, the predominant types are C and D
that represent moderately high and high potential for runoff. In such soil types, opportunities to
cultivate with traditional types of water harvesting, such as ditches, collector ditches or recharge
wells is severely limited or compromised. It is important that the project conducts detailed analysis
prior to implementing works to capture and store water for crop irrigation to secure any works'
viability. However, it is important to clarify that the scale of this assessment work is small
(1:250,000), so it is impossible to define areas which agrological condition could present better
characteristics for annual crops. Consequently, this assessment work will need to be conducted in
Page 6 of 15


further detail in the field by competent agricultural/soil professionals at the early stages of identifying
Project investments and assessing their feasibility.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Jason Jacques Paiement (CRKI2)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes          The project is classified as environmental Category B and
.         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  requires a partial Environmental Assessment (EA). Due to
the small-scale and dispersed nature of the eligible
investments, no large scale, significant and/or irreversible
impacts are foreseen. Beyond financing agricultural
inputs, investments can entail minor irrigation/facility
works and purchasing productive equipment that will
require socio-environmental management. An
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) has been prepared to guide demand-driven
project implementation in prioritizing environmentally
sustainable and climate smart investments and agricultural
practices. See further details below.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          The project area includes two protected areas:
4.04                                  Yerbabuena Biological Reserve in Francisco Morazdn and
Cerro Guanacaure Multiple-Use Area in Choluteca. The
project can fund activities that would have positive impact
on said areas or other natural habitats and/or engage in
sustainable use of their resources.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes          Based on the project's EA, sustainable, longer-term
forestry-related livelihood options would be a preferable
option compared with agricultural activities in many
places within the project area. Potential for said livelihood
options will need to be assessed during project
implementation, based on market analysis and
beneficiary/stakeholder demand. Further, project activities
aim at reducing pressure to deforest for agriculture and/or
livestock purposes and promoting agro-forestry.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes           The project will finance agricultural activities where
baseline conditions involve different levels of use of
agrochemicals. The project will promote Integrated Pest/
Crop Management through project-provided extension
services, and the ESMF will provide the necessary initial
guidance for the same. During implementation, concrete
cases will need to be assessed in detail and supported by
specialized guidance by a consultant/SENASA, the
national authority for agricultural health services on an as-
needed-basis.
Physical Cultural        Yes          Honduras has rich archaeological and cultural resources.
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  The project design does not particularly aim at financing
Page 7 of 15


activities related with physical cultural resources.
However, taken its demand-driven nature and even
potential preference for non-farm rural livelihoods, the
latter might address potential PCR/tourism-related
investments/activities. The project will only allow
positive impacts on PCRs. The project will only allow
positive impacts on PCRs; the ESMF's negative list will
exclude any activity that could lead to their degradation or
destruction. The ESMF will also guide for applicable
archaeological chance find procedures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           While there are a few towns in the project area with
BP 4.10                              potential beneficiaries who consider themselves to be
descendants of Lenca speaking Indigenous Peoples
commonly found in the western departments of the
Corredor Seco (i.e. Lempira, Santa Barbara, and
Intibucd), the Social Impact Assessment found no
evidence of their possessing collective attachments to
geographically distinct habitats or ancestral territories
within the project area; nor customary cultural, economic,
social, or political institutions that are separate from those
of the dominant society; nor an indigenous language.
INVEST-H will advise the project operators on additional
measures that may be required to provide all beneficiaries
with culturally appropriate project benefits.
Involuntary Resettlement No          The Social Impact Assessment found that due the limited
OP/BP 4.12                           physical footprint of the proposed investments, no land
acquisition or displacement of assets will be required. All
infrastructure and equipment investments will be
restricted to either lands privately owned by the
participating beneficiaries and/or unoccupied municipal
lands. The SIA also reports that access to the latter are
often particularly important for some of the poorest
agricultural laborers. INVEST-H will advise the project
operators on how to screen out any potential activities that
could require land acquisition, including guidelines on
how to document voluntary land donations, as relevant.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    Yes          There is a major multipurpose dam called Jos6 Cecilio del
4.37                                 Valle within the project area in the department of
Choluteca. If said dam is to provide water for project-
funded irrigation systems, the project will follow the
applicable OP procedures. For small dams, potential
adverse impacts are addressed through OP/BP 4.01,
Environmental Assessment as recommended by BP 4.37,
and measures are included in the Environmental and
Social Management Framework (ESMF).
Projects on International  Yes       OP 7.50 was triggered as some of the Project activities
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Page 8 of 15


may affect the riparian country of Nicaragua. In
accordance with OP 7.50, Nicaragua was notified and a
positive response was received by the Bank.
Projects in Disputed    No           There are no disputed areas within the project area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
O
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is classified as environmental Category B and requires a partial Environmental
Assessment (EA). The eligible investments are small-scale and of dispersed nature, including e.g.
minor infrastructure works on irrigation systems and storage facilities that will be financed based
on demand. Consequently, the project is not expected to cause negative large-scale or irreversible
environmental impacts. Instead, it has a remarkable potential for environmental value added.
Almost 90% of the project area has been intervened by agricultural land uses, and compared with
the general baseline situation; the project is expected to promote an overall positive environmental
impact. This will be pursued through capacity building and TA on environmentally friendly and
climate-smart agricultural practices regarding plant and animal production, forest management,
and fish farming. To promote continuity and additional market value for agricultural products,
producers and producer groups can receive assistance to obtain related certification. The main yet
overall minor environmental risks are expected to relate with potential small scale contamination
derived from inadequate or even prohibited use of agrochemicals or deficient management of
animal manure. Soil degradation might also occur in case sustainable agricultural practices were
not followed. Taken the vulnerability of the project area to environmental degradation and related
negative impacts of climate variability and change, environmental sustainability and climate
resilience are key factors in determining the selection of the activities to be financed.
0
The GOH and WB agreed on the TOR for contracting a qualified social specialist to assess the
potential social impacts of the proposed GAFSP project. The social assessment consultant
conducted interviews and consultations with a broad cross-section of local stakeholders, including
several individuals who self-identify as Lenca Indigenous Peoples, during three departmental level
consultation events. One explicit objective of these consultations was to present the proposed
project activities and anticipated impacts, as well as to seek participants' feedback on the GOH's
proposed approach to ensure compliance with WB OPs 4.10 and 4.12. The Social Assessment
(SA) provides considerable evidence of the strengths and inclusiveness of the local mainstream
cultural, economic, social and political institutions. The SA also details the absence or sporadic
nature of any customary indigenous institutions in the project area.
Regarding social impacts and based on the key findings of the Social Impact Assessment (SIA)
conducted for the project, despite the fact that State entities linked to the development process are
generally perceived as politically biased, susceptible to corruption, and having limited technical
capacity, the social risks associated with the project are expected to be moderate due to the small-
scale nature of the proposed investments and the demand-driven eligibility criteria of the
interventions to be supported.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Page 9 of 15


If successfully implemented, the project has potential for positive indirect and/or long term socio-
environmental impacts as poor rural communities will be supported to develop and implement
their agribusiness plans or plans for non-farm businesses, paired with technical assistance,
extension services, and needs-based training with a special and critical focus on environmental
sustainability. Component 2 will promote improved nutrition and health related behavior and
practices focus on both household and community level work. Overall, it is expected that
successful results would be sustained by direct beneficiaries and potentially replicated beyond the
beneficiary households/communities. On the other hand, due to the weight that TA and training
activities have within the project design, even if the project would not prove successful, no major
indirect and/or long term environmental liabilities beyond the business as usual scenario are
foreseen on the ground.
Regarding related ACS activities across Corredor Seco, CABEI will finance rural infrastructure, in
particular secondary and tertiary roads. These investments are expected to support the agricultural
production and nutrition investments financed by the GAFSP project by reducing transport costs
and improving access to markets and services within the project area.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
As the financed activities will be strongly demand driven, considering alternatives only becomes
relevant during project implementation. Regarding alternatives in terms of land use, all
infrastructure and equipment investments will be restricted to either lands privately owned by the
participating beneficiaries and/or unoccupied municipal lands. This restriction on the available
land use alternatives is aimed at avoiding adverse impacts caused by potential involuntary taking
of land.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Honduran Strategic Investment Office, INVEST-H (formerly known as the Millennium
Challenge Account Honduras, MCA-H) contracted an environmental, social, and gender specialist
O
to conduct a partial Environmental Assessment (EA) and a Social Impact Assessment (SIA) in the
project area. Said assessments form the basis of an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) that INVEST-H built upon the consultants' inputs with support from the Bank
specialists. The ESMF guides the project's socio-environmental management, including
a           compliance with national regulations and implementation of the applicable Bank safeguards.
Beyond describing the key environmental and social features of Corredor Seco as relevant to the
project activities, the ESMF guides identification and assessment of their potential socio-
environmental impacts and provides detailed instructions on applicable mitigation measures.
In further detail, the ESMF (i) ensures timely integration of socio-environmental considerations in
the overall project implementation and spells out related responsibilities and resource needs; (ii)
includes a negative list to prevent e.g. any activity that could lead to conversion or degradation of
natural habitats, physical cultural resources, deforestation related to expansion of croplands or
pastures or any activities that could require land acquisition; (iii) standardizes mitigation measures
for the main environmental impacts identified per different eligible investments; (iv) guides and
facilitates monitoring of integrated crop and pest management and climate-smart agricultural
practices; (v) guides provision of demand and capacity based environmental training to project
beneficiaries and those in charge of their technical assistance/extension services; (vi) links
environmental monitoring to further training and corrective actions as needed; and (vii) includes
Page 10 of 15


guidance to conflict prevention and addressing requests and complaints.
INVEST-H under the General Government Coordinator of the Presidency will be the project's
implementing agency. Since 2005, INVEST-H has implemented the Millennium Compact with the
O
USA. The Compact included: (i) a rural development component (US$72.2 million) covering
farmer training, TA, access to credit, farmer to market roads, and a grant facility for rural public
goods; and (ii) a road component (US$125.7 million), including the widening of the CA-5
highway to four lanes and the rehabilitation of several secondary roads and vehicle weight control
posts. Moreover, INVEST-H is implementing projects funded by the Inter-American Development
Bank (1DB), CABEI and USAID. INVEST-H staff from the environment and communications
departments has considerable prior experience with projects funded by multilateral agencies and
bilateral donors. Much of this experience involved working with EA procedures, indigenous
peoples, and rural producers, as well as with some involuntary resettlement and natural habitat
conservation needs that resulted from road sector investments.
INVEST-H management team will be responsible for the overall (field) supervision of the project's
activities and implementation by two the selected contractor(s), as well as for monitoring of the
performance of the project activities, including implementation of the ESMF. Under the terms of
the GAFSP agreement, the World Bank is the project's Supervising Entity and INVEST-H will
implement the project in line with the Bank rules, procedures, fiduciary compliance, and
environmental and social safeguards. The management unit is headed by a Manager and composed
of professionals in communications, transport development, rural development, environment,
social development and gender, administration and finance, procurement, and monitoring.
INVEST-H will contract two national or international management firms (Operators) to implement
Component 1 and 2 of the Project in different geographical areas following a quality and cost-
based procurement procedure. In case the Operators want to subcontract some of the services,
INVEST-H will be responsible for providing no objection to the terms of reference, selection
processes and sub-contracting contracts. INVEST-H will monitor contract implementation through
the ACS staff.
The Operators will be responsible for: (i) project implementation including of the project's
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF); (ii) preparing annual implementation
a          plans, budgets, and cash flows to be approved by INVEST-H; (iii) contracting, supervising and
monitoring their staff (such as agricultural and nutrition extension specialists), and firms or NGOs
implementing parts of the annual project plans; (iv) preparing, implementing and following-up
agricultural, marketing, business development, home garden and household hygiene SPs; (v)
hiring subcontractors and making payments to suppliers for the implementation of the SPs; and
(vi) preparing quarterly and annual implementation reports.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Selection of the target population. The target participant households are
i.     poor and extreme poor HH, beneficiaries of the Bono Vida Mejor (conditional cash
transfer) program and who pass an additional poverty verification test. Many of these HH have
difficulties meeting their responsibilities in health, education and nutrition;
ii.    highly vulnerable HH that have low food stocks and have no stable means of income
(including remittances, lack of employment);
iii.   female headed HH with presence of pregnant women, nursing mothers and children under
Page 11 of 15


five years of age or other children with nutritional risks;
iv.    have access to land (owning, renting, sharecropping, communal land, etc.), possibly with
potential for access to water resources (for agricultural SPs only);
v.     a limited number (less than 500) of recognized leaders of community-based organizations
(SLS, water boards, community councils "trustees" among others) who can influence other
members of the community to participate in the Project.
The selection criteria of the participants will be refined in the Project Operational Manual and
during implementation. The Project preparation team etimates the number of participants as
follows: 10,000 eligible HH will participate in component 1 and 6,000 HH in component 2. The
Project will seek the highest possible overlap, and it is estimated that around 4,000 HH will
participate in both components, resulting in a total of 12,000 HH.
Beyond the direct beneficiaries, other stakeholder groups include rural extension agents that will
be contracted by the project; local promoters that will engage to assist the project in reaching out
to the poorest families of the municipalities; specialized institutions that will provide specific
training such as business development, management of rural organizations, marketing, and savings
and loan societies' financial management; nutrition extension specialists that will provide the
delivery of the proposed nutrition education and promote close coordination with all programs
promoting nutrition-related issues; and the ACS donor partners. Further, relevant sector authorities
at national, departmental and municipal level, civil society/NGOs, and local residents.
The SIA included a gender assessment and produced a Gender Inclusion Strategy. Based on said
assessment, the main source of income among women living in Corredor Seco is agriculture
(63%), followed by wage labor (29%) and trade (8%). The assessment found that female-headed
households constitute roughly 1 in 5 households throughout the project area, with a slightly higher
percentage residing in urban areas. Given the significant time constraints on women, interventions
that affect women's time allocation can help improve their own nutrition as well as that of their
children. The project will contribute to empowering women and improve gender equality through
several actions: ensure women's voices are heard at gatherings; free up women's time by
improving access to water and new technologies; provide training at venues that are sensitive to
women; provide child care during training; encourage female membership in leadership roles
among producer groups; and encourage non-farm income generation, etc.
The initial stages of project preparation included various consultations that are presented in the
original GAFSP project proposal available from the Project files. The project and ESMF were
presented and discussed during a public consultation held on June 5, 2014 in the departmental
capital of Choluteca. More than 120 people attended the event from a wide range of stakeholders,
including representatives of the 25 municipalities (mayors, rural banks, municipal offices of
environment, women, and health, etc.); members of the Sectoral Round Table of Gulf of Fonseca;
representatives of related NGOs from the area; potential project beneficiaries; and representatives
from key centralized institutions like the Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
(SERNA).
The Government disclosed the ESMF in-country on June 11, 2014 and the Bank in Info Shop on
June 12, 2014. An revised version of the ESMF, which includes un updated project description,
was disclosed in-country on July 16, 2015 and the Bank in InfoShop on July 16, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Page 12 of 15


Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              16-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Jul-2015
O
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Honduras                                                 16-Jul-2015
Comments: The original ESMF was disclosed on the INVEST-H website: http://www.
mcahonduras.hn/ on June 11, 2014 and on InfoShop on June 12, 2014. The revised
ESMF was disculsed on the INVEST-H website on July 16, 2015 and on InfoShop
on July 16, 2015 as well.
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Jun-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Jun-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Honduras                                                 11-Jun-2014
Comments: Guidance on Integrated Pest Management is included in the disclosed ESMF. The
revised ESMF was disculsed on the INVEST-H website on July 16, 2015 and on
InfoShop on July 16, 2015 as well.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
O
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [   ]
Page 13 of 15


If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
.,          property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Have dam safety plans been prepared?                    Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X ]
Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
Bank?
Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project? Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [  ]  No [   ]   NA [ X]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Page 14 of 15


Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Eli Weiss
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Laurent Msellati (PMGR)              Date: 03-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 15 of 15


