                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA12526
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Oct-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Swaziland                         Project ID:   P151433
                            Project Name:     Swaziland Private Sector Competitiveness (P151433)
                            Task Team         Austin Francis Louis Kilroy,Feyi Boroffice
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         14-Sep-2015                       Estimated   30-Nov-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTC13                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (20%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade
                                              (20%), Public administration- Industry and trade (20%), SME Finance (20%),
                                              Other industry (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Regulation and competition policy (25%), Other Financial Sector Development
                                              (25%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (25%), Export
                                              development and competitiveness (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      25.00           Total Bank Financing:                25.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   25.00
                              Total                                                                                   25.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective is: to support an improved investment climate and strengthen
                           competitiveness of firms, especially in the agribusiness and tourism sectors.

                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         3. Project Description
                         COMPONENT 1: Improving the business environment
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subcomponent 1A: Implementation of the Investor Road Map (IRM)

                         Project activities will address the main constraints to implementation of the IRM, which will improve
                         the business environment in Swaziland regardless of sector:
                         (i)     Improved legal underpinnings for implementation.
                         (ii)    Refined IRM plan and institutional structure for implementation.
                         (iii)   Adoption of new ICT systems to streamline key business processes.


                         Sub-component 1B: Promotion of investment, trade, tourism, and entrepreneurship

                         The project will support the following activities:
                         (i)       Strengthened investment promotion and facilitation (including strategy, branding, a
                         customer relationship management system, and improved aftercare functions).
                         (ii)   Strengthened export promotion and facilitation.
                         (iii)  Improved tourism sector strategic planning and regulations.
                         (iv) Renewed entrepreneurship development strategy.


                         Sub-component 1C: Improved access to finance for SMEs

                         In order to increase access to finance for SMEs, the project will support the following activities:
                         (i)         Update demand-side information on existing SMMEs and their financial needs;
                         (ii)    Develop and strengthen credit infrastructure, including legislation and registry;
                         (iii)   Review the Export Credit and Small Scale Enterprise Guarantee Schemes and assist
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of revised Schemes
                         (iv)    Strengthen supply-side capacity for access to finance.



                         COMPONENT 2: Job creation in agribusiness and tourism

                         This component comprises activities to catalyze a sustained growth amongst private sector firms in
                         Swaziland.

                         Sub-component 2A: Competitive value chains in agribusiness and tourism

                         The project will engage with a key constraint to the establishment and scaling-up of firms in
                         agribusiness and tourism: the ability of entrepreneurs to identify and pursue competitive advantages,
                         through technical and sector knowledge plus the development of viable business plans.

                         Project interventions will support:
                         (i)      Scale-up of SWADE and STA as mentorship organizations for entrepreneurs.




                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         Sub-component 2B: Catalytic Financing Facility

                         Project interventions will support:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (i)         Establish a business plan competition for start-ups, and revenue-based financing for scale-
                         ups of community enterprises and SMEs.



                         COMPONENT 3: Project Implementation

                         This component will support the costs of the Project Implementation Unit including: externally
                         consultants if required; safeguards support; and monitoring and evaluation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         All planning, regulatory and institutional support will be provided to the Ministries located in
                         Mbabane, while sub-projects to be supported under the Catalytic Fund will be implemented
                         throughout the country once the sites are identified during the implementation stage of the Project.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Albab Akanda (GENDR)
                         Kisa Mfalila (GENDR)
                         Paula F. Lytle (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            Safeguards Policy 4.01 is triggered given that the
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     Catalytic Fund to be supported by the Project is expected
                                                                    to finance agribusiness and tourism sub-projects at both
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    industry and community levels. The activities may
                                                                    involve construction of new facilities, expansion of
                                                                    existing facilities, and support to agribusiness related
                                                                    processes all of which may have minor to moderate
                                                                    impacts on the environment. The degree of the
                                                                    environmental risks and impacts will be determined by
                                                                    the nature, scope and location of the sub-projects during
                                                                    the implementation phase of the Project. An
                                                                    Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                    (ESMF) will be prepared, consulted upon and publicly
                                                                    disclosed in the InfoShop and locally in Swaziland to
                                                                    provide guidance in identifying sub-projects, screening,
                                                                    managing and monitoring of likely environmental and
                                                                    social risks and impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes            The impact of the project on the natural habitats will be
                          4.04                                      addressed through the site-specific environmental and
                                                                    social assessments for each subproject, which will
                                                                    determined the impacts on ecosystems once the project
                                                                    locations have been identified and baseline characteristics
                                                                    assessed.


                                                                      Page 3 of 7
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             The Project will not support activities that will affect the
                                                                       management or health of forest not will the project
                                                                       support activities related to forestry or logging.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes                The Project is not expected to support sub-projects
                                                                       involving pest or pesticide management. However, given
                                                                       the inherent characteristic of agri-business activities
                                                                       involving the use of pesticides, appropriate screening,
                                                                       management and monitoring the use of pesticides will be
                                                                       included in the ESMF.
                            Physical Cultural           Yes            The project may provide TA or financing for activities
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       related to supporting tourism, which may involve or affect
                                                                       physical cultural resources. The ESMF will provide
                                                                       guidance on "chances finds" and management of cultural
                                                                       assets.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No                There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement No                The project will not finance activities that involve land
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or
                                                                       restrictions of access to resources and livelihoods.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The Project does not involve construction of dams, and
                            4.37                                       will exclude reliance on existing dams. Mitigation
                                                                       measures for small dams can be addressed under OP/BP
                                                                       4.01, but the ESMF does not currently include these
                                                                       measures so will need to be adjusted during the lifetime of
                                                                       the project should small dams be proposed as part of a
                                                                       CFF sub-project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No             The Project will not support sub-projects that will have
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       impacts on International Waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The Project will not support sub-projects located in
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           disputed areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Catalytic Fund, which will be supported by the Project, is expected to finance agribusiness
                              and tourism sub-projects at a small-scale industry and community levels. The activities may
                              involve construction of new facilities, expansion of existing facilities, and support to agribusiness
                              related processes along the supply chain, all of which may have minor impacts on the
                              environment. The degree of the environmental risks and impacts will be determined by the nature,
                              scope and location of the sub-projects during the implementation phase of the Project. An
                              Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to provide
                              guidance in identifying and planning of the sub-projects, screening from environmental risks and
                              impacts, managing and monitoring of likely environmental and social risks and impacts to achieve
                              sustainability. The inherent nature of environmental risks and impacts associated with agriculture


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           and agri-business operations are largely related to point and non-point source pollution from run
                           off emanating from the use of pesticides/herbicides in controlling weed infestation on farms and
                           potential increased use of fertilizer to increase crop productivity. Other likely impacts include
Public Disclosure Copy




                           effluent discharges and solid waste generated from agro-processing activities, noise and air
                           emissions from agro-processing facilities or construction works, occupational health and safety of
                           workers due to lack of or in-use of Personal Protective Equipment (PPE), soil erosion from poor or
                           lack of proper site drainage, and contamination of water (both surface and ground water) from oil
                           spills or construction works.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Since the Catalytic Fund will support agriculture and agribusiness related activities, such projects
                           may likely have some negative impact due to application of fertilizers and pesticides. However, no
                           potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts that are envisaged.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Given that the nature, scope and location of the sub-projects is not determined yet, the respective
                           site-specific instruments to be prepared for the sub-projects, will consider the technical, financial,
                           environmental and social aspects in carrying out the alternative analysis depending on the level of
                           risks and impacts likely to be generated from the sub-projects.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The capacity and knowledge of the Borrower to implement the Environmental and Social
                           Management Framework (environmental screening, assessment, mitigation, review, monitoring
                           and reporting) is relatively weak. The project will support the procurement of a dedicated
                           environmental and social specialist to oversee the implementation of the sub-projects. The project
                           will also support strengthening of PIU’s capacity in the application of World Bank safeguard
                           policies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The main organization that will be actively involved in implementing the project including the
                           ESMF, is the Aid Coordination and Management Section (ACMS) under the Ministry of
                           Economic Planning and Development (MEPD). The ACMS will constitute a permanent focal
                           point. An inter-ministerial Steering Committee will be established for project governance, chaired
                           by MEPD and with focal points from the key ministries and agencies as members. The unit will
                           report to the Ministry of Finance. The Catalytic Financing Facility (CFF) or Catalytic Fund, will
                           be implemented under the project implementation unit. The CFF manager will oversee the
                           selection process for the subprojects and will be supported by technical specialists recruited from
                           the private sector who will assess applications, and enforce spending that is consistent with the
                           approved applications. The CFF selection process will involve criteria will include environmental
                           and social criteria, as well as the Environmental and Social Screening Framework.

                           During preparation of the ESMF, consultations were conducted with 46 individuals from local
                           development programs, project practitioners, community trusts, and tourism stakeholders. Their
                           recommendations were incorporated into the ESMF, particularly in terms of community
                           participation in monitoring and mitigation, plus training to do so. A strategy has been defined in
                           the ESMF for ongoing consultation and annual reviews, collaboratively with potentially affected
                           people.


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Oct-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Swaziland                                                          05-Oct-2015
                           Comments: Approved on October 2nd, by Swaziland Environmental Authority (http://www.sea.
                                         org.sz/) which is the mandated body for environmental assessments and frameworks
                                         of this sort. Posted publicly on the website of SWADE ( http://www.swade.co.sz/
                                         index.php/downloads/category/25-world-bank ) on October 5th, and will be posted
                                         shortly on SEA's website. Also to be posted physically in three locations in the
                                         country.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        02-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     06-Oct-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Swaziland                                                          05-Oct-2015
                           Comments: Approved on October 2nd, by Swaziland Environmental Authority (http://www.sea.
                                         org.sz/) which is the mandated body for environmental assessments and frameworks
                                         of this sort. Posted publicly on the website of SWADE ( http://www.swade.co.sz/
                                         index.php/downloads/category/25-world-bank ) on October 5th, and will be posted
                                         shortly on SEA's website. Also to be posted physically in three locations in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         country.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?


                                                                    Page 6 of 7
                             If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
Public Disclosure Copy




                             project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                            OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                             Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                             Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             property?
                             Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Austin Francis Louis Kilroy,Feyi Boroffice
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                 Date: 08-Nov-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: David Bridgman (PMGR)                   Date: 08-Nov-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
