                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA18371
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Bosnia and Herzegovina             Project ID:   P152347
                            Project Name:      Bosnia and Herzegovina Employment Support Program (P152347)
                            Task Team          Mirey Ovadiya,Josefina Posadas
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          20-Jun-2016              Estimated     15-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSP03                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        97.91           Total Bank Financing:     56.10
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                   41.81
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      56.10
                              Total                                                                                      97.91
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase formal private sector employment among targeted
                           groups of registered job seekers. The project will achieve this by financing a menu of active labor
                           market programs, supporting strengthening of job intermediation, and by modernizing monitoring
                           and evaluation practices of the public employment services.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will have two components:



                                                                        Page 1 of 7
                         1. Support for Employment Promotion (ALMPs)

                         The objective of the component is to help the government scale up and increase the effectiveness and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         efficiency of its active labor market programs and job intermediation in order to help improve labor
                         market outcomes.

                         Sub-component 1a- Employment promotion through improved ALMPs. The financing from the
                         project will allow expansion of the coverage of ALMPs and will improve the effectiveness and
                         efficiency of selected ALMPs over time by better targeting and better definition of program design
                         parameters.

                         This sub-component will finance a package of financial incentives directed at jobseekers and
                         employers which will be accompanied by contractual obligations and co-responsibilities to ensure
                         financing of medium-term productive jobs in the formal private sector and discourage subsidizing
                         seasonal employment. These measures will include targeted wage subsidies, on-the-job training, and
                         self-employment programs. The sub-component will build on wage subsidy programs that are
                         currently being implemented and aim to improve their design and targeting. It will also aim to
                         maximize the complementarities between intermediation and ALMPs to improve the effectiveness of
                         the wage subsidy programs that are currently under implementation. This sub-component will
                         provide results-based financing (RBF); the funds allocated for this sub-component will be disbursed
                         upon achievement of agreed results to be measured by disbursement linked indicators (see Annex 2).

                         The governments of the two entities may opt for different parameters for these ALMPs that cater best
                         to their priorities and the needs of their target populations. Each year the program will finance two or
                         three of the programs included in the annual work-plans of the Employment Services with emphasis
                         on adjusting targeting and other design features of the programs to improve their cost-effectiveness
                         and/or impact. The programs to be funded every year should change based on learning and results
                         from previous years. Target groups will include youth, long-term unemployed, those with low-skills,
                         individuals above 45 years of age and vulnerable groups. Women are expected to benefit from these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programs as they are over represented in each of these target groups. The target groups are broadly
                         the same for both entities, however the measures will differ on the basis of the unemployment trends
                         and priorities for each entity (see Annex 2 for details). This sub-component builds on the successful
                         experiences of the recently-completed Social Safety Nets and Employment Support (SSNESP)
                         operation as well as recent experiences with wage subsidies, voucher, and on-the-job training
                         programs implemented by the Employment Services. All active labor market programs will be co-
                         financed 50/50 from general revenues. The project will support several active labor market programs
                         including on the job training/apprenticeship, self-employment, and wage subsidies for select groups.
                         Details of the employment programs that will be supported can be found in Annex 2a.

                         Sub-component 1b-Employment promotion through improved job intermediation. This sub-
                         component will aim to increase job placements by providing improved employment services for
                         jobseekers and employers. These activities are aligned with those that the PES (FBH and RS) have
                         already included in their employment strategy and annual action plans. These activities will be
                         primarily financed out of own budget funds.

                         Services for jobseekers will consist of activities such as use of improved methodologies for the in-
                         take/registration of newly unemployed, categorization of jobseekers by risk of falling into long-term
                         unemployment, and tailored counseling to clearly identify and focus resources on the jobseekers in
                         need of support from the employment services. Improved processes within employment services are

                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         expected to increase facetime with jobseekers, shorten waiting time between first registration and
                         development of an individual action plan, and increase monitoring of progress and needs of the
                         jobseeker.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Services for employers will consist of activities such as development of new employer outreach
                         methodologies (more calls and visits to employers), local skills needs surveys/interviews with
                         employers, and promotion of online services to increase the number of registered vacancies with the
                         employment services, and facilitation of vacancy opening and filling by providing tailored HR
                         services to employers.

                         This will mean minimizing the time dedicated to administrative tasks by automating certain
                         processes and using online services and electronic media to the extent possible, as well as
                         establishing division of functions for staff in those employment offices that have not started this
                         practice. It will also mean physically reorganizing employment offices to separate business processes
                         (division between administration and counseling). In addition, it will emphasize better
                         communication with clients through better information dissemination and intensified outreach.

                         Recognizing different starting points for each employment office, the project will aim to support
                         achievement of gradual uniformity in the manner in which employment services are delivered.
                         Although intake, registration and profiling processes will be improved for all jobseekers, the
                         counseling efforts will be focused on those who declare that they need support, and, in particular, on
                         those who have been out of the labor market for a short period and are closest to the market as well
                         as those who are hard to employ. One way of splitting effort among these two groups is
                         proportionally to their share in the total population of registered jobseekers, based on the
                         administrative data of the employment services. A draft manual of procedures that outlines improved
                         processes has been developed with support from the SDC, but it will need to be further revised,
                         adopted, and implemented gradually by all employment offices over the project implementation
                         period.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project will rely on the parallel efforts and financing of the Swiss Agency for Development
                         Cooperation (SDC) to improve services for jobseekers and employers (i.e. case management and
                         employer outreach). The SDC has been working with employment services for over three years
                         under the Youth Employment Project (YEP); a new round of grant financing has become effective in
                         April 2016. The SDC Youth Employment Project (YEP) will be implemented in a demand driven
                         manner (i.e. participation will be on a first-come, first-served basis). Yet, the aim will be maximum
                         coverage of all employment offices. The YEP will be implemented parallel to the World Bank
                         project.

                         In order to roll out the implementation of the activities, training and technical support modalities will
                         be developed and implemented by the entity level Public Employment Services (FBH and RS).
                         These modalities will include training of a core team of technical staff (training of trainers) to
                         provide training to key technical staff in a cascade fashion on new methodologies for jobseeker
                         profiling, employer outreach and use of information technologies for tracking jobseekers and
                         contacting with employers.

                         The project would support targeted knowledge exchange and communication activities aimed at
                         promoting uniform understanding and use of improved employment services management practices
                         and implementation of ALMPs. The activities would include support for learning events, establishing
                         peer-to-peer learning protocols across canton and entity staff, exchange visits, and broader

                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         information campaigns for the general public.

                         The agreed activities will be accomplished with a combination of government financing, resources
Public Disclosure Copy




                         from the SDC grant, and a very small portion of the loan. Many proposed activities relate to changes
                         in processes that have zero cost, while others are of relatively low cost.

                         Support for management systems, monitoring, and communications (TA)

                         This component will support effective monitoring of the project and provide financing for
                         strengthening management systems to monitor active labor market programs and employment
                         services, and developing and implementing an effective communications strategy targeting
                         jobseekers, employers, policymakers, and the overall population. It will build the basis for the
                         evidence collection and learning required to improve ALMPs and job intermediation over the
                         implementation period. It will provide financing using traditional investment lending mechanisms. It
                         will finance enhancements of IT systems to: (i) enable data exchange amongst employment bureaus
                         and other institutions; (ii) offer online services; (iii) monitor services offered to jobseekers and
                         employers; (iv) introduce/monitor branch office performance; and (v) monitor and disseminate labor
                         market trends. The above pre-supposes connectivity of all offices to an upgraded IT system that
                         would allow interface and data exchanges with other relevant institutions for verification of
                         jobseeker status and basic data (e.g. social assistance, agriculture subsidies recipients, etc.). This
                         component will finance and ensure a strong communications and outreach strategy to plan, develop,
                         and disseminate information on project resources, activities and results via multiple channels to
                         jobseekers, employers, policymakers, and the general population. It will also finance process and
                         impact evaluations of select ALMPs and/or institutional measures to be implemented by the
                         Employment Services and Ministries of Labor as well as beneficiary surveys. In the RS a randomized
                         control trial impact evaluation of selected programs will be conducted.

                         Dedicated project monitoring teams under the FBH Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare and the RS
                         Ministry of Labor and Veterans Affairs, will adminis ter the funds, monitor and report on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of project activities and achievement of Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs),
                         commission evaluations of select ALMPs, and implement selected activities under Component 2.

                         As with Component 1, these activities will be accomplished with a combination of government
                         financing (through annual work plans/budgets), the parallel SDC grant, and financing from the loan.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will finance activities in the whole territory of the BIH. Project beneficiaries are expected
                         to be the "unemployed" which will include some of the more vulnerable and marginalized.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Esma Kreso (GEN03)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No             The team has confirmed that the project has evolved and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      as such will not include any works or employment of
                                                                     unemployed population in public works. Some
                                                                     implications regarding the environment, if any,



                                                                       Page 4 of 7
                                                                     predominantly under Component 1 - on the job training
                                                                     and self-employment might benefit from a training
                                                                     organized by the Client, and assisted by the World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     team on enhanced environmental protection measures in
                                                                     employment creation.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No           There are no activities with a physical footprint
                            4.04                                     envisaged, nor any activities that would have implications
                                                                     regarding the environment including natural habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           There are no activities with a physical footprint
                                                                     envisaged, nor any activities that would have implications
                                                                     regarding the environment including forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No               There are no activities with a physical footprint
                                                                     envisaged, nor any activities that would have implications
                                                                     regarding the environment including agriculture and/or
                                                                     pest management.
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No           Permanent or temporary land acquisition will be excluded
                            OP/BP 4.12                               from sub projects.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No           There are no activities with a physical footprint
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     envisaged, nor any activities that would have implications
                                                                     regarding the environment including international
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no direct or indirect environmental safeguards associated with the proposed project.
                              During the PCN stage, the team and Client had envisaged employment of unemployed citizens in
                              the area of public works or works of general interest. During the development of the project's
                              scope, the involvement in public works has completely been abandoned, and the project will only
                              implement assistance measures to improve the labor market in country.
                              As an added value, the team will include segments on improving environmental performance,
                              linked to Component 1 - On the job training and Self employment support.
                              The team and Client have confirmed that the project will not include any construction or
                              reconstruction works aimed at improving services offered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                              None are anticipated.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              none.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              there are no recommended measures due to the scope and activities of the project that have no
                              environmental implications.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The project will be implemented by the Ministry of Labor and Veteran Affairs in RS and Ministry
                              of Labor and Social Policy in FBIH. The key stakeholders are the users of the employment
                              services in both Entities, namely unemployed job seekers. Since there are no instruments for
                              safeguards that need to be prepared specific consultations regarding this segment of the project
                              will not be carried out.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mirey Ovadiya,Josefina Posadas

                                                                       Page 6 of 7
                         Approved By
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Anita M. Schwarz (PMGR)   Date: 11-Jul-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 7 of 7
