                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR19723
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mozambique                                   Project ID:           P129847
                            Project Name:       Mozambique Mining and Gas Technical Assistance Project (P129847)
                            Task Team           Ekaterina Mikhaylova,Ilhem Salamon
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           15-Nov-2012             Estimated     28-Mar-2013
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEEX2                     Lending       Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                      No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        58.15           Total Bank Financing:     50.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                           50.00
                              UK British Department for International Development (DFID)                                             8.15
                              Total                                                                                                 58.15
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The proposed project development objective is to strengthen the capacity and governance systems of
                           key institutions to manage the mining and hydrocarbon sectors in Mozambique.
                           Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                           The proposed project development objective is to strengthen the capacity and governance systems of
                           key institutions to manage the mining and hydrocarbon sectors in Mozambique.


                                                                                 Page 1 of 10
                         3. Project Description
                         The proposed project has five components, each with multiple sub-components. The components
                         support (A) Mining Governance Capacity Building and Reform, (B) Natural Gas Capacity Building
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and Governance Reform, (C) Cross-Cutting Mining/Natural Gas Capacity Buildingand Reforms, (D)
                         Cross-Sectoral Reforms, and (E) Project Management and Coordination (see Annex 2 for detailed
                         description). The Project will be implemented over a seven year period (from effectiveness
                         anticipated to be April 2013 until closure in May 2020).

                         Component A. Mining Governance Capacity Building and Reform : The objective of this component
                         is to support second generation reforms in Mozambique?s minerals sector that will enable the
                         optimization of sector revenues and facilitate economic benefits to Mozambique and its people. To
                         achieve this objective the Project will support the following:

                         A.1. Mining Cadastre by updating the cadastral procedures and integrating the mining cadastral
                         database and GIS system with other country-cadastre systems as well as modernizing and improving
                         the capacity of provincial mining cadastre offices. Some land-use databases exist within different
                         ministries (such as transport, environment, agriculture and tourism) to which the mining cadastre
                         must be linked in order to improve surety of tenure and the overall quality and efficiency of licensing
                         process.

                         A.2. Mineral Assets Evaluation and Tendering by setting up detailed procedures for mineral asset
                         assessments and tendering procedures including criteria for selecting appropriate assets and targets
                         for tendering.

                         A.3. Improving Government?s Capacity to Manage Artisanal and Small Scale Mining by increasing
                         formalization of the ASM sector, improving standards and efficiency of ASM operations that
                         improve safety of ASM operations, quality of production, overall productivity, and value-based sales,
                         as well as provide general basic training in mining communities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         A.4. Building Capacity of Technical Departments of MIREM to reinforce their core functions of
                         reviewing (i.e. pre-feasibility and feasibility studies) and reporting on operations and activities by
                         license holders and their compliance with the agreed work plans.

                         A.5. Geodata Acquisition, Interpretation and Promotion, including regional airborne geophysical
                         surveys and geochemical surveys of the selected strategic mineral resource rich areas, processing and
                         interpretation of geophysical and geochemical data, geomapping of the potentially rich mineral
                         resource areas, geo-environmental mapping, upgrading of the Mineral Information System,
                         renovation and upgrade of core storage (for both mineral and petroleum exploration), library,
                         geological museum, seismic stations and geological and environmental laboratories to promote the
                         county?s investment interests and provide geo-scientific services to the public.

                         A.6. Reinforcing State Participation in Mining Concessions by defining and clarifying EMEM?s
                         (Empresa Mocambicana de Exploracao Mineira -- Mozambican Mining and Exploration Company)
                         mandate and functions and building its capacity to assess and manage the risks and manage state
                         participation (i.e., equity holding) in accordance with its mandate.

                         A.7. Transaction advisory services for large-scale mining operations and related infrastructure, that
                         will include technical, financial, and legal advice to Government negotiation teams with review of


                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         feasibility studies, mine development plans, infrastructure development plans, mine development
                         agreements and ancillary infrastructure agreements. The advice will be provided within the existing
                         legal framework of Mozambique, technical and financial requirements andspecifications and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         international good practices. The advice will be limited to technical, legal, economic and financial
                         considerations of mine development agreements and related infrastructure agreements.


                         Component B. Natural Gas Capacity Building and Governance Reform: The objective of
                         Component B is to support the Government to strengthen the capacity of its major institutions
                         engaged in the development and governance of the natural gas sector in order to allow them to
                         execute their mandates in a way that is conducive to sound investments and ensures that all
                         safeguards and health and safety standards are enforced along good international standards. In order
                         to achieve this objective the Project will support the following:

                         B.1. Strengthening the Capacity of Ministry of Mineral Resources to Support Sector Governance
                         Reform to (i) assist Government to formulate a vision for the development of the natural gas sector
                         and make policy and investment decisions and support this vision by, including the establishment of
                         new/special purpose vehicles, (ii) improve MIREM?s capacity to regulate the midstream/
                         downstream natural gas sector, (iii) modernize gas up-, mid- and down-stream policies and
                         legislation, and (iv) build MIREM;s capacity for assessment and structuring of potential PPP
                         financing arrangements to support natural gas infrastructure development.

                         B.2. Capacity Building and Governance Reform Support of the National Institute of Petroleum
                         (Instituto Nacional de Petroleo, INP) to improve INP?s capacity to manage the core functions of its
                         mandate as the national regulator for the petroleum sector of Mozambique, including support to INP?
                         s new office in Pemba, assistance with interpretation of geological and geophysical survey data and
                         maps, and data and GIS management for petroleum sector.

                         B.3. Capacity Building and Technical Support of the National Petroleum Company (Empresa
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Nacional de Hidrocarbonetos ? ENH) to enhance performance of its principal function to manage the
                         State participation in upstream developments (presently, 15% in Block 1 operated by Anadarko and
                         10% in Block 4 operated by ENI).

                         B.4 Transaction Advisory Services for Gas Operations and Related Infrastructure, that will include
                         technical, financial and legal advice to Government?s negotiation teams with review of feasibility
                         studies, productions plans, infrastructure development plans, natural gas agreements and ancillary
                         infrastructure agreements. The advice will be provided within the existing legal framework of
                         Mozambique, technical and financial requirements and specifications and international good
                         practices, but limited to technical, legal, economic and financial considerations of natural gas and
                         related infrastructure development agreements.

                         Component C. Cross-cutting Mining/ Gas Capacity Building and Reforms: The objective of
                         Component C is to support the Government?s cross-cutting mining and natural gas reforms to
                         strengthen the institutional and technical capacity of relevant Government agencies in revenue
                         management, environmental, social, and health and safety management as well as improve social
                         accountability through building capacity of civil society organizations. To achieve this objective the
                         Project will support the following:

                         C.1. Legal and Regulatory Framework for Mining and Hydrocarbons by (i) finalizing update of the

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         Mining Law and preparing supporting mining (including licensing) regulations update following the
                         passage of the new mining law as well updating relevant policies, laws, regulations, statutes and
                         other legal instruments as may be required from time to time during MAGTAP implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         period; (ii) preparing petroleum regulations; and (iii) sector specific health and safety and
                         environmental regulations and guidelines.

                         C.2. General Inspectorate, Health and Safety, and Regulatory Enforcement by developing of
                         operational standards and procedures for mine and petroleum projects inspections and monitoring,
                         building capacity of the general inspectorate for regular monitoring and inspections using appropriate
                         equipment, and strengthening the regulatory health and safety compliance enforcement mechanisms
                         for efficient application of the mining and petroleum law and regulations. Support to develop internal
                         audit functions.

                         C.3 Support to National Directorate of Planning and Development of MIREM, including
                         communications strategy and outreach, building capacity and providing equipment for monitoring
                         and evaluation of implementation of mining and petroleum policies, planning of concessions and
                         activities by MIREM and its agencies. The planning directorate will also manage and coordinate
                         follow up to functional management review, including assistance to MIREM with institutional
                         reforms, possible new institutions and procurement of related capacity building and equipment.

                         C.4 Strengthening and Establishment of Staff Positions, Capacity and Infrastructure in MIREM and
                         its Agencies, including support in the creation of additional staff positions based on the outcomes of
                         the MIREM?s and INP?s functional diagnosis and upgrade of IT and physical infrastructure at
                         MIREM?s and its key provincial offices in key areas that will enable MIREM and its departments
                         and agencies to meet the future requirements and increasing institutional mandates in view of
                         anticipated increased natural gas and mining sectors development.

                          C.5. Revenue Generation and Management by supporting implementation of the Technical Support
                         Plan for Ministry of Finance and the Revenue Authority to enhance the country?s macroeconomic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and fiscal policy making to harness the opportunities arising from the extractive industries boom for
                         more inclusive growth.

                         C.6. Enhancing Environmental and Social Management of Mining and Natural Gas Industries by (i)
                         carrying out SESA for mining and gas sectors and implementing its core recommendations; (ii)
                         undertaking necessary improvements of the relevant regulations and preparation of detailed
                         procedures where applicable, (iii) increasing of governmental capacity to manage EIAs and SIAs and
                         address disputes, and (iv) setting up robust monitoring and evaluation systems for environmental and
                         social impacts at central, provincial district and community levels, including financing training and
                         capacity building, provision of equipment, and setting up baseline data and other databases.

                         C.7. Building Capacity of Civil Society Organizations through training and targeted technical
                         assistance to increase their understanding of extractive industries' challenges and informed
                         involvement in the governance of the sector.

                         Component D. Cross-Sectoral Reforms: The objective of Component D is to support Government to
                         strengthen its capacity to integrate mining, oil and natural gas sector developments and benefits into
                         the broader economy of Mozambique. To achieve this objective the Project will support the
                         following:



                                                                      Page 4 of 10
                         D.1. Strengthening the Government?s Cross Sectoral Platform through technical advisory services
                         and drawing on global experiences to enable Government to make better informed decisions on the
                         integration of mining, oil and natural gas projects into the broader economy of Mozambique.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D.2. Strengthening Economic Linkages of Mines, oil and Gas Production through various studies and
                         transaction advisory services to optimize the economic value derived from the development of
                         mineral and hydrocarbon resources by creating an environment in which extractive industry serves as
                         a springboard for additional economic activities, including stimulating the utilization of local staff in
                         upstream sector, stimulating the development of downstream mining, oil and natural gas industries,
                         the promotion of down-stream value added mining activities (such as processing and domestic use of
                         natural gas), and promoting the local supply of goods and services to mining, oil and natural gas
                         companies.

                         D.3. Framework for Oil Spill Emergency Preparedness and Response Capacity. Mozambique is
                         hosting significant oil and gas activity in deeper waters. These activities can pose large operational,
                         social and environmental risks if proper mitiagation measures are not put in place. The Project will
                         support the development of plans and procedures and will finance capacity building for appropriate
                         Government agencies to encourage the establishment of public-private partnership platforms to better
                         address this issue, and to ensure essential emergency preparedness (including equipment) is in place.

                         Component E: Project Coordination (total cost US$4.9 million)

                         This component will provide support to MIREM in management and coordination of MAGTAP in
                         accordance with the Bank?s fiduciary and safeguards requirements and other policies and guidelines
                         during project implementation. Under this component the Project will enhance the implementing
                         agency?s (MIREM) capacity for overall project management and coordination, including social and
                         environmental safeguards, procurement, financial management, monitoring and evaluation through
                         the financing of technical advisory services, training, acquisition of goods, and operating expenses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is expected to be implemented in and benefit the entire country

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
                         Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GEN01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            Policy OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      IFC Performance Standard 1 on Assessment and
                                                                     Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
                                                                     Impacts. This is a technical assistance project which will
                                                                     support legal and regulatory review and capacity building
                                                                     of Government of Mozambique core agencies. No
                                                                     physical investments or activities will be undertaken
                                                                     during project implementation. A Strategic Environmental
                                                                     and Social Assessment (SESA) will be carried out by the
                                                                     Government as part of project implementation to inform


                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                                                          design of this technical assistance (TA). As needed, the
                                                          project will also: (i) update the environmental and social
                                                          frameworks for extractive industries sector, including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          norms, standards, requirements and regulations; (ii)
                                                          develop a subset of regulations and practice handbooks,
                                                          and set up extension services for the artisanal and small
                                                          scale mining sub-sector; and (iii) provide capacity
                                                          building and equipment to MIREM, INP, MMAS and
                                                          MICOA to implement the new frameworks on the ground,
                                                          and carry out effective and iterative public consultations
                                                          and participation/outreach with stakeholders.
                                                          In close consultation with the World Bank, SESA TORs
                                                          were developed by the Government and publicly
                                                          disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to
                                                          Appraisal on November 8, 2012.
                                                          The transaction advisory services will include economic,
                                                          financial and legal advice to government?s negotiations
                                                          teams on new upcoming mining, petroleum and gas
                                                          development projects, including ancillary and related
                                                          regional infrastructure and mid-and-downstream
                                                          processing (such as LNG). The transaction advisory
                                                          services will be provided within existing legal framework
                                                          of Mozambique, technical and financial criteria and
                                                          international good practices, as well as be consistent with
                                                          the Bank?s operational policies, including environmental
                                                          and social safeguards. The SESA makes provision of both
                                                          an RPF and ESMF with a comprehensive Environmental
                                                          and Social Screening Form (ESSF) that will be applied to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          any activity that could derive from such technical support.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP     No
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09    No
                         Physical Cultural          No
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/     No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement   Yes   Given the importance of resettlement issues in the context
                         OP/BP 4.12                       of the mining, oil and gas sector, OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary
                                                          Resettlement), the SESA to be undertaken during the
                                                          project implementation will provide a comprehensively
                                                          detailed diagnosis of the broader social issues (including
                                                          safeguards) associated with mining, petroleum and gas
                                                          sectors development in Mozambique. The SESA will
                                                          provide an appropriate basis, both in terms of principles
                                                          and prerogatives to be followed for the development of



                                                           Page 6 of 10
                                                                       policies to mitigate potential social risks consistent with
                                                                       international good practice. This will complement the
                                                                       ongoing Bank?s dialog with the Government on
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       involuntary resettlement issues afferent to the adoption by
                                                                       the Council of Minister on August 8, 2012 of the new
                                                                       regulation on Involuntary Resettlement (i.e. Decree
                                                                       31/2012).

                                                                       The proposed Project will be just limited to the provision
                                                                       of technical assistance and is not expected to result in any
                                                                       direct environmental and/or social impacts. In particular,
                                                                       there will be no land acquisition leading to resettlement
                                                                       and/or restrictions of access to resources or livelihoods
                                                                       that would require payment of compensation. The project
                                                                       would explore more tangible ways of further assisting the
                                                                       Government in improving/enhancing the newly approved
                                                                       Resettlement Decree (Decree 31/2012), and which would
                                                                       pretty much benefit from further support.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The Project is expected to have significant positive environmental and social impacts through
                              improvement of both social and environmental management of mining, oil and gas sectors;
                              promotion of modern mining and production methods, and enhancement of environmental and
                              social management capacity in MIREM, INP, MMAS and MICOA. As a technical assistance
                              operation, activities will have no significant physical impacts on the natural and/or social
                              environment. In addition to the technical skills development for the identified government
                              agencies, Aerial surveys and modest existing office refurbishment will take place; however, there
                              will be no acquisition of land, restriction of access to assets or property, new construction or
                              significant civil works. Moreover, the project will only provide technical support for establishment
                              and improvement of general sector management systems, and will not engage in zoning, planning
                              and/or preparatory activities for specific investments linked to identifiable impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               It is widely understood that mining, gas and petroleum activities often involve risks of significant
                              adverse impacts on natural habitats, people and their livelihoods and cultural resources if adequate
                              mitigation measures are not in place to adequately manage them. To help the Government of
                              Mozambique effectively address such safeguards concerns for future mining, oil and gas


                                                                        Page 7 of 10
                           investments (which are not part of this project), a key project activity will be the preparation of a
                           comprehensive Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA). The SESA is a planning
                           tool that will involve a participatory consultative process aimed at helping the Government to: (a)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           diagnose the key environmental and social problems and opportunities associated with the
                           anticipated growth of Mozambique's broader mining, petroleum and gas sectors; (b) identify the
                           policy, legal, regulatory, and institutional adjustments and capacity-building actions needed to
                           minimize the adverse cumulative environmental and social impacts of mining, oil and gas
                           operations and associated infrastructure development, while enhancing the positive impacts; and
                           (c) propose specific mitigation measures that the Government can implement in the near future to
                           improve the environmental and social sustainability of mining, petroleum and gas sector in
                           Mozambique, particularly through the MAGTAP.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             The project is a technical assistance project. No adverse social and environmental impacts are
                           envisaged.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             Ministry of Environment (MICOA) has clear policy guidelines that is being well implemented in
                           the country. Moreover, set up with the help of the WB, MICOA is receiving Technical Assistance
                           from the WB on Social and Environmental Safeguards policies, either alone or through their
                           continuous involvement in WB financed operations. Likewise, MMAS is also benefiting from
                           various World Bank funded operations in the field of social development, more particularly on
                           social protection. MIREM's capacity to monitor social and environmental safeguards is rated as
                           relatively low due to lack of tangible experience in that field. Details skill development areas will
                           be further assessed through the SESA, which will be undertaken as part of Project implementation.
                           Strengthening for social and environmental safeguards monitoring of the sector is included under
                           component A, and will be implemented throughout the various key government agencies
                           (MIREM, MICOA, MMAS, etc.).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             Key stakeholders are MIREM, INP, MICOA, MMAS local and provincial governments
                           authorities, local communities and CSOs. Stakeholders are being consulted on SESA, and this will
                           be further expanded to reach out to all key ones. Targeted technical capacity building on mining,
                           petroleum, and gas sector will be provided as part of the TA.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         08-Nov-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      08-Nov-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mozambique                                                          08-Nov-2012
                           Comments:



                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         08-Nov-2012
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      08-Nov-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mozambique                                                          08-Nov-2012
                           Comments:
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ekaterina Mikhaylova,Ilhem Salamon
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                           Date: 23-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon (PMGR)            Date: 24-Aug-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
