                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Feb-2019 | Report No: ISDSC23014




                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                            Page 1 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category     Country
                                                             Support to DRC human
                                                                                          B - Partial Assessment     Congo, Democratic Republic
                           P165052                           African trypanosomiasis
                                                                                          (B)                        of
                                                             control program
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit              Financing Instrument
                           Hadia Nazem Samaha,
                                                                                                                     Investment Project
                           Karamath Djivede Sybille                                       GHN07
                                                                                                                     Financing
                           Adamon
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                   0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                      0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                        0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                       2.75
                                 Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                  2.75


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective (PDO) is to leverage recent developments in HAT treatment and other
                           control tools to improve access to HAT health services for affected communities in ten health zones within five
                           targeted provinces of the DRC. The five selected provinces are Kwilu (ex-Bandundu), Mai-Ndombe (ex-Bandundu), East
                           Kasaï, Lomami, and Tshopo, and the ten health zones proposed are Kwamouth, Mushie, Bolobo (part), Bandundu,
                           Bagata, Masi Manimba (1), Moyen Kwilu (Djuma), Tshilenge, Cilomba, Ngandajika, Isangi, Yakusu, Yabaondo, and
                           Opala. The ten health zones in the five targeted provinces have a combined estimated population of 1 million people,
                           comprised of approximately 1072 villages. The estimated total target beneficiaries from these health zones is drawn
                           from about 700 endemic villages, with an estimated population of 675,000, representing almost 70% of the total
                           population within the ten health zones. The project aims to provide access to screening to 95% of the target
                           population (641,000 people), estimating that 50% of them are women.

                           The PDO will be achieved by strengthening capacity at the peripheral health services level to detect and treat HAT

                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                                     Page 2 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program



                           using rapid diagnostic tests and the current standard of care and support uptake of new treatments once available. It
                           will also strengthen community engagement in HAT detection and management so that affected communities
                           understand the risk of HAT, participate in case detection activities, and facilitate implementation of new treatments.

                           C. Project Description
                           The project is designed to overcome key capacity gaps for HAT case detection and case management, in 10
                           health zones from Kwilu (ex-Bandundu), Mai-Ndombe (ex-Bandundu), East Kasaï, Lomami, and Tshopo
                           provinces of DRC where HAT is endemic and DNDi is the main partner of the national control program for
                           control and surveillance of HAT, so as to improve targeted communities access to those services. These
                           efforts should contribute to disease diagnosis and elimination, but treatment will be funded from other
                           funding sources.

                           Through Component 1, the project will strengthen capacity of the peripheral health system to deliver HAT
Public Disclosure Copy




                           services at the community level. It will reach remote communities that have not, to date, been effectively
                           targeted to provide diagnosis as close as possible to where patients live, thereby contributing to reduce
                           disease prevalence. Through Component 2, the project will strengthen community engagement in HAT
                           surveillance and control, by using interventions such as information, education, and communication
                           techniques.

                           The project is innovative as it will contribute to:

                                   Building new capacities among public services at the health zone level and reaching new beneficiaries
                                    who were not covered by existing programs and by building capacity for HAT services delivery into
                                    the mainstream health system at the peripheral level.
                                   Building new capacities among beneficiary groups by building knowledge around HAT and fostering
                                    demand generation for HAT-related services
                                   Bringing alternative ways of delivering services, more effectively and/or efficiently, to beneficiary
                                    populations, including fostering awareness of and extensive access to new oral treatments once
                                    approved but treatment will not be funded from the JSDF Project.

                           The project will also document experiences and results to inform future community-level interventions.

                           The proposed Project will finance the following three components:

                           Component 1: Strengthen capacity of the health system to deliver HAT services at the community level
                           (USD 1.562 M) through screening and diagnosis but not treatment.

                           Subcomponent 1.1: Scale up capacity for active and passive case detection at the community level (USD
                           1.398 M)

                           Active screening: The project will support implementation of the Card Agglutination Test for
                           Trypanosomiasis (CATT), or RDTs (Rapid Diagnostic Tests) both serological screening tests that allow for
                           mass screening at the community level. Mobile teams are composed of community health workers (seven to


                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                                     Page 3 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                           nine people) for CATT complemented with mini-mobile teams (two technicians going door-to-door and
                           screening people) for RDTs and both detect seropositive suspects that are later tested with a confirmatory
                           parasitological test. Both CATTs and RDTs have been tested and deployed successfully in DRC. CATT and
                           RDTs increase the performance of the final parasitological diagnosis by targeting only seropositive
                           individuals, thus reducing the total numbers to be examined by microscopy. DNDi currently supports 10
                           mobile teams who perform active case detection.

                           The project will supply these teams with 200,000 CATT tests per year for screening (about one third of total
                           need). This grant will also support the purchase of 10 motorbikes to facilitate transportation to remote areas
                           for members of the mobile teams performing screening activities with RDTs in difficult to access areas and in
                           non-permanent settlements in endemic areas that cannot be reached by car. At present, teams can go to
                           villages but cannot access hard-to-reach ‘encampments’ where mini-mobile teams are needed due to high
                           risk of transmission. This complements, but does not duplicate, existing support from the BMGF for cars and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           boats for the mobile teams.

                           There is also a need to strengthen passive case detection and diagnosis at the peripheral health facility
                           level. In known areas of endemicity, the capacity of peripheral health centers should be
                           strengthened/developed for local detection of cases. Even if in some cases these structures exist and are
                           well-identified, they often lack the tools and trained staff to deliver on this objective. This capacity
                           strengthening activity will focus on those identified community health centers and provide them with the
                           tools and training to identify, among people self-presenting for health services, individuals with signs and
                           symptoms suggestive of HAT, screen, and diagnose them and, if confirmed, recommend treatment with the
                           most effective treatment available. However, treatment will not be funded from the JSDF grant
                           resources. This will include upgrading of equipment and supplies (10 microscopes, other equipment as
                           needed, 20,000 rapid screening tests per year, and additional lab consumables packages (e.g. disposable
                           gloves, syringes, etc.) for 20 health centers for screening and diagnosis), training of health care personnel at
                           the community level to use diagnostic tools , installing solar energy systems in 10 facilities given limited
                           access to electricity in those areas, as well as additional rehabilitation and maintenance of selected
                           community health centers and posts (5 health centers and 5 health posts per year over three years). It will
                           ensure that the selected health facilities can provide adequate care [but treatment would not be funded
                           from the JSDF Project] to all identified HAT patients in their community. Care will be taken in the selection of
                           facilities to be supported through this grant to avoid any overlap with support from other donors also
                           contributing to these activities. Selection will be finalized by appraisal.

                           Subcomponent 1.2.: Build capacity of the health system for the introduction of new treatments at the
                           community level (USD 0.164 M)

                           While the JSDF will not finance activities related to treatment, it is worth mentioning that the first oral
                           treatment for HAT (fexinidazole), developed by DNDi and partners are specifically designed to be adapted for
                           use in the remote settings in which HAT is found in DRC, is anticipated to be approved and introduced into
                           the DRC health system by the end of 2018 or the beginning of 2019. This will create a paradigm change in
                           how HAT is treated as this is the first time that patients can be directly involved in HAT treatment in contrast


                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                              Page 4 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                           to the past where the treatment could never be self-administered. It will require a parallel update in
                           guidelines for patient care and treatment at the national level. While JSDF funds will not be used to
                           implement the introduction of new oral treatment, that needs to be supported by other donors rather than
                           via the JSDF which cannot finance treatment. This activity will support the development and introduction of
                           new treatment guidelines via district health teams, development of training materials and training of health
                           zone authorities and staff on new treatment protocols (one training organized per year in each province up
                           to a total of 15 sessions) to ensure that once new treatments are made available through the health system,
                           they are also used appropriately. This is a fully new activity unsupported by any existing donor.

                           Component 2: Strengthen community engagement in HAT surveillance and control towards elimination.
                           (USD 0.910 M)

                           The mobile teams are the cornerstone of the active case detection strategy in DRC. However, some
Public Disclosure Copy




                           individuals screened by the mobile teams may not be detected at the time of the screening for any number
                           of reasons. Therefore, educating targeted communities and engaging them as active participants to identify
                           signs and symptoms of HAT and refer the suspected persons for HAT case detection and case management,
                           are critical to ensure progress. Through this component, an effective approach will be devised to engage the
                           community in surveillance and control activities on an ongoing basis and make them part of the continuum
                           of the HAT control system.

                           Subcomponent 2.1: Assessment of Community Knowledge and Behavior related to HAT Prevention,
                           Diagnosis and Treatment (USD 0.222 M)

                           Community assessment has not been done systematically in DRC, although several studies have reported
                           on the main beliefs and community reactions to previous treatments, mainly on the barriers to acceptance of
                           participation in mobile activities when melarsoprol was the main (and very toxic) treatment for the second
                           stage of the disease. Past studies, in that context, have found that sociocultural factors can be important
                           barriers to screening and treatment seeking behavior.[1]

                           This sub-component will provide support for a baseline social behavioral assessment to be conducted in
                           the five targeted regions to better understand the current sociocultural barriers to health seeking behavior
                           (including gender-specific behavior), knowledge of HAT infection and treatment options, and determine
                           appropriate interventions, to be funded from other sources, that are also gender-informed to address them.
                           This baseline assessment expects to use key informant interviews and focus group discussions rather than a
                           survey methodology, not only to ensure timely availability of the results and information to guide future
                           activities but also to ensure active participation of the targeted beneficiary communities/groups. The
                           baseline assessment will be conducted by a consultant(s) with experience in the health sector and expertise
                           in community engagement and behavior change communication, supported by local health care workers to
                           maintain the link for future health care services, and will ensure that representatives of different community
                           groups are met separately, as necessary, to ensure transparency, comfort, and ownership by the community.

                           The choice of communities to assess will be based on existing information, available at the PNLTHA, from the
                           past mobile teams’ activities, including participation data in each target area, as well as the detected

                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                            Page 5 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                           prevalence (number of cases in the selected villages in the three previous years). This quantitative
                           information will be complemented with the qualitative analysis about the perception of the disease and the
                           present understanding of the available treatment solutions, but actual treatment will be funded from other
                           sources. It will examine specific vulnerable groups, including women and children. Detailed baseline and
                           endline studies are under the M&E Section.



                           [1] Should I Get Screened for Sleeping Sickness? A Qualitative Study in Kasai Province, Democratic Republic of
                           Congo, Alain Mpanya, David Hendrickx et al., Jan. 2012 available at
                           http://journals.plos.org/plosntds/article?id=10.1371/journal.pntd.0001467

                           Baseline and Endline Studies:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The baseline assessment will inform the design of specific interventions that might include activities at the
                           community level such as: workshops and demonstration events related to information and education
                           campaigns (IEC); community activities targeting beliefs and harmful social norms that contribute towards
                           greater HAT exposure or delay treatment thus increasing the risk of transmission and delaying disease
                           elimination; psychosocial support for affected patients, etc. The baseline assessment will also inform what
                           type of accompanying behavioral interventions or messaging would best support the introduction of the new
                           HAT treatments to be funded from other sources.

                           At the end of the grant period, a post-intervention social behavioral assessment will be performed in the
                           targeted endemic communities, again considering specific feedback from different vulnerable groups to
                           evaluate changes in perception and behavior. Success shall be positive changes in behavior and perception
                           about HAT prevention, diagnosis and treatment and utilization of local health services which would
                           contribute to a steep reduction or even absence of new cases in the targeted communities. A specific
                           assessment tool will be designed to measure this impact.

                           The sub-component will provide support for a consultant(s) with the appropriate qualifications (monitoring
                           and evaluation, social science, community engagement and behavior change communication) and with
                           experience in conducting similar assessments in the health sector. The detailed request for proposals will
                           outline the minimum specifications of coverage for focus groups and interviews within the provinces to
                           ensure that there are sufficient inputs from the intended beneficiaries.

                           The baseline and post-intervention assessment results will be shared with the PNLTHA and partners involved
                           in DRC HAT control activities and integrated into the training provided under sub-component 2.2 as outlined
                           below.

                           Subcomponent 2.2: Support community participation in HAT case detection, monitoring and surveillance
                           (USD 0.688 M)




                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                            Page 6 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                           As part of building the local capacity, the project will support interventions to encourage greater
                           community participation to identify and self-refer suspect cases to community health centers in between
                           visits from the mobile teams, hence fostering community-level case detection, monitoring and surveillance
                           so that affected patients can be detected early and cared for effectively. These interventions will be targeted
                           towards increasing community use of local health services by improving knowledge and reducing practices
                           and harmful behaviors at the community level that limit health seeking behavior and result in increased HAT
                           vulnerability.



                           The interventions will be designed based on results of the social behavioral assessment in sub-component
                           2.1, taking into consideration all the inputs from the communities as well as local health personnel engaged
                           in the process, and then implemented with the support of the NSSCP/PNLTHA, provincial, district, and local
Public Disclosure Copy




                           health authorities as well as community key opinion leaders (KOLs), such as chiefs, traditional healers, village
                           elders, or women at the community level. IEC campaigns and messaging would be appropriately targeted at
                           the local and health facility level, through community radio stations or similar locally accessible means.

                           A training cascade approach will be used to train provincial and district staff as trainers of trainers (TOT),
                           which will then train the health zone personnel. Trained local health officers would then engage with and
                           train community KOLs, who would then be equipped to provide guidance to their specific community groups.
                           In addition, the mobile teams will also play an important role of engaging community KOLs, including special
                           outreach activities to traditional healers. Traditional healers play a very important role in these communities
                           as most patients first go to traditional healers, which can delay diagnosis and access to treatment, so close
                           coordination and collaboration with this dimension will be critical.

                           The KOLs will act in conjunction with local health officers to provide communities with correct health
                           information regarding HAT, the most up to date treatment and training on the clinical symptoms of HAT,
                           thereby contributing to improving case detection and reducing the stigma associated with the disease. As
                           necessary, particularly at the local/community level, the TOT training may necessitate some gender
                           disaggregated training to allow appropriate cultural and social norms to be followed to improve the
                           acceptability of the training and messaging. The sub-component will also provide support for materials
                           required for the IEC campaign and tools and documents needed for trainings.

                           The sub-component will provide support for the two community-based learning specialists who will
                           conduct one national level training of trainers (TOT) session with the support of the baseline assessment
                           consultant(s) for provincial level health personnel. Then the trained provincial TOTs would conduct two
                           training sessions with their relevant district and local health personnel. District- and local-level health
                           personnel would then train KOLs in their health zones so that the KOLs are able to also share that
                           information accurately within their communities. KOLs trained in these sessions would be expected to
                           disseminate the information shared within their communities through their own community activities. It is
                           expected that there would be at least three KOL training sessions in each of the targeted provinces and then
                           the KOLs would subsequently be involved in multiple activities/events to disseminate the information to


                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                              Page 7 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                           their communities and ensure greater distribution of the information. Combined, there should be one
                           national TOT session, two sessions in each province (total 10), and 30 sequences at the health zone or KOL
                           level after the end of the assessment.

                            Training of trainers (TOT)

                                   Place: Kinshasa
                                   Trainers: Project Coordinator; baseline assessment consultants (two); two Community-based Learning
                                    Specialists
                                   Trainees: Four (4) Provincial HAT Coordinators and four (4) Supervisors (East Kasaï and Lomami are
                                    covered by one coordinator); Five (5) Persons from Provincial Direction of Health in charge of
                                    community-based activities (Provincial supervisor); 10 district supervisors from involved health zones
                                   Duration: Three (3) days
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Training health staff (facilitators)

                                   Place: Each provincial capital except Lomami, as they will join at Mbuji Mayi
                                   Trainers: One National baseline consultant; one Community-Based Learning Specialists; one Provincial
                                    HAT Supervisor; one Provincial Supervisor; one District Supervisor per health zone
                                   Trainees: Up to 30 (including staff from the peripheral health structures and community mobilizers
                                    from the health teams) that will be identified during the assessment per province.
                                   Duration: Two (2) days

                           Training Key opinion leaders (KOLs) at health zone level

                                   Place: At each health zone headquarters
                                   Trainers: One community-based learning specialist; one district supervisor; one or two community
                                    mobilizer(s) from the directly involved mobile teams
                                   Trainees: Up to 30 KOLs from the villages of a given health zone
                                   Duration: Two days

                           Community-level interventions facilitated by the KOLs will be continuous starting the second year of the
                           project. They will not be formally programmed as they would be “opportunistic” to take advantage of other
                           community-based events, engagements and activities and the availability of mobile teams and health zone
                           officials. These interventions incorporate the use of locally available media both for dissemination and
                           information purposes. The specific examples of these interventions will be more clearly defined based on the
                           baseline social behavioral assessment.

                                   Place: At each village center at least two activities per community per health zone. Overall, it is
                                    expected that there shall be over 600 community-level activities over the three years.
                                   Trainers: One community-based learning specialist and/or one district supervisor and/or one
                                    community mobilizer from the directly involved mobile teams if the team is in their scheduled route


                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                            Page 8 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                                    at the village or nearby. Ideally, there should be at least five KOL per event, one to two of them
                                    trained under the program.
                                   Trainees: All villagers that show up; water to be provided
                                   Duration: Two to three hours
                                   Content: Community meetings; theatre; sport events; side training during HAT active case search or
                                    other health system activities (vaccination campaigns…)

                           At the community level there will also be home based visits and case search, and specific support for patient
                           referral to diagnostics and treatment centers.

                           Component 3: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge
                           Dissemination. (USD 0.277 M)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Subcomponent 3.1: Project Management and Administration (PMA) (USD 0.207 M)

                           This component will finance the provision of goods, consultant services, training, and operating costs to
                           support project monitoring, evaluation, and management, with an aim to ensure efficient, effective,
                           transparent, and accountable delivery of this project. The project implementation unit (PIU) will be the DNDi
                           office in Kinshasa and will be composed primarily of DNDi staff, with capabilities added through hiring of
                           consultants, as needed. The project will be overseen by an overall project coordinator (international DNDi
                           staff) together with the Kinshasa Head of Office (country-level coordination and supervision). The Grant
                           financial management (FM) and procurement functions will be ensured respectively by DNDi’s FM staff and
                           Logistics Officer, which is responsible for procurement, and supported by a Procurement Specialist (to be
                           added if necessary). Final project management arrangements, together with any additional fiduciary capacity
                           needs, will be confirmed during Appraisal.

                           The project will also finance the mandatory external audits (for each of the four expected years of the project
                           life cycle), Project Launch, Mid-Term Review and closing activities, and the Implementation Completion
                           Report (ICR).

                           Subcomponent 3.2: Monitoring and Evaluation (USD 0.070 M)

                           The monitoring and evaluation of final outcomes and results under component 1 are embedded within the
                           component activities, while the endline assessment as well health screening data will provide outcomes and
                           results for component 2. These qualitative and quantitative outcomes together with the medical results
                           achieved during implementation will be combined in the final report by the Implementing Agency to provide
                           an overall picture of the impact of the project. Therefore, there will be no impact evaluation necessary to be
                           conducted. M&E arrangements will include participatory monitoring of the activities by the beneficiaries
                           through regular consultations on project implementation. Beneficiary inputs will be collected routinely
                           through KOL interviews during field visits by the project trained personnel, to gain the views of intended
                           beneficiaries regarding the impact of the project interventions.



                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                            Page 9 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                           DNDi has existing M&E staff for collecting and reviewing data related to the grant outcomes that have been
                           the main focus of their current activities and can easily support the collection of necessary data for activities
                           under Component 1. These staff will be supplemented by the recruitment of an additional M&E specialist,
                           who would be responsible for coordinating component 2 activities, reviewing and enhancing the
                           participatory monitoring data (design a beneficiary survey and work with mobile teams to administer it), and
                           collecting and analyzing data for the overall project results framework.

                           Subcomponent 3.3: Knowledge Dissemination (USD 0.000 M - covered by existing DNDi budget)

                           The project will develop good practice notes on community engagement in disease surveillance and control
                           (directly related to this project) and introduction of new treatment mechanisms at the community level and
                           the associated risks with this introduction but not actual administration of the drugs which cannot be funded
                           from the JSDF funds. These will inform policy discussion and scale up of interventions that effectively engage
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communities in low-resource settings through World Bank or other support. Results and experiences will be
                           disseminated through the HAT Platform newsletters, scientific conferences, and publications in peer-
                           reviewed journals. A specific mass media communication strategy (at national and international level) will
                           also be developed, including visits to the field. Knowledge dissemination will be managed through the vehicle
                           of the existing HAT platform (by its coordinator) and DNDi staff. These costs will not be covered by the JSDF
                           grant as they are part of ongoing DNDi project activities and adequately supported at present. However,
                           activities related to treatment would not be funded from the project activities.

                           The experience of community intervention to strengthen capacity for disease surveillance through
                           screening and diagnoses of disease will be shared internally at DNDi and adapted to other disease programs
                           and contexts (Leishmaniasis, Chagas, Onchocerciasis, Mycetoma, Pediatric HIV, and Hepatitis C teams,
                           working in other countries in Africa, Latin America, and Asia) within the regular R&D monthly meetings.
                           Within the HAT team, a parallel intervention is being planned at the community level in Uganda and Malawi
                           in the context of the extension of new treatments to the T.b. rhodesiense endemic areas.

                           One HAT Platform newsletter per year will include updated information about the project evolution and
                           further presentations on specific information (baseline, project implementation evolution, challenges, and
                           solutions found) will take place annually alternating scientific meetings as the HAT Platform-EANETT (East
                           African Network for Tsetse and Trypanosomosis) and the ISCTRC (International Scientific Council for
                           Trypanosomiasis Research and Control) conferences organized by the African Union in alternate years. HAT
                           Platform-EANETT in 2018 and 2020 and ISCTRC in 2019. The Partners of the NSSCP/PNLTHA, including WHO,
                           FIND, IRD and IMT, usually meet twice a year to share experiences and clarify the destination of their
                           financial support within the programmed activities. They support different mobile case detection teams, but
                           always keeping the same terms and conditions as established by the PNLTHA to avoid differences among
                           staff in payments or equipment. These meetings will certainly be relevant to discuss content and adapt
                           strategies regarding other partners’ input and results.

                           The first component of this project will be implemented over 3 years, and the second component will start
                           the first year with the assessment and the second year with training and implementation. End-line report will


                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                              Page 10 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                           be prepared at the beginning of the fourth year. The full project through the Closing date will allow for 4
                           years to accommodate for feedback to the local authorities and communities, delays in implementation and
                           possible lags in activities and avoid transaction costs to extend the closing deadline.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will be implemented in 5 provinces (Kwilu, Mai-Ndombe, East Kasaï, Lomami, and Tshopo). No
                          civil works will be undertaken and no adverse environmental or social impacts are expected. The project
Public Disclosure Copy




                          does not require any land acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement and/or restrictions of access to
                          resources and livelihood. The project is expected to have a positive impact for all beneficiaries including
                          vulnerable groups such as children, women, and the poor. World Bank Grievance Redress Communities and
                          individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a World Bank (WB) supported project may submit
                          complaints to existing project-level grievance redress mechanisms or the WB’s Grievance Redress Service
                          (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address project-related
                          concerns. Project affected communities and individuals may submit their complaint to the WB’s independent
                          Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred, or could occur, as a result of WB non-
                          compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints may be submitted at any time after concerns have
                          been brought directly to the World Bank's attention, and Bank Management has been given an opportunity
                          to respond. For information on how to submit complaints to the World Bank’s corporate Grievance Redress
                          Service (GRS), please visit http://www.worldbank.org/GRS. For information on how to submit complaints to
                          the World Bank Inspection Panel, please visit www.inspectionpanel.org



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          At the national level, DRC has legislative and regulatory frameworks which are conducive to good
                          environmental management. In addition, they have signed a number of international treaties and
                          conventions to ensure good environmental governance. The Government of DRC has experience with the
                          Bank’s Safeguard Policies due to Bank-funded projects across different sectors. However, implementation
                          capacity is weak. The Ministry of Environment, Conservation and Sustainable Development (MECNDD)
                          governs environmental policies and their compliance. The MECNDD’s main department in charge of
                          environmental monitoring and management is the National Agency for the Environment (Agence Congolaise
                          de l’Environnement - ACE). The ACE is responsible for safeguards compliance of all projects in the country
                          and is familiar with safeguards instruments such as the Environmental and Social Management Framework
                          (ESMF), the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), and the Indigenous Peoples Policy Framework (IPPF). The
                          agency (ACE) has limited capacity, and still largely relies on donor and project funds to carry out its field
                          supervision duties. At the provincial level, government agencies often do not have the equipment, trained

                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                           Page 11 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                          staff, and management capacity necessary to monitor social and environmental impacts. Citizen engagement
                          is often poor at the national level, despite decentralization efforts, resulting in limited ownership. The Bank
                          has had a participatory approach through its various investments, and civil society (vocal and active), local
                          institutions, and leaders are invited to meetings during the design of projects. At project level, the
                          beneficiary will prepare necessary instruments and implement mitigation measures related to the triggered
                          safeguards policies, including special care for adequate medical waste disposal. The environmental and social
                          safeguards instruments have already been prepared under the ongoing Health Systems Strengthening
                          project (P147555) and will be adapted as needed to address specificities of this project. Overall, safeguards
                          management is challenging in the environment of DRC. To address the issues at the national level, the World
                          Bank is engaging in an Advisory Services and Analytics (ASA) on existing Environmental and Social national
                          framework and institutional capacity, which will allow the Bank to better address and mitigate risks and
                          impacts of investments (project launched in October 2017).
Public Disclosure Copy




                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Grace Muhimpundu, Social Specialist
                          Richard Everett, Social Specialist
                          Joelle Nkombela Mukungu, Environmental Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project            Triggered?                Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                 The environmental impacts of the project
                                                                                                 are expected to be minimal. Anticipated
                                                                                                 environmental safeguard issues related to
                                                                                                 project activities include management of
                                                                                                 liquid/solid waste (including hazardous
                                                                                                 waste) generated from diagnosis and
                                                                                                 treatment of affected patients, and overall
                                                                                                 laboratory safety aspects. These issues are
                                                                                                 limited to the specific health facilities
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes                   supported which are required to comply
                                                                                                 with applicable regulatory requirements of
                                                                                                 the government of DRC (on biomedical
                                                                                                 waste management, hazardous waste
                                                                                                 management, Water Act, and so on) and
                                                                                                 international GCP. The instruments will be
                                                                                                 updated (Environmental and Social
                                                                                                 Management Framework as well as a
                                                                                                 Biomedical Waste Management Plan) and
                                                                                                 disclosed prior to appraisal.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      No                    This OP is not triggered, as there will be no


                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                                Page 12 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program



                                                                                                  potential impact on natural habitats.
                                                                                                  The proposed project will not affect forests,
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                  No
                                                                                                  nor will it involve de/re-forestation.
                                                                                                  No use of pesticides or health-related
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                             No                  concerns with respect to vector
                                                                                                  management are expected.
                                                                                                  The project does not trigger this policy as
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No
                                                                                                  no excavation or dredging will take place.
                                                                                                  Indigenous Peoples are not found in the
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No
                                                                                                  zones of intervention.
                                                                                                  The project does not involve land
                                                                                                  acquisition leading to involuntary
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No
                                                                                                  resettlement and/or restrictions of access
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  to resources and livelihoods.
                                                                                                  The Project will not finance any dam
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No
                                                                                                  construction or rehabilitation.
                                                                                                  None of the intervention sites concern
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No
                                                                                                  International Waterways.
                                                                                                  None of the intervention sites are in
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No
                                                                                                  disputed areas.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           01-Mar-2019
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           An Environmental and Social management Framework (ESMF) and Medical Waste Management Plan
                           (MWMP) have already been prepared and disclosed for the ongoing Health Systems Strengthening project.
                           This project will adopt and conform to these existing safeguard instruments. These environmental and social
                           documents will be adapted/complemented as needed to reflect specificities of this project.


                           APPROVALS

                           Team Leader(s):                            Hadia Nazem Samaha

                           Approved By

                           Safeguards Advisor:                        Maman-Sani Issa                     01-Feb-2019



                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                                 Page 13 of 14
                                  The World Bank
                                  Support to DRC human African trypanosomiasis control program




                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Trina S. Haque                                    01-Feb-2019


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Feb 25, 2019                                                                                                                            Page 14 of 14
