INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA13382
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Eastern Africa            Project ID:  P155163
Parent       P128332
Project ID:
Project Name: Africa Medicine Regulatory Harmonization Project (P155163)
Parent Project AFCC2/RI-African Medicines Regulatory Harmonization Project (P128332)
Name:
Task Team       Apollo Muhairwe
Leader(s):
Estimated                                 Estimated    29-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHN01                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (100%)
Theme(s):       Health system performance (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      3.90            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   0.00
Pharmaceutical Governance Fund                                             3.90
Total                                                                      3.90
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
To harmonize medicines registration systems and to improve efficiency and enhance transparency
in medicines registration among the East African Community Partner States.
Page 1 of 5


﻿B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
1.     The PDO and the project components will be maintained under the AF. The project's Results
Framework (Annex 1) has been updated to integrate a new indicator under component one to monitor
progress in the critical area of strengthening pharmacovigilance in the EAC region.
2.     The two components of the project have been retained and the AF will continue to support
the two components. The amounts listed below represent the cost of activities that will be supported:
Component 1: US $2.1 million - Regional Coordination and Capacity Building for Medicines
Regulatory Harmonization. The AF will provide support to scale up existing activities. This
includes: support for meetings of Project Steering Committee, EAC Secretariat project staff; joint
activities by all EAC Partner States in medicines evaluation and assessment which will involve
training in the use of the documents developed under Phase I of the project and actual evaluation of
marketing authorization applications; conducting joint inspections for Good Manufacturing Practices
(GMP) of pharmaceutical manufacturers both regional and international as a component of
evaluation of a marketing authorization application; procurement of an Integrated Information
Management System (IMS) Solution by end of 2017, and training in quality management system for
continual improvement of NMRAs in preparation for ISO certification by end of 2017. These
activities will be coordinated at the regional level by the East African Community Secretariat.
A new sub-component on Strengthening Pharmacovigilance in the EAC Partner States will be added.
The EAC and Partner States' National Medicines Regulatory Agencies will prepare a strategic plan
on strengthening management of adverse reactions to medicines and patient safety as well as post
market surveillance of medicines in the EAC region. A regional technical working group will be
formed that will guide a comprehensive survey to be conducted to establish existing gaps (gap
analysis) which will inform preparation of a comprehensive project proposal.
Component 2: US $1.3 million; Institutional Development and Strengthening of National Medicines
Regulatory Authorities. The AF proposes focus on actual implementation of harmonized guidelines
for medicine regulation at national level in EAC Partner States. The documents, standards and
guidelines that were prepared will be piloted and institutionalized by the NNMRAs during this
period. The activities include: piloting the use, at national level, of the Common Technical
Documents for registration of medicines and inspection of pharmaceutical manufacturing facilities,
review and follow up of QMS implementation, twinning programs among National Medicines
Regulatory Agencies, sensitization of pharmaceutical importers on the use of the documents during
marketing authorization applications, regulatory support to pharmaceutical manufacturers and
industry on the use and compliance with CTD requirements, printing / translation of documents,
national launch and domestication of EAC guidelines for medicine evaluation & registration, Good
Manufacturing Practices (GMP) and Quality Management Systems (QMS), and other capacity
building activities for National Medicines Regulatory Agencies.
Additional Financing to NEPAD Agency (US$0.5 million): The additional funding for NEPAD will
go towards political advocacy, promotion of the draft Model law for medicine regulation,
coordination of partners and facilitation and development of new projects by regional economic
blocks in sub-Saharan Africa. The funding for NEPAD does not correspond to any specific
Page 2 of 5


﻿component of the project but rather, it is for NEPAD's continued technical assistance and support for
the project. NEPAD Agency performance has been satisfactory without any audit or financial
management issues. The initial Grant to NEPAD is fully disbursed.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in all five EAC countries, namely Burundi, Kenya, Rwanda,
Tanzania and Uganda.The project will involve Regional Coordination and Capacity Building for
Medicines Regulatory Harmonization, which will entail meetings, training, development of and
implementation of guidelines/ standards, inspections/surveillance of processes, procurement &
installation of management systems. Component two will involve institutional development and
strengthening. All the proposed AF activities do not pose any adverse environmental and social
impacts, and therefore no need for environmental assessment. The project is thus kept in EA category
C.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No          The project EA Cat is retained as C because the AF
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               activities have been maintained (for up-scaling) with only
one addition of pharmacovigilance and all entail capacity
building/training, meetings, development of guidelines
and standards. Piloting activities entail implementation of
developed guidelines (focusing on processes and
procedures) without any infrastructure or physical input
activities. Therefore the project does not have any adverse
environmental and social impact on the surroundings.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project does not involve conversion or degradation of
4.04                                any natural habitat.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project does not involve activities that will interact
with any forest.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project will not involve use or increase in the use of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No          The project does not involve any physical activities and
Resources OP/BP 4.11                will not affect any PCR.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          The project will not be implemented in IPs districts/
BP 4.10                             locations known in the region
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project will be undertaken in existing facilities and/or
OP/BP 4.12                          institutions and will not involve any activity that requires
land acquisition or affect livelihood of any community.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project does not involve development of dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No       The project will not support activities that require use of
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                any international waterway.
Projects in Disputed    No          The project will not be implemented in any area of dispute
Page 3 of 5


﻿Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
N/A. No safeguards issues emerged during project implementation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A. No safeguards issues emerged during project implementation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
N/A
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
N/A
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
The project does not have any issues relating to safeguards, N/A
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 4 of 5


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes []No []        NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Apollo Muhairwe
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name:                                      Date:
Practice Manager/      Name:                                       Date:
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


