                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR17687
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Mongolia                                     Project ID:           P125964
                            Project Name:      Mongolia Livestock and Agricultural Marketing Project (P125964)
                            Task Team          Stephane Forman
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          29-Oct-2012                                  Estimated   22-Oct-2012
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA02                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (50%), Animal production (25%),
                                               Agricultural extension and research (25%)
                            Theme:             Rural markets (50%), Rural policies and institutions (20%), Other environment
                                               and natural resources management (10%), Micro, Small a nd Medium Enterprise
                                               support (10%), Gender (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        11.49           Total Bank Financing:                                            0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              0.49
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                                         11.00
                              Total                                                                                                11.49
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives




                                                                                 Page 1 of 8
                         3. Project Description
                         This restructuring encompass only extension of closing date by 11 months, reallocation of proceeds
                         and minor changes in the Results Indicators. There is no change in the PDO, project components and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         interventions, geographical scope and environmental and social risks and safeguards. The project
                         remains articulated around the same components and sub-components:

                         Component 1 – LINKING HERDERS TO MARKETS
                         The objective of this component is to create productive partnerships by linking producers of
                         livestock products (meat, fiber, milk and horticultural products) to markets and diversifying sources
                         of income and household nutrition. The component will also support traceability of products for
                         participating herder cooperatives. The objective will be achieved through 3 specific sub-components
                         as follows:

                         Sub-Component 1a:        Meat and Fiber Market Development
                         Sub-Component 1b:        Dairy Market Development
                         Sub-Component 1c:        Pilot Horticulture Production

                         Component 2 – RAISING LIVESTOCK PRODUCTIVITY AND QUALITY
                         This component is to ensure productivity increases and quality products for the markets. Support will
                         be provided through extension services in the areas of animal health, nutrition, breed improvement
                         and feeding to improve the productivity of the five traditional species (sheep, goat, horse, cattle/yak,
                         camel) within the semi-nomadic production system through breeding, feeding and animal health. The
                         target group for support will be the herder gro ups participating in component 1 to ensure
                         complementarity and synergy and will also be implemented through three sub-components namely:

                         Sub-component 2a:        Promoting Animal health
                         Sub-component 2b:        Animal Breeding and Genetic Improvement
                         Sub-component 2c:        Animal Nutrition
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Matching grant financing has been provided for the establishment of forage production plots. In a
                         way that will enable citizens to enclose an area of land, in agreement with the soum authorities, to be
                         used for winter fodder conservation. The project will support micro-scale forage processing facilities
                         at soum level and participatory on-farm research. Selected herders herd will be used for
                         demonstration purposes so that producers at large can better understand the relationship between
                         nutrition, productivity and profitability.

                         Component 3 - PROJECT MANAGEMENT (US$1.0million)

                         This component will support the coordination of project activities and the fiduciary functions of the
                         Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be established by the MIA. The PIU will be staffed and
                         equipped to enable it to effectively carry out these activities. The sub component will finance
                         incremental staff, consultants, operating costs, some technical assistance, training, M&E activities
                         and impact assessments, information dissemination and annual audits. The project will also support
                         the coordination of donor funded programs in the livestock sector, by holding semi-annual meetings
                         to review implementation progress and provide policy guidance to MIA.

                         The Project has engaged the services of Technical Service Providers (NGOs) in each Aimag with


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         considerable experience in value chain development to support herder/groups in developing
                         productive partnerships with marketers. The terms and conditions and contractual obligations for the
                         successful NGO are described in the Matching Grants Manual.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Activites under the sub-components 1a and 1b (through matching grants) are about to start. There are
                         the only one likely to have minor environmental impacts (small infrastructure). Investments will be
                         screened under a check-list approved by the Bank. The PIU is about to hire a resource person who
                         will be accountable to train stakeholders and beneficiaries and ensure that these stakeholders
                         including soums and aimag environment officers and TSPs, are aware and follow the EMF
                         recommendations. The proposed person will also assist in enforcing environmental screening check-
                         list and provide a training on importance of use existing national laws/regulations as well as WBG’s
                         environmental and social safeguard policies in sub-project planning, implementation and M&E. PIU
                         agreed to hire resource person and allocate operational budget.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project wis implemented in five aimags: Gobi-Altai, Bayankhongor, Zavkhan, Arkhangai and
                         Khuvsgul. These are five western aimags stretching from the southern border with China to the
                         northern border with Russia. They cover several of the most prevalent ecological zones in Mongolia,
                         from arid desert in the south, through semi-arid grassland, to steppe and in the northern part the
                         steppe-forest. Within each of the five aimags, three soums in each aimag have been selected. The
                         criteria for the selection of soums were based on: (i) access to markets; (ii) potential for fodder
                         production; (iii) existence of herder groups/cooperatives; (iv) no overlap with other on-going similar
                         projects and ideally; (v) there is demand for value chain development support.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Zongcheng Lin (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental              Yes            The overall impact of the project on the environment is
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     expected to be positive. Livestock nutrition is a core
                                                                    theme of the project - required for improving quality of
                                                                    livestock and increasing productivity. A critical issue in
                                                                    the Mongolian livestock sector has been poor nutrition as
                                                                    animals depend upon open grazing – this has led to a
                                                                    decline in the quality of pastureland. Under the project, a
                                                                    greater emphasis on a more balance approach to nutrition
                                                                    would be promoted, with increased production of fodder,
                                                                    and, it is hoped, a reduced dependency on open pasture.

                                                                    Given the nature and small scale of the proposed activities
                                                                    scattered in the five aimags/provinces under the project, a
                                                                    Category B project is proposed. up to now, no major
                                                                    impacts on environment were noticed. However, some
                                                                    concerns remains relating to adverse impacts associated
                                                                    with Component 1 and Component 2 now that the project
                                                                    is fully on track, including, among others:
                                                                    •         impacts of improved fodder &vegetable



                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                       production in project area and the potential pesticides
                                                       which may be induced by the project.
                                                       •        impacts on water resources, e.g. the digging of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       shallow wells for fodder production and vegetable plots;
                                                       •        impacts of more intensive forms of livestock
                                                       production, including manure management.
                                                       •        small scale construction-related impacts(e.g.
                                                       livestock sheds,);

                                                       Therefore, for the purpose of mitigating any adverse
                                                       impacts caused by these activities, an Environmental
                                                       Management Plan (EMP) has been prepared including the
                                                       following:
                                                       •         Environmental guidelines to address siting of
                                                       fodder and vegetable production and potential adverse
                                                       impacts from the production(e.g. likely use of fertilizer
                                                       and pesticides, and water resources management);
                                                       •         Environmental guidelines for siting of livestock
                                                       production, manure management, and training
                                                       arrangement for local farmers;
                                                       •         Environmental guidelines to address general
                                                       impacts of small scale construction (e.g. livestock sheds,
                                                       small irrigation facilities, chance find procedures);
                                                       • Environmental guidelines to address waste generated
                                                       from laboratories financed under the project;
                                                       • Some activities under Sub-component 1a may be
                                                       determined until project implementation. For these
                                                       activities the EMP will include selection criteria and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       general guidelines with regard to identification,
                                                       monitoring and mitigation of possible adverse
                                                       environmental impacts of these activities.
                                                       • Institutional arrangements for the implementation of the
                                                       above environmental guidelines/manuals.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   The project will not procure or supply any pesticides.
                                                       However, pesticides may be induced by the improved
                                                       fodder and vegetable production activities. The PMP
                                                       estimates that there is probability to use pesticide for
                                                       agricultural use.
                                                       As of now, the principle has been to grow fodder and
                                                       vegetables without any pesticide (capitalizing on
                                                       "organic" products for niche markets). However, the Bank
                                                       and PIU will remain vigilant.
                         Physical Cultural      No     Based on the available information, the project will not



                                                        Page 4 of 8
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                      adversely affect sites with archeological, paleontological,
                                                                      historical, religious, or unique natural values. Chance
                                                                      finds during construction might occur and relevant clauses
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      will be included in all construction contracts.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No            This project will not require land acquisition and
                            OP/BP 4.12                                resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               Safeguards clearance was transferred to the SMU on January 2012. The project triggers two
                              safeguard policies: Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) and Pest Management (OP 4.09). The
                              Environmental Management Framework prepared for project well describes the processes to be
                              followed.

                             Environmental Assessment. The EMP assesses the potential project impacts. The major impacts
                             on the environment include (i) impacts of improved fodder & vegetable production in project
Public Disclosure Copy




                             area, such as stress on water resources due to the new wells that may be dug to support increased
                             local fodder and vegetable production and any irrigation undertaken, and soil erosion; (ii) impacts
                             of more intensive forms of livestock production; (iii) waste discharged from small-scale
                             processing facilities; and (iv) small scale construction-related impacts(e.g. livestock sheds,
                             irrigation facilities).

                              Pest Management. The project will not procure or supply any pesticides. However, pesticides may
                              be induced by the improved fodder and vegetable production activities. The PMP estimates that
                              there is probability to use pesticide for agricultural use.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                               Environmental Assessment. An EMP was developed in accordance with Bank Operational Policy
                              OP4.01. The EMP proposes adequate mitigation measures such as soil conservation measures

                                                                       Page 5 of 8
                          including balanced fertilization, wind barrier around agricultural land; chemicals management,
                          requirements of waste management for small-scale processing facilities and livestock facilities.
                          Environmental specifications for contractors have been developed to mitigate the impacts
Public Disclosure Copy




                          associated with small scale construction. The EMP also specifies monitoring plan, institutional
                          arrangements, capacity building activities, and budge for the EMP implementation.

                          Pest Management. A Pest Management Plan, as an annex for the EMP, has been developed. The
                          PMP proposes necessary activities to mitigate and prevent potential risks and negative impacts of
                          using and distributing of pesticides and provide relevant guidance. The proposed mitigation
                          measures consist of, among others: (i) promoting practices which reduce risks in the handling of
                          pesticides and minimize adverse effects on humans and the environment; (ii) promoting IPM to
                          reduce the use of toxic pesticides; (iii) training and capacity building for local farmers and
                          governmental agencies in controlling and monitoring on pesticide distribution, using, storage and
                          transporting; (iv)introducing biological and botanical pesticides and encouraging, promoting the
                          development of alternatives for reducing risks like biological control methods and techniques,
                          non-chemical pesticides and pesticides of low risk to humans and the environment; (v)
                          strengthening monitoring; and (vi) reinforcing regulatory aspects. Implementation of the PMP
                          will be undertaken by all partners and stakeholders of LAMP, including farmers and herders’
                          groups, IPM researchers, extension agents, crop consultants, food producers, traders of biological
                          and chemical pesticides and application equipment, environmental inspectors and representatives
                          of consumer groups. The PMP also specifies the institutional arrangement, monitoring
                          requirements, and the budget for the PMP implementation.

                          A Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in the MoFA has been established for the coordination of
                          project activities. Overall responsibility of the project monitoring, evaluation, and reporting rests
                          with the PIU. Day-to-day duties will be carried out by an M&E officer at the PIU who will work
                          closely with the Soum Coordinator in each Soum. A gender specialist has also been recruited as
                          PIU staff. At the Soum-level, the MoFA Coordinator (Head of the VABU) assumes full
                          responsibilities as Soum Coordinator (SC) for the project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           MoFA has appointed a National Steering Committee (NSC) to provide guidance to the Project
                           Director and the PIU. The NSC approves activity and procurement plans, monitor and assess
                           implementation, ensure the appropriate use the grant and ensure coordination in project
                           management.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             In accordance with Bank Safeguard policies, public consultations were conducted during
                           preparation, with local farmers and other stakeholders such as officials of project soum
                           administration and ASIA and ADNET officials/staff, inspectors and local farmers on April 25-29
                           and on May 5-7, 2012. Their opinions and concerns have been taken into account in the EA
                           safeguards documents. The EMP including the PMP was disclosed locally in September at the
                           local governmental website and province libraries. The final EA documents were sent to the Bank
                           InfoShop for disclosure on October 28, 2012.
                           During implementation (since 2014) continuous consultation is undertaken by the PIU and TSP
                           with Aimags and Soums level MoFA staff (VABUs), but also with herders' communities and
                           cooperatives. They are the one submitting proposals for sub-projects to be directly financed
                           through the project or through sub-grants.



                                                                      Page 6 of 8
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Oct-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         17-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Aug-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Oct-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Mongolia                                                         17-Sep-2012
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Stephane Forman
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                       Date: 03-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
