INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12658
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Lao People's Democratic    Project ID:  P149599
Republic
Project Name: Power Grid Improvement Project (P149599)
Task Team       Rome Chavapricha
Leader(s):
Estimated       22-Apr-2015                Estimated    23-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (50%), Energy efficiency in Heat
and Power (50%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      30.00            Total Bank Financing:   30.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                30.00
Total                                                                      30.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to help improve efficiency and reliability of power distribution
in the selected load areas served by EDL.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 11


﻿The main proposed project components include:
a. Component 1: Smart metering, distribution improvement and distribution losses reduction [US$ 19
million]: This component is expected to introduce advanced metering infrastructure (AMI)
technology and digital meters in the project area. In addition, it is expected to help improve reliability
of power supply and reduce losses in selected parts of the distribution network through strengthening
of power distribution infrastructure and distribution automation. This component includes
rehabilitating power distribution lines, upgrading of conductors, increasing transformer capacity,
placement of capacitors for reactive power and voltage control, installation of load break switches
and reclosers, etc.
b. Component 2: Electric utility information system [US$ 6 million]. There are three
subcomponents: (i) Supply and installation of optical fiber communication links to support advanced
metering and distribution automation; (ii) Extension of Geographic Information System (GIS) to
support power distribution operation and maintenance; and (iii) Supply and installation of an updated
corporate financial management information system (FMIS). This sub-component is expected to take
a modular approach in modernizing financial management in EDL, including through the
improvement of billing and collection system, which can be subsequently scaled up to a full
enterprise resources planning system or be disaggregated according to EDL corporate structure.
c. Component 3: Institutional capacity building and project implementation support [US$ 5 million].
This component is expected to include (i) financing for EDL's distribution materials and equipment
testers and related trainings, (ii) applications of advanced metering infrastructure, (iii) applications of
energy balancing and power flow software, (iv) consultancy for electric utility information system,
(v) support to measure distribution system performance indicators, and (vi) project implementation
support and incremental operating cost. This component is expected to enhance EDL institutional
capacity to utilize new technologies to address distribution losses and improve power grid efficiency.
d. Component 4: Contingent emergency response [US$ 0 million]. The objective of the contingent
O
Q)        emergency response component with a provisional zero allocation is to allow for the reallocation of
financing in accordance with the IDA Immediate Response Mechanism in order to provide a rapid
response to disaster or emergency events, as needed. This component would finance expenditures on
a positive list of goods and/or specific works and services required for emergency recovery. An
Emergency Response Manual (ERM) will apply to this component, detailing streamlined financial
management, procurement, safeguard and any other necessary implementation arrangements.
Status of the Project, Procurement, Financial Management and Disbursement
EDL, supported by the Bank team, has prepared a preliminary cost estimate for all components under
the proposed IDA Credit budget of US$ 30 million. The actual cost will be determined upon
completion of procurement for each procurement package.
The implementing agency EDL is expected to utilize its existing expertise in procurement, financial
management, disbursement, and environmental and social management gained through the on-going
REP II and the GMS Power Trade Project. The Bank team has carried out an updated assessment of
EDL's fiduciary as well as safeguard capacity and will provide the necessary training and support
during appraisal and implementation.
Page 2 of 11


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The geographical scope of the project is limited to the urban and suburban area of Vientiane.
Specifically, the intended project area is located in Xaythany district of Vientiane capital, about 10
kilometers north of Vientiane city center, with a distribution loss of around 24 percent in 2014
(higher than national average of 13 percent). The Vientiane capital area accounts for about 40 percent
of the country's demand for electricity. The Xaythany district comprises low- and high-income
residential customers, commercial, and industrial customers. There are currently about 46,000
residential and 1,100 non-residential customers in Xaythany.
The number of kilometers of power lines to be rehabilitated is about 366 (of which 127 for medium-
voltage). Small-scale works linked primarily to installation of meters, capacitors, upgraded medium-
voltage transformers, power poles, and conductors of low- and medium voltage lines are linked to the
proposed rehabilitation of existing medium and low voltage distribution lines and reinforcement of
selected electricity networks. The planned activities within the project do not include construction of
new transmission or distribution electrical lines. The physical installations of meters, power
distribution equipment, communication links, computing hardware, testing equipment are expected
to be done on existing power poles, power lines, and buildings owned by EDL or by electricity
customers.
No physical relocation of existing residences is expected as construction work will be done on the
existing power distribution infrastructure. However, minor losses of private assets such as land, crops
and fences may occur as a result of upgrading of existing or adding new power poles under the
existing right of way. At this stage of the project design the location of the poles is not yet decided by
EDL. However, the land area required for new poles normally is around one square foot per pole,
which would be addressed through voluntary land donation. Loss of crops and fences would be
compensated at replacement value. EDL will notify affected customers for any power cut
requirements during project implementation in accordance with its established procedures, including
those adopted under the Bank requirements.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Juan Martinez (GSURR)
Waraporn Hirunwatsiri (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Small scale installation works pertain to the rehabilitation
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               of distribution of medium voltage (MV 22kV) and low-
voltage (LV 0.4 kV) lines and the installation of
electronic meters, replacement of capacitors (LV line),
upgrading of conductors (on LV and MV lines) and
replacement and addition of transformers and power poles
(for MV). Given the nature of the rehabilitation works, the
project is proposed as category B as certain mitigation
measures and monitoring actions will have to be
implemented during the civil works in order to minimize,
prevent and reduce possible temporary impacts on the
environment. Temporary environmental impacts during
Page 3 of 11


﻿works may include soils and water surfaces pollution due
to disposal of fuel oils and other chemicals related to
works and disposal of waste materials from installations
to be replaced, and physical hazards to workers. Special
attention will be given to management of hazardous
electrical waste (old transformers) including handling,
transportation and final disposal of materials
contaminated by PCBs, as well as to impacts from
disconnection of power lines and interruption of service to
beneficiaries during works. These potential impacts could
be managed through clear environmental due diligence
obligations of contractors (which will be stipulated in the
ESMP) and use of adequate technical construction
standards. To ensure that the environmental issues are
appropriately addressed, EDL prepared an ESMP
including ECoPs that meet the applicable World Bank
safeguard policies and national applicable legislation. The
WBG Environmental, Health and Safety (EHS)
Guidelines for Power Transmission and Distribution
which has been incorporated into the ESMP and ECoP
will be followed during project construction, operation
and maintenance, including provisions for beneficiaries
and worker health and safety. The ECoPs include
specifications for the proper disposal of excess/discarded
electric materials, lubricants, etc. In addition, proper
dissemination of service disruption, traffic management,
etc. will be required of all contractors. The draft ESMP
was publicly disclosed in country on March 26, 2015 as
well as in Infoshop on March 25, 2015 in English before
the public consultations.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The works will take place in urban and sub-urban areas
4.04                                 where there is no natural habitats.
o         Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           There is no forest in project right of way. No project
activities are involved with forest management of
affecting forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project does not involve the purchase or increase use
of pesticides. EDL does not use toxic herbicides to
prevent vegetation growth around poles.
Physical Cultural       Yes          The policy is triggered as precautionary measure to avoid
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 impacts to stupas, pagodas or other cultural and historical
resources. From the initial rights-of-way survey, no
physical cultural resources were found within the existing
22kV distribution right of way, which is located along the
existing road (National Road 13 South). A detailed survey
to identify buried physical cultural resources at the
location of the additional poles will be conducted before
Page 4 of 11


﻿the work commencement. A chance find procedures were
included in the ESMP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          The project will be implemented within the Xaythany
BP 4.10                             district which is an urban district within Vientiane
Capital. Indigenous Peoples communities (known as
Ethnic Groups in Lao PDR) are not known to be present
in the project areas.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes       The project triggers OP4.12 Involuntary Resettlement,
OP/BP 4.12                          and draft protocols for voluntary land donation (P-VLD)
and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been
drafted and disclosed in order to address project impacts
in compliance with both GOL and World Bank's policies.
No involuntary land acquisition is expected as the small
land plots for new poles required are commonly provided
through voluntary donations. However, during
construction and maintenance minor impacts on structures
and standing crops and trees (trimming) cannot be ruled
out. At this stage of the project design the location of the
poles is not yet decided by EDL. A Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) was therefore developed which
provides principles and procedures to ensure that such
impacts will be fully compensated at replacement value.
The Protocols for VLD include detailed documentation
indicating the appropriateness of the VLD, description on
owners and users of land donated, procedures for
consultation and disclosure, informed consent of the
person donating the land, legal documentation indicating
the transference of land donated, and grievance redress
procedure and mechanism. In the unlikely event, that
involuntary resettlement will occur in the form of impacts
on structures or standing crops and trees, the RPF that was
prepared by EDL will be applied. The Bank has reviewed
the P-VLD and RPF drafted by EDL.
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No           The project will not support construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                of dams nor will support other investments that rely on
the services of existing dams.
Projects on International  No       No project activities are involved in international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                waterways.
Projects in Disputed   No           No project activities are involved in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Page 5 of 11


﻿and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The activities involved in PGI project would include small scale installation works pertain to the
rehabilitation of distribution medium voltage (127 km of 22 kV MV) and low voltage (239 km of
0.4 kV LV) lines and the installation of electronic meters, replacement of capacitors (LV line),
upgrading of conductors (on LV and MV lines) and replacement and addition of transformers and
power poles (for MV). Given the nature of the rehabilitation works, the project is proposed as
O
category B and triggered Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 as certain mitigation measures
and monitoring actions will have to be implemented during the civil works both during the
*           construction and operation and maintenance phase in order to minimize, prevent and reduce
possible temporary and site specific impacts on the environment.
The key impact of the project during project construction and operation phase may include soil
and surface water pollution due to disposal of fuel oils and disposal of construction debris (from
earth excavation for installation of 50 electrical poles) and waste materials (from replacement of
old PCB-based transformers, meters, etc.) and physical hazard to workers. A preliminary on-site
assessment conducted found about 30 households with structures around power poles and limit
working space for EDL officers and contractors. The exact scale and history of household
structures around power poles will be determined during implementation.
In addition, trimming of trees and bushes during project installation for additional poles and
regular maintenance of vegetation within the 22 kV distribution right-of way which is necessary to
avoid disruption to overhead power lines and poles will have minor impact to biological resources
in the project right of way.
In terms of climate and geophysical hazards, as a result of the WBG Climate and Disasters Risk
Screening Tool, the project is considered being moderately exposed to strong winds and slightly
exposed to drought that may directly impact project implementation and operation. For instance,
strong wind may disrupt construction activities or cause physical damages to infrastructure during
operating phase. Excess drought may cause fire accidents, which may cause physical damages.
The project is less exposed to flooding as most of distribution equipment is above ground-level,
and may continue to operate safely during flooding.
The social issues associated with the project are expected to be limited. EDL has already
established procedures and communication methods to inform its customers of upcoming power
cuts necessary for the project implementation. It is expected that under this project no involuntary
land acquisition, physical relocation of households, or commercial entities due to construction
work will occur as all the work will be done on existing power distribution infrastructure. About
50 new power poles would be installed on private land under the existing right of way (ROW)
along a nine-kilometer section of provincial public road and located in the field paddies. Impact
will be minor since each pole will require only around one square foot of land. Such minor loss of
land will be addressed through voluntary donations in line with the protocols provided in the
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). In addition, minor impacts on structures and standing
crops and trees may occur during construction and maintenance. The RPF provides principles and
procedures to ensure that such impacts will be fully compensated at replacement value.
A draft Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), Environmental Codes of Practices
(ECoP), Protocol for Voluntary Land Donation (P-VLD) and Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) in line with the World bank's Safeguard policies, the WBG Environmental, Health and
Page 6 of 11


﻿Safety (EHS) Guidelines for Power Transmi ssion and Distribution and the National applicable
legislation that appropriately addressed the environmental and social issues identified from E&S
due diligence was prepared by EDL and reviewed by the Bank. The draft ESMP, ECoP, P-VLD
and RPF have been disclosed in country and Infoshop prior to project appraisal. Public
O
consultation was held on April 3, 2015 in Xaythany District.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
O
in the project area:
Lower electricity generation resulting from a reduction in distribution losses will also yield a
reduction in C02 emissions since part of the generation comes from fossil fuel fired power plants.
A cumulative C02 emissions saving amount of 1.27 million tons from the project is the long term
positive impact from the project. In term of future activities in the project area that may impact
project implementation on the safety aspect, any new temporary shelter around power poles could
be an issue. This potentially could obstruct and limit safety working space for workers during
project operation and maintenance. To avoid and mitigate any negative impacts, EDL will prepare
a detailed plan to ensure no additional temporary shelter will be built around power poles.
The socio-economic benefits include a range of positive impacts by improving the efficiency and
reliability of power distribution in the urban and suburban areas, the strengthening of power
distribution infrastructure and improvements of voltage drop, reduced power cuts, and reduction of
distribution losses, which ultimately result in local economic benefits. The potential for adverse
impacts on the existing communities is low, as the area is already heavily developed and
populated. The physical installations of meters, communication links, computing hardware, testing
equipment are expected to be done on existing power lines, and buildings owned by EDL or by
electricity customers.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
O
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Measures to Be Taken:
0
Mitigation and management have been proposed in the ESMP to address all of the impacts
identified, including a comprehensive ECoP and P-VLD and RPF for implementation during
construction and operation of the scheme. The ESMP details the environmental management and
supervision organizations and responsibilities, mitigation measures, capacity training plan,
monitoring plan, and budget estimates for implementation. Relevant elements of ESMP and ECOP
will be incorporated into project management by EDL in order to ensure effective implementation
throughout the preconstruction, construction and operation phases of the project.
The draft ESMP and ECoP have been prepared by EDL and reviewed by the Bank. The draft
ESMP and ECoP has been disclosed locally and in the InfoShop to address project impacts in
compliance with both GOL and World Banks' relevant policies for small scale installation works
pertain to the rehabilitation of distribution of medium voltage (127 km of 22kV MV system) and
low-voltage (239 km of 0.4 kV LV system) lines and the installation of electric meters,
replacement of capacitors (LV line), upgrading of conductors (on LV and MV lines) and
replacement and addition of transformers and power poles (for MV). The ECoP will be
incorporated as part of the contractor's contract.
Page 7 of 11


﻿Appropriate P-VLD of new poles installation include detailed documentation indicating the
appropriateness of the VLD, description of owners and users of land donated, procedures for
consultation and disclosure, informed consent of the person donating the land, legal
O
Q)          documentation indicating the transference of land donated; and grievance redress procedure and
mechanism.
In the unlikely event that involuntary resettlement will occur in the form of impacts on structures
or standing crops and trees, the RPF that was prepared by EDL will be applied.
Institutional and Implementation Arrangements
The Environment and Social (E&S) Office of EDL will be responsible for the implementation of
the proposed mitigation measures in the ESMP, ECoP, P-VLD and RPF. The E&S Office will be
responsible for ensuring, on a day-to-day basis, that the mitigation measures and monitoring
activities identified in the ESMP, ECoP, P-VLD and RPF are implemented. EDL capacity for
implementing environmental and social safeguard is strong. EDL has also experienced working
with the Bank on power sector projects (e.g. Rural Electrification Project I and II). With EDL
capacity, they will provide training to contractors involved in project construction on the
environmental and social safeguard. The training will be focused on: environmental protection
laws and regulations, environmental management good practices for power grid improvement;
including training on P-VLD.
In addition, EDL's individual E&S consultant will provide oversight and advice to EDL as needed
to ensure the ESMP and its monitoring plan is effectively implemented. Detailed Institutional
arrangements are described in the ESMP.
Gender Strategy
Women are more vulnerable to some types of impacts, therefore a draft gender strategy has been
prepared and included in the ESMP. It is expected that the project would proportionately benefit
female and male population through improved efficiency and reliability of power distribution. In
addition, targeted training of female EDL staff (about 20 percent of total staff) will be carried out
during implementation phase, which will be monitored and evaluated under the project results
a          framework. Potential additional financial support for Lao's electrification fund Power to the Poor
Program from this proposed project's financial benefits will benefit more women-headed
households.
Institutional Capacity Assessment
As an institution, EDL has worked with the Bank for over 20 years and is familiar with the Bank's
environmental and social safeguard policies. Currently, one Bank-financed project with EDL are
under supervision (Rural Electrification Phase II). In order to comply with the Bank requirement
as well as the Government of Lao PDR, under Rural Electrification Phase I and II EDL prepared
the Environmental Assessment Framework, the Resettlement Policy Framework and the Ethnic
People's Development Plan. Therefore, EDL is familiar with the Bank safeguard's policies. In
addition, EDL has been implementing numerous projects financed by other development financial
institutions, such as the ADB, which have similar safeguards policies as those of the Bank.
Most of the staff and internal consultants of EDL have qualified education background and
Page 8 of 11


﻿relevant project experience. However, the Bank will provide capacity building on safeguard for
EDL to successfully implement the project. As was mentioned before, as part of the project
implementation arrangements, an environmental and social team will include staff members from
EDL Environmental and Social Department with support from the E&S consultants, having the
O
Q)         responsibility to minimize the social and environmental impacts of the project during the
construction/installation and after completion of the project. The E&S team will monitor the
preparation and implementations of the ESMP, ECoP, RPF and P-VLD as necessary to minimize
the social and environmental impacts according to agreed policy frameworks for safeguards.
During the project preparation, the Bank team has provided a series of informal guidance on the
Bank's environmental and social safeguards policies to its counterparts in EDL. Numerous
meetings and discussions of the Bank team with its counterparts in EDL have also provided many
on-the-job training opportunities to the EDL project team. Also during the project implementation,
formal and informal training will be provided to EDL team to properly implement the ESMP,
ECOP, P-VLD and RPF. Training budgets have been allocated for project implementation stage as
described in the ESMP. EDL's E&S individual consultant will assist EDL to supervise the
implementation of the project, including the implementation of the ESMP.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders include those affected directly or indirectly, as well as the local governments and
goods and service suppliers, contractors, customers and suppliers of EDL. For stakeholders, in
addition to individual household census and sample survey respondents, several rounds of focus
group discussions (FGDs) and public consultations were conducted on April 3, 2015 for the
preparation of the ESMP
The purpose of each meeting or interview was to first convey information to the people regarding
the project, and secondly to seek feedback to gain an understanding of their perceptions of the
project, their aspirations and to receive their comments on how the project may affect them.
Written documentation on the project was provided, as well as oral presentations and discussions
with the meeting attendees or interviewees.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                         26-Mar-2015
Comments: Following public consultations the draft Environment and Social Management Plan,
the Environmental Codes of Practices, the Resettlement Policy Framework and the
Protocols for Voluntary Land Donation will be revised by EDL and reviewed and
cleared by the World Bank.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              24-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Mar-2015
Page 9 of 11I


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                          26-Mar-2015
Comments: Following public consultations the draft Environment and Social Management Plan,
the Environmental Codes of Practices, the Resettlement Policy Framework and the
Protocols for Voluntary Land Donation will be revised by EDL and reviewed and
cleared by the World Bank.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
a         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Page 10 of 1I


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Rome Chavapricha
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                  Date: 21-Apr-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)              Date: 21-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


