                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Apr-2018 | Report No: ISDSC24007




                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                                            Page 1 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                         Project Name                 Environmental Category   Country
                                                              Strengthening DRM
                           P166648                                                         B - Partial Assessment   Central Africa
                                                              Capacity in ECCAS
                           Team Leader(s)                     Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                    Investment Project
                           Prashant Singh                                                  GSU13
                                                                                                                    Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Financing (in USD Million)

                           SUMMARY                 -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                  0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                     0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00


                           DETAILS      -NewFin2




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective is to strengthen DRM coordination, planning and policy advisory capacity of the ECCAS
                           through regional collaboration and knowledge dissemination capacity of ECCAS. The project will accelerate the
                           effective implementation of a comprehensive disaster risk reduction and risk management framework in the ECCAS
                           region.

                           C. Project Description
                           The project is part of the European Union (EU) Africa, Caribbean and Pacific (ACP) cooperation program
                           “Building Disaster Resilience to Natural Hazards in Sub-Saharan African Regions, Countries and
                           Communities”, so-called “Building Disaster Resilience in SSA” financed under the 10th European
                           Development Fund (EDF). The overall objective of this program is to strengthen the resilience of sub-
                           Saharan African regions, countries and communities to the impacts of natural disasters, including the
                           potential impacts of climate change, to reduce poverty and promote sustainable development. To achieve
                           this objective, five Result areas[1] were identified, to be implemented by several partners, including the
                           African Development Bank (AfDB), African Union Commission (AUC), the United Nations International



                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                                                    Page 2 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS




                           Strategy for Disaster Reduction (UNISDR) and the Global Facility for Disaster Reduction and Recovery
                           (GFDRR), managed by the World Bank.

                           Result area 2 – “R2 - African Regional Economic Communities (RECs) have disaster risk reduction (DRR)
                           coordination, planning and policy advisory capacities operational to support their respective member states
                           and regional and sub-regional programs” – is implemented by the GFDRR through an additional EU
                           contribution of EUR 20 million to the ongoing “ACP-EU Natural Disaster Risk Reduction (NDRR) Single Donor
                           Trust Fund (SDTF) in its regional/sub-regional component (Window 1), with a particular focus on sub-Saharan
                           Africa.

                           The specific objective of Result 2 is to strengthen and accelerate the effective implementation of an African
                           comprehensive disaster risk reduction and risk management framework at regional level. This will be
                           achieved by providing targeted support to African RECs to strengthen their capacities for improved
Public Disclosure Copy




                           coordination, planning, policy advisory and knowledge dissemination to advance the regional Disaster Risk
                           Management (DRM) agenda and better support their respective member states in taking informed decisions
                           in building resilience to disasters. Activities are supporting and are aligned with the strategic approach
                           articulated by the AUC’s Program of Action for the Implementation of the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
                           Reduction 2015-2030 in Africa - PoA, the RECs strategies and the Sendai Framework for Disaster Risk
                           Reduction. Special attention will be given to indigenous peoples and local communities who are especially
                           vulnerable to, and disproportionately impacted by, climate change and natural disasters. They also play an
                           important role in climate mitigation and adaptation. The role for traditional/local knowledge is also to be
                           included in such strategies as stipulated in the Sendai Framework.

                           Result 2 is targeting four African RECs, namely the Economic Community for Central African States (ECCAS);
                           the Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS); the Intergovernmental Authority on
                           Development (IGAD); the Southern African Development Community (SADC), as well as their key partners
                           such as African universities and research centers, river basin authorities or technical organizations.

                           The ECCAS specific project will be implemented in two phases - the first phase is from the effectiveness of
                           this Grant till December 31, 2019 and the second phase will be from 1st January 2019 to 31 December
                           2019. This Recipient-Executed grant complements an existing Bank-Executed project (P154341). The Bank-
                           Executed project has the same components as the Recipient-Executed but implements different
                           complementary activities under the same program. The total budget available for ECCAS activities is US$ 5
                           million among which US$ 2,205,000 will be Recipient Executed.

                           The following section describes the five components of the project with corresponding budget and the
                           respective implementation as Recipient (including phase 1 for the present project) and Bank executed
                           activities.

                           Component 1: Regional Hazards/vulnerability identification and Risk mapping (RE US$200,000 with no
                           allocation in phase 1; BE US$620,000)



                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                                             Page 3 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS




                           This component will first provide ECCAS with a regional hazards/vulnerability identification and risks mapping
                           with a focus on major trans-boundary hazards. A geoportal “Water and Disaster risks” combining the ECCAS
                           Water Information System and the regional risk information database will be developed as well as a regional
                           Atlas. A pilot project will be further developed to address trans-boundary flood risks, including EWS and a
                           Contingency Planning simulation.

                           Intermediate Result Indicators:

                                       A Database is developed and uploaded, and geo portal is operational, and atlas published
                                       A Regional validation workshop has been organized
                                       At least one contingency plan for transboundary flood risks is developed
                                       ECCAS Expert is trained on Geoportal and GIS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 2: Capacity Building for Disaster Risk Reduction/Climate Change Adaptation (DRR/CCA) (RE
                           US$580,000 including phase 1: US$430,000; BE US$960,000)

                           This component will mainly provide support to ECCAS in (i) reinforcing member states capacity building and
                           institutional strengthening ensuring that member states capacity on DRM/CCA is enhanced and awareness is
                           raised to improving DRM measures implementation, (ii) building regional practice research and capacity
                           building collaboration with Academic/Technical centers of excellence, including internships for students, (iii)
                           creating a DRM/CCA website page to strengthen communication on DRR on the ECCAS, develop
                           communication tools, and (iv) supporting Gender mainstreaming of ECCAS Gender Action Plan in the
                           DRR/CCA plan of Action.

                           Intermediate Result Indicators:

                                   At least 3 students have done internships within ECCAS HQ
                                   At least 8 countries have received support on office equipment and human capacity improvement
                                    and training for users
                                   Training modules on DRM and CCA are developed and conducted for ECCAS Sct and MS
                                   Communication tools and developed and disseminated, Social media communication campaigns are
                                    developed
                                   A web site page for DRM/CCA is developed
                                   At least 5 ECCAS FP have been facilitated on knowledge exchange missions for national platform or
                                    coordination mechanisms
                                   Gender action plan mainstreamed in national strategies and plans

                           Component 3: Strengthening of Policy Dialogue and legislation on DRM (RE US$425,000 including phase 1:
                           US$265,000; BE US$650,000).

                           The component will include the review of national and regional policies and legislations on disaster risk
                           reduction and climate change adaptation to promote regional harmonization and coordination at regional
                           level. Workshops and seminars on sensitization of ECCAS Parliamentary Network for Disaster Resilience

                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                                              Page 4 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS




                           (REPARC) will be organized to promote DRR in National legislations; an ECCAS Hydromet Forum will be
                           organized; and Central Africa DRR Platform events will also be organized under this component.

                           Intermediate Result Indicators:

                                   An action plan for modernization of hydromet services at regional and national levels is developed
                                   At least 4 countries have their strategies drafted or aligned to SF
                                   REPARC is reinforced and DRM advocacy is made in MS national parliaments

                                        Component 4: Enhance Regional Capacity for Preparedness, Response & Post Disaster Assessment
                                        and Recovery/Reconstruction Planning (RE US$200,000 including phase 1: US$100,000; BE
                                        US$563,000)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                        The component will consist of enhancing ECCAS coordination capacities thru training national sectoral
                                        experts on assessment, planning and coordination of post-disaster needs and recovery framework,
                                        develop national contingency plans and undertake a study on ECCAS Regional and Member States'
                                        hydromet and flood/drought Early warning systems and services.

                                        Intermediate Result Indicators:

                                   At least 4 PDNA/DRF trainings have been undertaken
                                   At least 2 countries have developed National contingency plans and validated it
                                   A detailed Regional Technical Report is produced on HydroMet EWS institutions and capacities and a
                                    clear set of recommendations for strengthening is provided

                                        Component 5: Implementation technical and coordination capacity at the ECCAS Secretariat is
                                        strengthened (RE US$802,000 including phase 1: US$470,000)

                                   The component will include the general administrative costs of the Project Implementation Unit,
                                    staffing and equipment, including a Senior DRM Specialist, an Administrative and Financial Specialist,
                                    a Procurement Specialist, an Accountant, a DRM Junior expert and a Monitoring and Evaluation
                                    Specialist.

                           Intermediate Result Indicators:

                                   The PIU is set up and operational
                                   Trainings for Administrative and Financial Specialist and a Procurement Specialist have been
                                    undertaken

                           [1] R1 - Extended Programme of Action for the Implementation of the Africa Regional Strategy for Disaster
                           Risk Reduction operational (PoA). To be implemented by the AUC and the UNISDR.




                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                                                Page 5 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS




                           R2 - African Regional Economic Communities (RECs) have DRR coordination, planning and policy advisory
                           capacities operational to support their respective member states and regional and sub-regional programs. To
                           be implemented by the GFDRR.

                           R3 - Core capacities of the specialized national and Regional Climate Centers (RCCs) are improved, to meet
                           the needs of DRM agencies and socio-economic sectors for effective use of weather and climate services and
                           Community-focused and real-time Early Warning Systems (EWS). To be implemented by the AfDB.

                           R4 - African countries have improved knowledge of risks through, the compilation of historical disaster
                           related data to inform the assessment and modelling of future risks. To be implemented by the UNISDR.

                           R5 – Multi-risk financing strategies are developed at regional, national and local levels to help African
                           countries make informed decisions and to mitigate the socio-economic, fiscal and financial impacts of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           disasters. To be implemented by the GFDRR.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will be implemented at and through the secretariat of the ECCAS based in Libreville, Gabon.
                          However, the eleven ECCAS member states are beneficiaries, covering a population of around 181 million
                          inhabitants. ECCAS covers an area of 6,667,421 sq. km (around 22% of Africa) and the dominant land cover is
                          tropical rainforest. The key regional environmental challenges are land degradation, drought, climate change
                          integration into sectoral policies, desertification and high-water demand pressure for multiple uses. Key
                          regional social challenges relate to inclusion of the forest dependent communities in decision-making who
                          live near, occupy or rely these forests for their material, social and physical well-being.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          ECCAS adopted in 2017 a General Policy on environment and natural resources management. The fight
                          against desertification, drought, land degradation, and climate change are imbedded in this Policy. In 2009,
                          three experts were hired: (i) Environmental economics and value of biodiversity expert; (ii) Forest Economic
                          and sustainable management of forests expert; (iii) fisheries resources and marine ecosystems expert. The
                          environmental expert is no longer in service. The Environmental economics and Biodiversity experts will
                          oversee monitoring and managing environmental issues, including safeguards compliance. ECCAS has
                          implemented a Bank financed project but the DRM Unit has no experience of Bank financed projects. The
                          Bank-funded Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) closed in December 2015.
                          For both project development objective and overall implementation, it was rated "moderately satisfactory".


                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                                              Page 6 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS




                          The design of the current project has benefited from the CAADP experience. ECCAS’s capacity to address and
                          manage environmental and social safeguard related issues remains limited. To bridge this gap, the Project
                          will establish a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to support implementation of the Project, and will
                          strengthen the capacity of ECCAS environmental economic and natural management experts to take care of
                          safeguards and ecosystem services during project implementation. There will be an agreement with the
                          client on the process to address environmental and social issues associated with implementation. This
                          agreement will be in the form of an agreed TOR and will be ensure that review of policies, strategies and plan
                          of actions and legislations: - captures the consideration of ecosystem services in the context of hazard and
                          risk assessment; - considers relevant Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and
                          Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) as decision-making tools for mainstreaming DRM
                          strategies and measures into policies, plans and projects; - considers the guiding principles (C & H) set out in
                          the Sendai Framework, which underscores opportunities for environment and social inclusion in the context
                          of disaster prevention or reduction; - involves adequate consultation with and engagement of key
Public Disclosure Copy




                          stakeholders; - properly mainstreams occupational safety, environmental and social safeguards
                          considerations.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Alexandra C. Bezeredi, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Cyrille Valence Ngouana Kengne, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project            Triggered?               Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01              Yes                  The project will not include any civil works.
                                                                                                In addition, the pilot project that will be
                                                                                                developed to transboundary flood risks,
                                                                                                including EWS and a Contingency Planning
                                                                                                simulation will no entail civil works. Studies
                                                                                                on ECCAS Regional and Member States'
                                                                                                hydromet and flood/drought Early warning
                                                                                                systems and services, will not be used for
                                                                                                implementing any physical works. The TA
                                                                                                lead to the completion of technical or
                                                                                                engineering designs or other outputs in
                                                                                                preparation for the construction of physical
                                                                                                infrastructure. However, the TA will
                                                                                                undertake a review of national policies,
                                                                                                strategies and plan of actions and
                                                                                                legislations on DRR/CCA to align with
                                                                                                Sendai Framework. This will be an
                                                                                                opportunity to incorporate environmental


                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                                                 Page 7 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS



                                                                             and social considerations into the proposed
                                                                             review of national policies, strategies and
                                                                             plan of actions and legislations on DRR/CCA
                                                                             to align them with Sendai Framework.
                                                                             Because of the above explanation.
                                                                             Reviewed policies, strategies and
                                                                             legislations are likely to have
                                                                             environmental and social impacts when
                                                                             implemented through future DRR/CCA
                                                                             programs or projects. The OP/BP 4.01 is
                                                                             then triggered. The Project is classified as
                                                                             Category is B. However, the project will
                                                                             follow the “Interim Guidelines on the
                                                                             Application of Safeguard Policies to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-
                                                                             Financed Projects and Trust Funds
                                                                             Administered by the Bank, dated January
                                                                             2014. Particularly on Bank financed
                                                                             activities that may fall under the Interim
                                                                             Guidelines' Type 1 (Strengthening client
                                                                             capacity) and Type 2 (Assisting in
                                                                             formulation of policies, programs, plans,
                                                                             strategies or legal frameworks etc.),
                                                                             respectively.
                                                                             By appraisal, there will be an
                                                                             agreement/agreed ToR with the client on
                                                                             the need and process to incorporate
                                                                             environmental and social considerations
                                                                             into the review of national policies,
                                                                             strategies and plan of actions and
                                                                             legislations on DRR/CCA to align them with
                                                                             Sendai Framework

                                                                             Review of national policies, strategies and
                                                                             plan of actions and legislations on DRR/CCA
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   No   to align with Sendai Framework, will not
                                                                             lead to any detrimental effects on
                                                                             protected areas.
                                                                             Review of national policies, strategies and
                                                                             plan of actions and legislations on DRR/CCA
                                                                             to align with Sendai Framework, will not be
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                            No
                                                                             used to promote commercial forest
                                                                             management activities and reforestation
                                                                             activities.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                       No   Not applicable.


                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                             Page 8 of 10
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS




                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11              No                  Not applicable
                                                                                                  The project will not include any activities in
                                                                                                  areas where Indigenous Peoples are
                                                                                                  present, per the requirements of OP 4.10.
                                                                                                  The Review of national policies, strategies
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No                  and plan of actions and legislations on
                                                                                                  DRR/CCA to align with Sendai Framework,
                                                                                                  will not lead to any adverse impacts on
                                                                                                  Indigenous Peoples and traditional local
                                                                                                  communities.
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No                  Not applicable
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No                  Not applicable
                                                                                                  Although the project will contribute to
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  address regional DRM challenges, it will not
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No                  involve any works or studies, which impact
                                                                                                  international waterways in the sense of
                                                                                                  OP/BP 7.50
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No                  Not applicable


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           26-Apr-2018
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           ECCAS has already implemented a number of World Bank financed projects in the previous years but the
                           DRM Unit has not yet managed a World Bank financed project. ECCAS’s capacity to address and manage
                           environmental and social safeguard related issues remains limited. To bridge this gap, the project will
                           establish a small Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to support the implementation of the project, and will
                           strengthen the capacity of ECCAS environmental economic and natural management experts to take care of
                           safeguard and ecosystem service relevant issues during project preparation and implementation. There will
                           be an agreement with the client on the need and process to address environmental and social issues
                           associated with the results of the TA. Such an agreement will take the form of an agreed TOR and will be set
                           to make sure that review of national policies, strategies and plan of actions and legislations: • Strengthening
                           of the capacity of ECCAS environmental economic and natural management experts to take care of
                           safeguards and ecosystem service relevant issues during project preparation and implementation. This
                           training will be delivered during the establishment of Project Implementation Unit (PIU). • By appraisal, there
                           should be an agreement/agreed ToR with the client on the need and process to incorporate environmental
                           and social considerations into the proposed review of national policies, strategies and plan of actions and
                           legislations on DRR/CCA to align them with Sendai Framework. A stakeholder consultation and strategic

                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                                                   Page 9 of 10
                                   The World Bank
                                   Strengthening DRM Capacity in ECCAS




                              communications plan will also be prepared and approved prior to appraisal. • The above-mentioned ToR will
                              be set to make sure that review of national policies, strategies and plan of actions and legislations: o captures
                              the consideration of ecosystem services in the context of hazard and risk assessment; o considers if relevant
                              Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) and Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
                              (ESIA) as decision-making tools for mainstreaming hazard and disaster risk reduction strategies and measures
                              into policies, plans and projects; o considers the guiding Principles (C & H) set out in the Sendai Framework,
                              which underscores opportunities for Environment in the context of disaster prevention or reduction; o
                              involves adequate consultation and engagement of key stakeholders; o properly mainstreams occupational
                              safety and safeguards considerations.


                              APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Team Leader(s):                                  Prashant Singh

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Maman-Sani Issa                                   23-Apr-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst                         23-Apr-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Apr 24, 2018                                                                                                                            Page 10 of 10
