INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR6034
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Oct-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Mexico                     Project ID:  P100438
Project Name: Adaptation to Climate Change Impacts on the Coastal Wetlands in the Gulf of
Mexico (P100438)
Task Team       Renan Alberto Poveda
Leader(s):
Estimated       1 1-Feb-2009               Estimated    23-Nov-2010
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN04                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
GEF Focal       Climate change
Area:
Sector:         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (100%)
Theme:          Climate change (39%), Biodiversity (22%), Water resource management (39%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      23.50            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                        17.14
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                4.50
US, Govt. of                                                     0.77
JAPAN Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants                          0.55
JAPAN Gov. of (excl. Ministry of Finance - PHRD Grants)          0.55
Total                                                           23.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 8


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
0
2. Current Global Environmental Objective(s)
3. Project Description
Component 1. Design of Selected Adaptation Measures and Technical Coordination of the Project
Detailed design of the adaptation measures to be implemented under the Project, taking into account
federal programs of the Recipient that deal with wetland management in the Pilot Areas. Provision of
technical assistance to facilitate modeling, generation of data, analysis, and access to information and
long-term remote sensing of the Pilot Areas. Provision of technical assistance to facilitate the
technical coordination of the Project.
Component 2. Implementation of Pilot Adaptation Measures in Highly Vulnerable Wetlands
Development and implementation of, inter alia, comprehensive wetland management plans and land
zoning for the Pilot Areas (including, inter alia, specific measures and procedures to prevent and
otherwise address deforestation and illegal construction) and, in connection therewith, the
implementation of a technical monitoring system and the carrying out of adaptation measures as
follows.
Sub-component 2.1: Wetlands of the Papaloapan Rivershed, Alvarado Lagoon (Veracruz). Under
the Alvarado Agreement for the Veracruz Pilot Area, taking all appropriate action needed for: (i) the
integration of climate concerns in the conservation and management strategy of the Alvarado
Lagoon, including the adoption of a plan for the enforcement of a buffer zone around the Lagoon;
and (ii) the construction of a pilot stabilization barrier to buffer extreme weather events and future
Srises in sea levels.
Sub-component 2.2: Wetlands of Carmen-Pajonal-Machona (Tabasco). Under the Cardenas
Agreement for the Tabasco Pilot Area, taking all appropriate action needed f or: (i) the development
o        of a wetland conservation and management strategy, including the updating of land zoning
regulations; (ii) the carrying out of pilot restoration and reforestation with native species along
biological corridors; and ( iii) the carrying out of pilot strengthening of the sandbars that separate
lagoons from the sea.
Sub-component 2.3: Biosphere Reserve Sian Kaan, Punta Allen (Quintana Roo). Under the INE-
IMTA-CONANP Agreement for the Sian Kaan Pilot Area, taking all appropriate action needed for:
(i) the strengthening of the Sian Kaan Pilot Area#s monitoring system and protected area
management plan to include climate change impacts; and (ii) the carrying out of pilot re-population
of coastal reefs to maintain their buffering capability and protection of the coastal wetland.
If needed, any of the following areas will be considered as a possible substitute area to any of the
four pilot areas named above. Selection of a substitute will be done in the prior agreement with the
Bank after carrying out the relevant assessments required by Bank policy, and based on a detailed
implementation plan satisfactory to the Bank:
Page 2 of 8


﻿1)    Rio San Fernando-Laguna la Nacha. Tamaulipas
2)    Rio Coatzacoalcos (Uxpanapan-Laguna El Colorado). Veracruz
3)    Cancin (Laguna Nichupte-Nizuc). Quintana Roo
4)     Sistema los Petenes. Campeche.
o
Component 3: Assessment of the Impacts of Climate Change on Water Resources Planning at a
National Level and in Coastal Wetlands including the Identification of Potential Response Options
Development of climate change impact scenarios on the Recipient's national water resources,
hydrologic characterization of pilot emblematic basins with a focus on coastal wetlands and
associated watersheds and identification of response options and measures that could be adopted at a
national level to incorporate the anticipated impacts of climate change on water resource planning.
Component 4: Project Management
Coordination of the administrative, financial management, procurement, and safeguard aspects of
the Project.
The government of Mexico (GoM) has requested the following key modifications to the project: (i)
withdrawal of all activities and implementation arrangements associated to the pilot site in
Tamaulipas, due to insecurity in the State; (ii) reallocation of grant proceeds in order to make use of
the released funds from the Tamaulipas pilot and enable remaining project activities to be finalized;
(iii) adjust the project counterpart from INE to INECC and modify the implementation arrangements
accordingly; (iv) modify the definition of operational cost and add training and workshops as an
eligible expenditure in order to broaden eligible expenses under this grant; (v) modify the definition
of the proposed activities related to the pilot sites in Laguna de Alvarado (Veracruz), and in the
Sistema Lagunar Carmen-Pajonal-Machona (Tabasco); (vi) adjust Project indicators in order to better
reflect and measure the achievement of the Project's Development Objective (PDO) and Intermediate
Results; and (vii) an extension to the closing date of the project for one additional year. Performance
of Safeguard implementation has been satisfactory up to date.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The adaptation measures will be implemented in the wetlands of a) Laguna de Alvarado (Veracruz);
b) Carmen-Pajonal-Machona (Tabasco); and c) Punta Allen (Quintana Roo). These wetlands were
selected during the formulation phase of the Project through a process that responds to the magnitude
of the impacts induced by climate change; the value of the compromised economic and
environmental services; its global biodiversity value; the availability and readiness of local
institutional capacity, and the participation of the local community. The areas around these wetlands
do not have comprehensive land zoning and all except Punta Allen lack wetland management plans.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alonso Zarzar Casis (GSURR)
Dora Patricia Andrade (GEN04)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         No major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated.
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Minor environmental impacts may be expected from some
on-the-ground investments. The Project is designed to be
entirely positive from an environmental point of view,
Page 3 of 8


﻿particularly by protecting vulnerable ecosystems from the
impact of GCC. Some expected direct positive impacts
include: (i) reduced vulnerability of coastal ecosystems in
the pilot sites; (ii) reduced uncertainty of impacts of GCC
and improved planning of stressed water resources and
ecosystem conservation; (iii) mitigation of impacts of
unsustainable land uses; (iv) reduced vulnerability of and
planning and management of water supply in selected
urban areas; (v) increased public awareness of adaptation
needs and increased social and institutional capacity to
manage the ecosystems; and (vi) strengthened resilience
of environmental services in the face of climate change
impacts. An Environmental Management Framework has
been prepared and was disclosed in-country and through
the Bank's InfoShop on February 10, 2008. An
Environmental Assessment will be performed as part of
the design of the adaptation measures.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          This policy has been triggered considering that some of
4.04                                  the adaptation measures will take place in the protected
area of the Sian Kaan Natural Reserve, and on key
wetland ecosystems.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes          This policy has not been triggered considering that the
Project will support activities such as reforestation with
native species to create biological corridors will provide
new sources of employment and income to the local
population and will not entail restriction of access to
natural resource use, but would rather improve natural
conditions and natural productivity, helping also growing
ecotourism.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No            There are not Pest issues as part of the project.
Physical Cultural        No           While wetlands often have a cultural value, since in many
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  of them there are places of
archaeological or historical importance recognized all
over the world, the selected sites are not not known to be
in specific areas of archaeological value. Nonetheless,
through the EA the corresponding measures would be
addressed in case aspects of cultural value are identified.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           The Project is not expected to trigger the social safeguard
BP 4.10                               policies. There are no Indigenous Peoples in the four pilot
sites selected for Project implementation. The
conservation efforts and potential creation of buffer zones
will not restrict access to natural resource use in the case
of the Alvarado site. The other adaptation measures are
not relevant to the social safeguard policies.
Involuntary Resettlement No           Activity directly/indirectly related to the Project will not
OP/BP 4.12                            cause any Involuntary Resettlement
Page 4 of 8


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Not applicable
4.37
Projects on International  No        Not applicable
U         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           Not applicable.
O
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project does not trigger the social safeguard policies. There are no Indigenous Peoples in the
four pilot sites selected for project implementation. The conservation efforts and creation of buffer
zones will not restrict access to natural resource use in the case of the Alvarado site. The other
adaptation measures are not relevant to the social safeguard policies. The preparation of land
zoning regulations and management plans will incorporate social analysis to assess potential direct
or indirect impacts of these regulations and plans on local population living in the relevant areas.
IMTA will sign agreements with the municipalities in the project areas and CONANP to stipulate
that such zoning regulations and management plans shall not cause subsequent physical or
economic displacement of population and are consulted at each stage with local stakeholders and
communities. The design and preparation of these plans will seek maximum participation and
community benefits.
No major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated. Minor environmental impacts may be
expected from some on-the-ground investments. The project is designed to be entirely positive
from an environmental point of view, particularly by protecting vulnerable ecosystems from the
impact of GCC. Some expected direct positive impacts include: (i) reduced vulnerability of coastal
O
U           ecosystems in the pilot sites; (ii) reduced uncertainty of impacts of GCC and improved planning of
stressed water resources and ecosystem conservation; (iii) mitigation of impacts of unsustainable
o           land uses; (iv) reduced vulnerability of and planning and management of water supply in selected
urban areas; (v) increased public awareness of adaptation needs and increased social and
o           institutional capacity to manage the ecosystems; and (vi) strengthened resilience of environmental
services in the face of climate change impacts. An Environmental Assessment will be performed
as pa rt of the design of the adaptation measures.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Not applicable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A consultation process has been undertaken at the four project sites. At each site, meetings and
forums were held with local authorities (municipalities, state environmental authorities),
communities' grass-root organizations such as fishermen cooperatives, farmer cooperatives, and
Page 5 of 8


﻿local and regional NGOs and university development institutions as well as the participating
institutions (SEMARNAT, CONANP, CONAFOR and CONABIO). A list of participants at each
site is available in the project files. The consultation process has resulted in confirming the
measures that will be undertaken at each site. An Environmental Management Framework has
O
been prepared and disclosed in country as well as through the Bank's InfoShop on February 10,
2008.
Wetland Panuco River, Altamira (Ciudad Madero), Tampico Lagoon System Corridor in
Tamaulipas:
The consultation was lead by the Municipality of Tampico. It included a significant participation
from the most important local and State institutions as well as by several university professors and
students. More than 200 people attended the meeting. The participants included representatives
from the municipality of Tampico, the government of Tamaulipas, environmental and social
NGOs, State universities such as UNE, U.A.T., and UVB Valle de Mexico, environmental State
agencies, private environmental companies and federal government environmental agencies.
Wetland Papaloapan River, Alvarado Lagoon, Veracruz:
The consultation was lead by the Municipality of Alvarado. It had an impressive number of
representatives from grass root organizations, local enterprises as well as research institutions.
More than 150 attended the meeting called by the Major of Alvarado. The participants included
representatives from the Municipality of Alvarado, the government of Veracruz, around twenty
fishermen cooperatives, local conservation NGOs, the Fishing National Institute, representatives
from adjacent municipalities, women's cooperatives, research institutions from State universities,
and members of CONAGUA.
Wetland of the Lagoon System Carmen Pajonal, Machona, Tabasco:
The consultation was lead by the municipalities of Paraiso and Cardenas. It included a significant
number of representatives (estimated over 70 participants) from the local governments and the
state of Tabasco. The participants included Cabinet members of the State of Tabasco, mayors, high
municipal government officials as well as representatives from PEMEX, CONAFOR, CFE,
leaders from the Ejidos, conservation NGOs, farmers and fishermen cooperatives, foresters, cattle
raising associations, and members from the Climate Change State Council.
Wetland of Punta Allen, Estuary System Boca Paila, Biosphere Reserve Sian Kaan, Quintana
Roo:
The consultation was lead by the municipalities of Felipe Carrillo, Tulum and Solidaridad and
included state and federal authorities. It included the participation of the local fishermen,
representatives from local NGOs associated with the Sian Kaan reserve and state university
members.
During these meetings presentations were made on climate change in general, expected scenarios
of CC for Mexico and in particular for the wetlands in the Gulf of Mexico, and the potential
adaptation measures that can be implemented through this project and other investments. There
was ample room for interventions from the stakeholders, for questions and proposals around the
issue of wetland protection and improving resilience for CC, as well as regarding improvement of
natural resource use.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Page 6 of 8


﻿The project will benefit farmers, rural communities, fishermen cooperatives, eco-tourism
activities through the implementation of interventions such as reforestation, water resource
management, etc. Rural communities will benefit from project interventions and will be actively
involved in the implementation and management of these adaptation measures.
Each pilot design will undergo environmental assessments to make sure benefits for ecosystems
and benefits for people that depend upon these ecosystems are maximized.
The project will use best environmental practices; communities will be involved in the monitoring
efforts.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               10-Feb-2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                            10-Feb-2009
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Mexico                                                    10-Feb-2008
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]    NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes[  ] No[X]  NA [  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Page 7 of 8


﻿Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [X]    NA [    ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [    ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Renan Alberto Poveda
Approved By
O
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)              Date: 01-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Raul Ivan Alfaro Pelico (PMGR)       Date: 01-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


