                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC16091

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Ukraine                        Project ID:      P158379
                            Project Name:   SUPPORT TO EXTRACTIVE INDUSTRIES TRANSPARENCY
                                            INITIATIVE COMPLIANCE PROCESS PROJECT
                            Team Leader(s): Ilhem Salamon
                            Estimated Date 15-Dec-2015
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GEEDR                          Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Oil and gas (100%)
                            Theme(s):            Other accountability/anti-corruption (50%), Participation and civic
                                                 engagement (30%), Other environment and natural resources management
                                                 (20%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.4                           Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Extractives Global Programmatic Support                                                      0.4
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to assist the Government of Ukraine in implementing the EITI
                           agenda
                           C. Project Description
                           Following an extensive advocacy effort led by local civil society organizations, the Cabinet of
                           Ministers of Ukraine passed a resolution "on Ukraine's accession to the EITI” on September 9, 2009.
                           Ukraine was admitted as an EITI candidate on 17 October 2013 after successfully completing the
                           four “sign-up” steps including the development of a work plan, which was validated by the EITI
                           Board. Ukraine as required to publish its first EITI report by October 17, 2015 with the objective to
                           become compliant by October 2016.

                           Given that enhancing transparency and accountability represents a substantial challenge in the
                           country, the MSG that was formed in 2012 decided to be carefully optimistic about what it could
                         realistically achieve and limited the coverage of the first EITI report to the oil and gas sector, while
                         the second EITI Report would be extended to mining. The publication of EITI Reports that “include
                         contextual information about the [overall] extractive industries” (requirement 3) and are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         “comprehensive [and] include full government disclosure of extractive industry revenues, and
                         disclosure of all material payments to government by oil, gas and mining companies” (requirement
                         4) are requirements for EITI compliance. Ukraine will, therefore, have to publish its second EITI
                         report before the validation period starts on October 17, 2016.

                         Soon after its admission as a candidate country, however, Ukraine experienced a prolonged political
                         and economic crisis. The EITI process was understandably delayed but kept moving forward. The
                         MSG continued to meet reasonably regularly throughout the crisis and instead of seeking a voluntary
                         suspension, opted to move ahead with preparations for EITI Reporting, in the hope that the reporting
                         process could begin quickly once the political situation stabilized.

                         Despite the challenging geopolitical context, substantial progress has been made with the EITI
                         process in Ukraine. On 16 June 2015, the Parliament of Ukraine adopted Law No. 521-VIII “On
                         Amending Certain Laws of Ukraine with Respect to Strengthening Transparency in Extractive
                         Industries in Ukraine” (the “Law”) mandating the participation of all relevant parties in EITI
                         reporting. The Law was approved by the President and came into force on 12 July 2015. The
                         Ministry of Energy and Coal Industry has also developed bylaws specifying the scope of EITI
                         reporting, entities required to participate, and the implications of non-participation. These bylaws are
                         expected to be adopted by the Cabinet of Ministers by the new calendar year. The laws were
                         prepared to enable the disclosure of financial information and business activities of Ukrainian
                         extractive companies ahead of the submission of the EITI report due by 17 October 2016. As a result
                         of the bylaws still not being adopted, the Independent Administrator in charge of developing the first
                         EITI Report for Ukraine experienced difficulties in collecting data from several major players such
                         as the State Fiscal Service and Ukrnafta. The Ukraine MSG, therefore, decided to request a deadline
                         extension for the publication of the first EITI Report to ensure that it would be as comprehensive and
                         meaningful as possible. The request for extension was granted by the EITI Board on December 4
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2015.

                         While the preparation of the first EITI report necessitated substantial effort and demonstrated a
                         strong leadership and commitment from the Ukraine MSG, the challenges ahead are significant. The
                         first EITI report was published on December 4, 2015. To ensure the publication of a second EITI
                         report, covering all extractive industries by October 2016, much effort will be needed to allow the
                         Ukraine MSG to (i) communicate extensively and effectively on the EITI requirements and process,
                         (ii) engage all relevant stakeholders in the EITI process by providing them with enhanced capacity,
                         and (iii) build the analytical and legal work needed to underpin the reform agenda associated with the
                         EITI compliance process. The proposed grant is meant to support these critical efforts, the
                         publication of the next EITI reports and other key activities needed to ensure the sustainability and
                         mainstreaming of EITI in Ukraine.

                         Project Components

                         The proposed grant would be a follow-on grant to an EITI MDTF grant (Ukraine EITI
                         Implementation Support Project, P128405) which financed the establishment of Ukraine’s national
                         EITI Secretariat and the first EITI report’s preparation and dissemination. The proposed grant is
                         meant to push EITI implementation in Ukraine forward and support critical efforts needed to help the
                         country reach EITI compliance. A follow-up grant is needed to ensure the sustainability and
                         mainstreaming of EITI in Ukraine. The signing of key contracts under the proposed project will be
                         needed to trigger access to a follow-on grant.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: EITI Implementation Support (US$ 175,000). This component will support the
                         activities essential to EITI implementation and meeting Ukraine’s obligations as an EITI candidate
                         country to reach compliance. These activities include:

                         •        Annual EITI reports for Ukraine (US$ 150,000). Recruitment of an Independent
                         Administrator (IA) in charge of the preparation of one EITI report covering all extractive industries
                         for the calendar years 2014 and 2015.

                         •       Sub-committees and regional MSG meetings (US$ 25,000). Costs of meetings of the sub-
                         national coordination units recently created by the MSG to broaden involvement in the EITI process
                         and regional MSG meetings for the first year of implementation.

                         When additional Extractives Global Programmatic Support (EGPS) financing becomes available to
                         Ukraine, a follow-on project will be prepared with the objectives to use the funds to finance: (i) sub-
                         committee and regional MSG meetings for the second year of implementation (US$25,000); (ii) a
                         review of the legal and regulatory framework of the extractive industries including a needs
                         assessment for additional policy, reform or investment. The review and needs assessment, and any
                         underpinning work would be prepared in compliance with and taking into account the Bank's
                         safeguards and related operational policies. (US$ 400,000); and (iii) a feasibility study for setting up
                         an integrated government system for generating EITI data more efficiently (US$300,000).

                         Component B: Capacity Building Activities (US$ 75,000). Building on lessons learnt from the
                         preparation of the first report, it will be important to help operators and state agencies better
                         understand the EITI requirements. Under this Component, the project will thus support advisory
                         services for state agencies and companies operating in the extractives industries to comply with EITI
                         requirements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         When additional EGPS financing becomes available to Ukraine, the funds will finance: (i) additional
                         training to deepen Ukraine EITI MSG and National Secretariat knowledge of issues associated with
                         resource management (US$ 75,000); (ii) core training on EITI and natural resources management
                         tailored for all relevant stakeholders government officials, parliamentarians, companies operating in
                         the Extractives Industries (EI), civil society (including NGOs, the media, and youth) on matters
                         related to the extractive industries, EITI Standard, and overall transparency in the sector (US$
                         50,000); and (iii) tailored training to investigative journalists on reporting on EI and EITI (US$
                         50,000).

                         Component C: Communication and Outreach (US$ 60,000). This component will support the
                         implementation of the Ukraine EITI Communication Strategy for the first year of project
                         implementation and will include the following activities:

                         •       Print and visual media outreach campaigns (US$ 25,000). Support for the EITI National
                         Secretariat to publish and disseminate crucial information on EITI implementation through radio,
                         TV, and print media outreach campaigns, in order to inform the public on the overall extractives
                         industry, EITI implementation and related events;

                         •       Organization of awareness raising events (US$ 30,000). Round tables, press conferences,
                           conferences, workshops will be organized to increase the overall understanding of the key issues in
                           the management of the extractives sectors.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           •        Internet and social media activities (US$ 5,000). Support for the management of a Ukraine
                           EITI website and social media accounts that contains information specifically related to the EITI
                           implementation in Ukraine as well as wider information on activities related to transparency of
                           extractive industries in Ukraine, as well as global news and trends on EITI implementation
                           experiences from other countries.

                           When additional EGPS financing becomes available to Ukraine, the funds will be used to finance a
                           second year of implementation.

                           Component D: Project Management (USD$ 90,000). This component will support the costs of the
                           EITI National Secretariat staff (National Coordinator of the Secretariat, Financial, Procurement and
                           Public Relations Consultants) and provide support for the operating costs of day to day activities
                           carried out by the EITI Secretariat, under the oversight of the MSG. GoU covers the costs of office
                           space and associated utility costs, while the grant will cover the operation costs associated including
                           office supply, travel costs related to the work of the Secretariat and of MSG members, office
                           maintenance, internet, phone, banking charges.

                           While the cost described above will be covered for one year of project implementation, another year
                           of implementation could be financed when additional EGPS financing becomes available to Ukraine.
                           Triggers will be added to the project paper for the completion of specific actions during this phase
                           before financing for the next phase kicks in.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project is a technical assistance for Ukraine. It is meant at enhancing transparency and
                           accountability in extractive industries’ revenue management. It involves no physical investment or
Public Disclosure Copy




                           recommendation that would be relevant for safeguard analysis.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not relevant for the project.

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No               This operation does not trigger any particular
                           BP 4.01                                               safeguards policies as the activities are
                                                                                 essentially training in nature.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Ilhem Salamon
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Brandon Enrique Carter (SA)                                  Date: 25-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Paulo De Sa (PMGR)                                           Date: 25-Nov-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
