                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR18612
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                              Project ID:           P148471
                            Project Name:      Scaling-up the Peer-to-Peer Learning in Public Finance at the LSG Level in the
                                               Kyrgyz Republic - SUPPL (P148471)
                            Task Team          Gregory Kisunko,Zhanybek Ybraiym Uulu
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated                                                       Estimated
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GGO15                                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            Sub-national government administration (60%), General public administration
                                               sector (40%)
                            Theme:             Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (60%),
                                               Decentralization (20%), Other public sector governance (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         0.00           Total Bank Financing:                                            0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                               Financing Gap                                                                                            0.00
                               Total                                                                                                    0.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a     No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                            3. Project Description


                                                                                 Page 1 of 4
                         Component 1: Project management, including Community of Practice building activities. This
                         component will fund the following activities.
                         (a)      Strengthening existing Secretariat through additional hiring and capacity building. The first
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tasks of the Secretariat will be supporting the Implementation Agency in developing and adoption
                         detailed rules of operation and project implementation plan. The Secretariat will be in charge of
                         effective implementation of all project activities. The Secretariat will be also supporting organization
                         and functioning of Communities of Practice (COPs), reporting to the World Bank and any other
                         project related issues including, but not limited to project logistics, administration, and coordination
                         with resource persons (RPs), other government agencies and the World Bank.
                         (b)      Addressing through PTP learning (i) ?just-in-time? budget-related demands of the LSG units,
                         e.g. new requirement on budget reporting; (ii) laws and regulations that affect LSG abilities to
                         function, e.g. regulations ion land allocation for pastures, licensing fees, etc. This will be done by
                         constant communication with the COP members and in collaboration with them defining topics for
                         the upcoming PTP events. It is expected that majority of topics for PTP activities will be planned not
                         more than for 6 months ahead of event.
                         (c)      This component will also cover activities related to project oversight by the Steering
                         Committee. It is expected that at least one countrywide COP ? financial officers? COP ? will be
                         formally established by the end of the project. The formal organizational arrangements for the other
                         two COPs ? local council members and heads of LSG units ? may differ due to the election cycle and
                         elected nature of their positions. A more detailed description of the roles of Secretariat, COPs,
                         Steering Committee, etc. are shown in the Diagram 1 below.

                         Component 2: Organization and delivery of learning events to the Resource Persons. This component
                         will fund organization and delivery of PTP learning and training events for 40 rayon level Resource
                         Persons (RPs) in each COP that will help improve their understanding of PFM at the local level and
                         help them be effective leaders and resource persons of rayon-level communities of practice and to
                         sustain COP at the rayon level. It is expected that each COP will have one resource person per rayon
                         and that these people will be selected among the most knowledgeable and active members of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         communities of practice (i.e. they will be local civil servants (financial officers), elected officials
                         (heads of LSG) or local council members, respectively. This component will help improve
                         knowledge and understanding of significant local PFM and accountability issues and good practices
                         in the Kyrgyz Republic. It will provide an institutional set up to more effectively share experiences
                         and knowledge related to PFM reforms and therefore bolster a PTP learning initiative which will
                         enable local stakeholders in the PFM process to exchange ideas, discuss challenges, share their
                         experiences/best practices and by doing so, improve budgeting processes at the LSG level - where
                         most of the country residents can see and feel the impact of PFM policies and reforms.

                         Component 3: Organization and delivery of PTP learning at rayon level. This component will fund
                         rayon level PTP learning for all 40 rayons of the country- both formal events and advice provided to
                         the COP members by rayon level RPs. It is expected that formal PTP events at rayon level will be
                         held approximately every quarter and will include relevant participants (financial officers, local
                         council members working in budget committee) from each Ayil Okmotu (LSG units) in that rayon
                         (therefore, all 450+ rural LSG units will be covered). Organization and conduct of the PTP evens will
                         be a shared responsibility of the Secretariat and rayon RP (for each COP). It is also expected that the
                         formal PTP events when and if possible would be aligned with the relevant rayon level meetings
                         COP members supposed to attend as a part of their work responsibilities.

                         Component 4: Evaluation. This component will fund baseline and end-of-project data collection and


                                                                       Page 2 of 4
                           benchmarking and end of project evaluation. It is expected that evaluation will be done by an
                           independent entity that was not a part of project implementation. This component will also fund an
                           independent end-of-project audit.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           This is a TA project, therefore it will not have any physical location beyond location of the PIU and
                           Project Secretariat. The latter and former are going to be located in Bishkek.
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               No
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               none
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               none
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               none
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.


                                                                        Page 3 of 4
                                none
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                none
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gregory Kisunko,Zhanybek Ybraiym Uulu
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                  Date: 04-Jun-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Adrian Fozzard (PMGR)              Date: 06-Jun-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
