                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR16867
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Indonesia                                    Project ID:           P117323
                            Project Name:       Indonesia Power Transmission Development Project (P117323)
                            Task Team           Dhruva Sahai
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           18-Feb-2010                                  Estimated   08-Jul-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEE02                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme:              Infrastructure services for private sector development (40%), Rural services and
                                                infrastructure (40%), Urban services and housing fo r the poor (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                           No
                            Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       254.10           Total Bank Financing:                                       225.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              29.10
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                225.00
                              Total                                                                                                254.10
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to increase the capacity of the power
                           transmission systems in Java and south-central Sumatra to meet increa
                           sing electricity demand.


                                                                                 Page 1 of 14
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         The development objective of the proposed project is to increase the capacity of the power
                         transmission systems in Java and south-central Sumatra to meet increa
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sing electricity demand.
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project has two components with a total investment cost estimated at US$ 255 million, each of
                         which is described below.

                         Component 1: Expansion and Construction of Transmission Substations in the Java-Bali System:
                         This component includes the expansion of four 500/150 kV and forty six 150 kV/20 kV existing
                         substations by adding one or two new transformers and associated equipment at each substation, and
                         construction of one new 150 kV/20 kV substation in Java.
                         Component 2: Upgrading and Expansion of Transmission Substations in South-central Sumatra:
                         This component includes upgrading five existing substations system from 150 kV to 275 kV by
                         adding one or two new 275/150 kV transformers and associated equipment at each substation, and
                         expanding 16 existing 150 kV/20 kV substations by adding one or two new transformers and
                         associated equipment at each substation in south-central Sumatra system.

                         The original loan for the US$ 225 million Indonesia Power Transmission Development Project was
                         approved on July 10, 2010, signed on November 18, 2010 and became effective on May 30, 2011.
                         The project components are designed to address priority investments for the transmission and sub-
                         transmission systems in the Java Bali, and Sumatra networks. As of April 21, 2016, the project has
                         an undisbursed balance of US$ 133.44 million and is in problem status. The project has been rated
                         Moderately Unsatisfactory for Implementation Progress. Implementation delays were encountered in
                         all six major contract packages of up to 18 months against the original contract schedules due to
                         inadequate contract management capacity, prolonged internal processes and reviews, and slow
                         decision making at PLN. The project has also realized savings due to a reduction in the scope of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         work under the Sumatra substations, and the outcome of the competitive tender process by following
                         the Bank?s Procurement Guidelines and Procedures which were below those originally assessed. A
                         Level I restructuring is therefore proposed for the project to enable the use of US$ 80 million in
                         project savings for construction and development related to substation expansion, including the
                         installation and upgrading of transformers at additional locations. The restructured project will also
                         prepare the proposed Poko Hydropower Project (HPP) and will include an updated feasibility study
                         including geotechnical investigation, environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA),
                         dispatching of panel of experts, and, if the project is found to be feasible, prepare tender documents
                         for procurement packages. The safeguards instruments will be prepared and disclosed during the
                         implementation of the restructured project. It may be noted that the Poko HPP itself will be
                         processed as a separate stand-alone project/IPF for Bank financing.

                         The project is restructured to include the following new components to make use of the $80 million
                         savings:
                         a.      US$ 52.06 million for construction and development related to substation expansion,
                         including the installation and upgrading of transformers at additional locations in Java, Bali, and
                         Sumatra as per the scope of work provided in PLN?s letter of April 22, 2015.
                         b.      US$ 8 million to support the preparation of Poko HPP.

                         US$ 20 million of loan funds shall be canceled as agreed upon with PT PLN, and MOF.


                                                                     Page 2 of 14
                         The proposed project restructuring would also entail the extension of the project by 18 months
                         through June 30, 2018 to enable the completion of the planned activities. This would be the second
Public Disclosure Copy




                         extension of the project. The restructuring is at the core of Government and Bank pro-activity to put
                         this project on a successful trajectory. In addition to the restructuring, there are activities to improve
                         delays in procurement and other implementation bottlenecks already underway. In particular, the
                         Team has worked with PLN to develop an action plan that covers the actions to be taken to remove
                         implementation bottlenecks, and the time by when these bottlenecks shall be removed. PLN is also
                         holding monthly management meetings to review progress against action plan targets, and is
                         preparing minutes to record the agreements reached and decisions taken to maintain the momentum
                         towards completing outstanding work under the contracts. The Task Team shall continue to monitor
                         PLN?s progress towards achieving the proposed completion dates under the action plan.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Expansion, Upgrading and Construction of Transmission Substations:

                         The subprojects (including the proposed additional locations) are located in various provinces in
                         Java, Bali and in Sumatra. The key project activity is to install new transformers and
                         associatedequipment in existing 500 kV, 275 kV and 150 kV substations. Prior to this restructuring
                         proposal, there are eight substations that have been upgraded/ extended. There are now 30
                         substations that will be either upgraded or reinforced (24 in Java, 6 in Sumatera) through project
                         savings.

                         Three types of subprojects have been identified during the implementation of IPTD I: (i) subprojects
                         implemented within the existing fence of an existing substation and no land acquisition involved
                         (thirty six subprojects); (ii) subprojects implemented adjacent to an existing substation site, requiring
                         some land acquisition in four substations in Sumatera and (iii) the Millennium subproject involving
                         the construction of a new substation but not involving land acquisition because the land was
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transferred to PLN without costs from the owner of the industrial zone, to which the substation will
                         supply electricity.

                         It is expected that for the proposed addition allocations, salient physical characteristics are still the
                         same and the existing safeguards measures and safeguards instruments (EMP) are adequate to
                         mitigate potential adverse environmental impact.

                         Environment screening has identified the following potential impacts of these subprojects: (i)
                         impacts during construction associated with movement of men, machinery and materials (noise, dust,
                         chance find of cultural artifacts, prohibition of PCBs, worker exposure to electromagnetic fields
                         (EMF) where an existing substation is present); (ii) impacts during operation including worker health
                         and safety issues associated with EMF, noise and possible transformer cooling oils.

                         Land acquisition process, including public consultation and satisfactory compensation for the
                         population residing in the project area is the main social issues in the project. Since land acquisition
                         is limited, impacts on the individual PAP is normally modest and limited in the acquisition of small
                         piece of land or cutting down of few trees. Of the total 30 subprojects proposed by the loan saving,
                         none will involve land acquisition as the activities are only up-rating and extension of the existing
                         substations.



                                                                        Page 3 of 14
                         Site visits and screening undertaken by the task team has determined that Indigenous Peoples as
                         defined by OP 4.10 are not present in, nor have collective attachment to the project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Preparation of Poko HPP

                         The proposed Poko HPP is a dam-tunnel-type hydropower scheme to be developed upstream of the
                         Mamasa River (a tributary of the Sadang River) in South Sulawesi, Indonesia (see Figure1 below).
                         However, the impacted area of the proposed Poko HPP will be extended into West Sulawesi
                         Province. PLN, the project owner, has requested the Bank to finance the development of the Poko
                         HPP through direct-lending to PLN.

                         The restructured IPTD project savings will be used to support PLN to prepare the Poko HPP
                         including an updated feasibility study (F/S; JICA had prepared an F/S in 1997 which is outdated)
                         including geotechnical investigation, develop safeguards documents such as the ESIA and
                         environmental and social management plan (ESMP), and, if the project is deemed feasible through
                         due consideration to the environmental and social impacts, prepare tender documents for the
                         procurement of works and goods contracts. It may be noted that the terms of reference (ToR) for the
                         ESIA will be prepared to satisfy not only the Bank's policies, but also the requirements of the
                         Indonesian regulation on Analisis dampak lingkungan (AMDAL). This is an effort to streamline the
                         two documents in order to avoid confusion of having two separate environmental management
                         documents during implementation. The safeguards instruments will be prepared and disclosed during
                         implementation of the restructured project.

                         The involvement of the Bank is critical for the responsible development of the cascade of
                         hydropower projects in the Mamasa River basin.

                         Downstream of the proposed Poko HPP on the Mamasa River, is an existing dam-tunnel-type
                         scheme called Bakaru I HPP (126 MW; the dam is called the Garugu Dam) commissioned in 1991.
                         Bakaru I HPP had been designed and built to accommodate the expansion of another 126 MW
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (Bakaru II HPP) by constructing a parallel headrace tunnel from the Garugu Dam and expanding the
                         existing power house to accommodate additional generating units. KfW is committed to finance this
                         extension known as Bakaru II HPP.

                         Furthermore, a recent Bank-financed study on the hydropower potential of the Mamasa River
                         identified a scheme which takes the tailrace water from Bakaru I HPP (and the proposed Bakaru II
                         HPP) into a headrace tunnel for an installed capacity of 146.5 MW further downstream. This scheme
                         is referred to as Bakaru III HPP.

                         By using IPTD project savings for the preparation of Poko HPP, the Bank can effectively support
                         PLN to optimize the development of the basin and to minimize the overall impacts on the
                         environment and society. The ESIA expected to be financed by the IPTD's project savings will
                         include the preparation of a cumulative impact assessment to ensure that basin-wide consideration is
                         reflected in the design and operation of t he proposed Poko HPP and the other existing and proposed
                         HPP in the same basin. Poko HPP itself will be processed as a separate stand-alone project/IPF for
                         Bank financing.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (GEN2A)



                                                                     Page 4 of 14
                         Ninin K. Dewi (GSURR)
                         Penelope Ruth Ferguson (GENDR)
                         Sulistiowati Ms. (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental           Yes        The substation upgrading or extension, from the IPTD
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01              savings project will have similar potential adverse
                                                            environmental impacts as the IPTD project. They are
                                                            construction related impacts (noise, dust, prohibition of
                                                            PCBs, worker exposure to electromagnetic fields (EMF)
                                                            where an existing substation is present, etc.) and impacts
                                                            during substation operations- mostly related to health and
                                                            safety aspects. The project related to substation
                                                            extension/upgrading after restructuring will continue to
                                                            use the current ESMF to screen subprojects and prepare
                                                            specific instruments such as ESIA or ESMP, where
                                                            required, based upon screening.

                                                            The restructured project shall also finance technical
                                                            studies and safeguards document preparation (ESIA,
                                                            ESMP) for the Poko HPP, which will be processed as a
                                                            separate stand-alone project for Bank financing. The
                                                            construction of Poko HPP will have significant,
                                                            irreversible, and large scale potential environmental and
                                                            social impacts. Thus, it is a Category A project. The
                                                            potential impacts of the proposed project will be assessed
                                                            in the ESIA, which will be financed by the restructured
                                                            IPTD project. The ToR for the ESIA will be prepared and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            submitted to the Bank for review. Since the Indonesian
                                                            regulation on AMDAL requires the consultant to prepare
                                                            a detailed KA ANDAL (detailed ESIA ToR) including
                                                            specific methodologies on sampling and analysis, and to
                                                            conduct consultations based on the KA ANDAL/detailed
                                                            ToR, public consultations will be held after the consultant
                                                            is mobilized. The task team supports the harmonizing of
                                                            the ESIA and AMDAL, and agreed that convening
                                                            consultations based on the KA ANDAL/detailed TOR
                                                            satisfies the relevant Bank policies. The ESIA will be
                                                            submitted by PLN to the Bank for review. Once the Poko
                                                            HPP is processed separately for Bank financing, the ESIA
                                                            will also be submitted to and reviewed by the Bank and
                                                            will be disclosed locally and in the Bank's Infoshop to
                                                            meet the Bank's disclosure requirements.

                                                            The updating of the feasibility study on Poko HPP
                                                            includes geotechnical investigation involving drilling of
                                                            approximately 10 bore holes, excavation of one or two



                                                             Page 5 of 14
                                                        adits (small tunnels) for in-situ tests, and use of
                                                        explosives for the seismic refraction survey. World Bank
                                                        Group EHS (Environmental Health and Safety) General
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Guidelines and specific Guidelines for Mining shall be
                                                        used to manage, mitigate and monitor potential impacts of
                                                        this study especially related to ?Special Hazard in
                                                        Underground Mining and Use of Explosives. The ToR for
                                                        the updating of the feasibility study, which includes the
                                                        sub-contracting of geotechnical investigation, shall be
                                                        reviewed by the Bank's Safeguards Specialist.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   The restructured project will finance the preparation of
                         4.04                           Poko HPP. This project will have potential adverse
                                                        impacts on natural habitats (forest areas, river systems,
                                                        freshwater aquatic ecosystem, terrestrial flora and fauna,
                                                        etc). Assessing impacts on natural habitats will be
                                                        included in the ToR for the ESIA and mitigation measures
                                                        will be included in the ESMP or could include a separate
                                                        stand-alone Biodiversity Management Plan depending
                                                        upon the scale of impacts on natural habitats.

                                                        The substation upgrading/extension component financed
                                                        by this project will not cause adverse impact to natural
                                                        habitats as the projects are mostly located at existing
                                                        substation locations. This project component will continue
                                                        to use the current ESMF from IPTD.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   The restructured project will finance the preparation of
                                                        Poko HPP. This could lead to an investment decision
                                                        which would result in potential adverse impact to natural
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        forests. The information available at this stage from PLN
                                                        revealed that no protection forest norconservation forest
                                                        will be directly impacted by the project. The ToR for the
                                                        ESIA has included an initial screening study that will
                                                        include the investigation of sensitive areas such as natural
                                                        forests. Mitigation measures will be included in the ESMP
                                                        or could include a separate stand-alone Biodiversity
                                                        Management Plan depending upon the scale of impacts on
                                                        natural forests.
                                                        In addition the ESIA study will also assess forest health
                                                        and forest-dependent communities, if any.

                                                        For the existing IPTD project, substation upgrading and
                                                        extension will not cause an adverse impact to forest areas
                                                        as the projects are mostly located at existing substation
                                                        locations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The restructured project will not purchase pesticides or
                                                        cause potential increase in pesticide use from the



                                                         Page 6 of 14
                                                        technical studies funded under the project, nor from the
                                                        substation upgrading/extension project.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The restructured project will finance the preparation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           Poko HPP that could cause potential impact on PCRs. The
                                                        ToR for the ESIA will include a requirement to assess and
                                                        manage PCR aspects under the project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   There is no new substation that will be built under the
                         BP 4.10                        saving loan. All activities are extension and up-rating of
                                                        the existing substations. The substations themselves have
                                                        been operated for years and no issues reported regarding
                                                        the impact of their operations to the surrounding areas. As
                                                        the existing IPTD, the restructured project will not create
                                                        any issue on indigenous peoples.

                                                        Based on a preliminary screening process and site visits to
                                                        the Poko HPP site, indigenous peoples as defined by
                                                        OP4.10 were not identified. However, screening for
                                                        indigenous peoples as defined in OP4.10 must still be
                                                        conducted in the ESIA to confirm this, and that may result
                                                        in the need to prepare an IPP.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The existing IPTD project has minor impact on the
                         OP/BP 4.12                     resettlement, with only one LARAP provided for the 4
                                                        substations in Sumatera area. The lands which were
                                                        mostly acquired through direct negotiation is almost
                                                        100% finished with no major issue encountered during its
                                                        implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        For the restructured project, it is confirmed that none of
                                                        the 30 (thirty) subprojects will need land acquisition as
                                                        the activities are extension and up-rating of the existing
                                                        substations.

                                                        The restructured project will prepare the Poko HPP which
                                                        will involve land acquisition and resettlement. A recent
                                                        KfW-funded study to optimize the cascade development
                                                        of Poko and Bakaru HPPs (February 2015) made
                                                        preliminary assessment that at the proposed full supply
                                                        level of Poko HPP?s dam at 820 m, 153 households (677
                                                        people) in the proposed reservoir area will need to be
                                                        resettled. The following areas need land acquisition/
                                                        LARAP: dam site and hydropower facilities, reservoir,
                                                        access road, transmission line, and quarry. Since layout of
                                                        site requirements could change during basic design and as
                                                        watershed management impacts are specified, each
                                                        LARAP should include a description of the process for
                                                        preparing and implementing future LARAPs in case there
                                                        is any change on alignment of the project or need for


                                                         Page 7 of 14
                                                                       added land acquisition.
                                                                       PLN will prepare the LARAPs with its own financing.
                                                                       Once the Poko HPP is processed separately for Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       financing, the LARAPs will also be submitted to and
                                                                       reviewed by the RSS and will be disclosed locally and in
                                                                       the Bank?s Infoshop to meet the Bank?s disclosure
                                                                       requirements.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes            The policy is triggered. The restructured project will
                            4.37                                       finance the preparation of Poko HPP and will trigger OP
                                                                       4.37 on Safety of Dams. The ToR for the updating of the
                                                                       feasibility study will include provisions to adhere to OP
                                                                       4.37, and relevant sections of dam safety will be included
                                                                       in the ESIA. As per OP 4.37, the restructured project will
                                                                       also be used to recruit a panel of experts which will be
                                                                       fielded at key milestones of the feasibility study and the
                                                                       preparation of EISA and LARAP.

                                                                       The substation upgrading and extension component will
                                                                       not have activities related to Dam Safety.
                            Projects on International   No             The existing IPTD project and the proposed restructured
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       project will not have projects that are located in
                                                                       international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The existing IPTD project and the proposed restructured
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           project will not have projects that are located in disputed
                                                                       areas.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                                While the restructured project itself will not finance the development of any hydropower
                              projects, the studies and assessments financed by this project for Poko HPP can lead to an
                              investment decision to develop Poko HPP which would potentially have significant, large scale
                              and irreversible adverse environmental impacts on natural habitats or critical natural habitats such
                              as forest area (production or protection forest), river system, freshwater aquatic ecosystem,
                              terrestrial flora and fauna etc. Also it will have significant social impacts as the project will
                              involve resettlement and potential impacts to PCRs, Indigenous people (to be confirmed through
                              ESIA survey) and Dam Safety. It is a therefore considered a Category A project.

                              In addition, the updating of the feasibility study includes geotechnical investigation involving
                              drilling of approximately 10 bore holes, excavation of one or two adits (small tunnels) for in-situ
                              tests, and use of explosives for the seismic refraction survey. The World Bank Group?s EHS
                              Guidelines for "Mining" shall be used to manage, mitigate and monitor the potential impacts of
                              this study especially those related to ?Special Hazard in Underground Mining? and ?Use of
                              Explosives?.




                                                                        Page 8 of 14
                          For the substation extension/upgrading, based on the documents furnished by PLN and the current
                          implementation of the ESMF, the Bank has concluded that impacts from IPTD sub-projects for
                          extension and upgrading are likely to be modest, non-sensitive and reversible, and in every case,
Public Disclosure Copy




                          mitigation measures can be designed to reduce the negative impacts.

                          Expected impacts during construction include (i) increased level of dust and noise from the use
                          and movement of machinery; (ii) non-toxic solid waste during construction; (iii) oil spill or
                          leakage from machinery or transformers; (iv) prohibition of PCB and (v) worker health and safety
                          from existing EMF. Impacts during operation include (i) oil leak from transformers; (ii) fire and
                          emergency preparedness; (iii) solid waste and (iv) worker health and safety.
                          For substation extension/upgrading using project savings, the current ESMF will continue to be
                          used. The template for Environment Management Plans (EMPs) under the ESMF have been used
                          for all subprojects under IPTD and it is found to be adequate in addressing and mitigating potential
                          environmental adverse impact from the project. The template for LARAP and IPP are also
                          available in the ESMF. A Land Acquisition and Resettlement Plan (LARAP) has been prepared
                          for four substations in Sumatra that require land acquisition for the IPTD project. The EMPs and
                          LARAP have been reviewed by the Bank and found to be satisfactory.

                           PLN's Emergency Preparedness and Response procedures and Worker Health and Safety
                           requirements under its transmission projects were reviewed by the Bank team and found to be
                           consistent with international good practice.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            No long term adverse impact is envisaged from the extension/upgrading components of the
                           restructured project. The reinforcement of substations will result in improvement of power supply
                           adequacy and quality in the project areas, which is an ingredient for economic growth and
                           household quality of life. However, for Poko HPP construction, which the restructured project will
                           only support the preparation of, there are potential indirect and /or induced impacts from the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project that need to be taken into account during ESIA preparation such as biodiversity impacts,
                           potential illegal logging by local community in the forest area by using the project?s access road,
                           social impacts such as camp followers and HIV/AIDS. RSS will review the ToR of the ESIA to
                           ensure these potential indirect and or long term impacts are taken into account.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            For substation extension projects involving land acquisition, alternatives were considered to
                           minimize impacts on resettlement and environment. A recent KfW-funded study, conducted in
                           two-stages, to optimize the cascade development of Poko and Bakaru HPPs (February and
                           September 2015) involved an analysis on the power system in Sulawesi which concluded the need
                           for PLN to develop Poko HPP to meet the projected increase in electricity demand. The study also
                           involved analysis on alternative dam heights in order to limit the number of households requiring
                           physical relocation. The updating of the feasibility study, and the preparation of the ESIA and
                           LARAP for Poko HPP will include further analyses. The ToRs for ESIA and LARAP, in
                           particular, shall be submitted to RSS for review.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            For the substation extension/upgrading that will be financed by the savings, the project
                           implementing agency (PT PLN) will continue to use the ESMF that shall include the development


                                                                     Page 9 of 14
                         of EMPs for all subprojects and LARAP for subprojects that involve land acquisition. The EMPs
                         and LARAP for IPTD have been reviewed by the Bank and found to be satisfactory. PLN has
                         experience with World Bank projects such as the Java Bali Power Sector Restructuring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Strengthening Project, IPTD, Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage Hydropower Project and others.

                         Environmental impacts from the substation extension/upgrading project will be mitigated
                         according to measures set out in the EMPs. Measures include the following: (i) the construction
                         site will be sprinkled with water (ii) construction activities will be performed only during normal
                         working hours; if construction activities have to be performed before or after the specified time
                         limits, the local society must be notified in advance; (iii) Contaminated soils and solid waste will
                         be removed and disposed to sites approved by local authorities; (iv) Bidding documents shall
                         prohibit procurement of equipment containing PCBs. For the construction phase, the EMP for each
                         substation will be included in the bidding documents and contracts as legal obligations for
                         contractors to implement. During operation, the EMP will be transferred to the respective
                         operating entities for implementation.

                         Permanent land will be compensated in the form of land substitution or cash at market value.
                         Crops or trees will be compensated at market value or be replaced. Impacts to land under ROW
                         due to temporary use by PLN during construction and land use limitation by owners during
                         operation will be compensated at negotiated values to be agreed upon with the affected households
                         and in consultation with local governments. The restructured project will support the preparation
                         of Poko Hydro. Safeguards instruments such as the ESIA, and LARAP will be prepared and
                         disclosed during the implementation of the restructured project in the future.

                         PLN also has adequate experience in preparing ESIAs for high risk projects funded by the World
                         Bank, ADB, KfW and others. Safeguards instruments such as the ESIA, and LARAP for Poko
                         HPP will be prepared and disclosed during the implementation of the restructured project in the
                         future. A special unit in PLN is responsible for handling the preparation of safeguards documents
                         under the Division Head of HSSE (Health, Safety, Security, and Environment). Several full time
Public Disclosure Copy




                         staff dealing with the preparation of safeguards documents and technical studies also participated
                         in the preparation of the Upper Cisokan hydropower project, Mattenggeng hydropower project,
                         and several geothermal projects. PLN UIP XII, which is the PLN office located in South Sulawesi
                         responsible for the proposed Poko HPP, also has a full time safeguards staff member but limited
                         staff and low level management to cover hydropower plant as Category A project. Due to the
                         complexity of land acquisition and resettlement of a hydropower project, PLN Headquarter is
                         considering elevating the responsibility of land acquisition including resettlement, legal issues and
                         public communication in UIP XII from the current sub-manager level to the manager level as in
                         UIP VI for Upper Cisokan Pumped-Storage Project.

                         For substation extension/upgrading, two Regional Project Offices in Java and Sumatra under PLN
                         are directly responsible for the preparation and implementation of EMPs and LARAPs. PLN and
                         its Regional Project Office in Java have experience with the implementation of WB financed
                         projects. They have involved broadly similar safeguards issues and mitigation and are experienced
                         with WB requirements regarding preparation and implementation of EMPs and LARAPs. The
                         Regional Project Office in Sumatra has now four competent environment and social specialists as
                         its permanent staff. They are very experienced with national regulations as land acquisition and
                         environment management is a common practice in PLN. During preparation, environment and
                         social staff of the two project offices received training from the Bank team. They have prepared
                         satisfactory EMP and LARAP for the subprojects under their responsibility. During supervision,

                                                                   Page 10 of 14
                           further training will be provided to PLN staffs in charge of social and environment management.
                           Progress of EMP and LARAP implementation will be carefully monitored.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The KA ANDAL /detailed TOR for the ESIA study will be publicly disclosed and meaningful
                           consultations shall be prepared and conducted by PLN UIP X11 in Makassar. At least one other
                           round of comprehensive consultations shall be conducted once the draft ESIA completed as per
                           Ministry of Environment Regulation no 17/2012 and OP 4.01. Key stakeholders are the local
                           community, project affected people, local government officer, local NGOs and national NGOs,
                           Local Forestry Agency, Environmental Agency.

                           Public consultations on EMP/LARAP for extension/upgrading of substations subprojects that
                           involve land acquisition shall be conducted as per the ESMF taking into account lessons learned
                           from the IPTD project. For subprojects that will be implemented within their existing premises,
                           public comments were solicited through posting the EMPs on PLN?s website and in the respective
                           project offices.
                           Announcements in local newspapers were made for this consultation. Stakeholder concerns were
                           incorporated into the project design and EMPs.

                           All the EMPs and LARAP in Bahasa of the existing project have been publicly disclosed.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          31-Jan-2018
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       31-Jan-2018
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                            31-Jan-2018
                           Comments: All the EMPs and LARAP of the existing project (IPTD) had been publicly disclosed
                                         in Infoshop on February 3, 2010. For substation extension/upgrading of the
                                         restructured project, the current ESMF will continue to be used. The restructured
                                         project will finance existing IPTD projects, additional locations realized through
                                         project savings, along with technical studies and safeguards instruments for the
                                         Poko HPP. The restructured project is not for financing the physical construction of
                                         Poko HPP. The safeguards instruments for Poko HPP that will be prepared include
                                         the TOR for the ESIA study, the ESIA document, and LARAP or IPP (if required).
                                         The ToR for the EISA was reviewed by the RSS on January 26, 2016. The
                                         disclosure of these documents shall take place at a later point in time.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          15-Mar-2018
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       30-Mar-2018




                                                                    Page 11 of 14
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                         31-Jan-2018
                           Comments: The Resettlement Action Framework of the existing project had been publicly
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         disclosed in InfoShop on February 3, 2010. The disclosure of the safeguards
                                         documents for Poko HPP shall take place in the future during the implementation of
                                         Poko HPP project.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       31-Jan-2018
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    31-Jan-2018
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                         31-Jan-2018
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         To be undertaken in the future during the implementation of the Poko HPP.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 12 of 14
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                          677 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?




                                                                     Page 13 of 14
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dhruva Sahai
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name:                                              Date:
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                      Date: 15-Jun-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 14 of 14
