INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA14673
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Congo, Democratic Republic T            P155266
of                  Project ID:
of
Parent       P091092
Project ID:
Project Name: DRC Urban Water Supply Project Additional Financing and Restructuring
(P155266)
Parent Project DRC Urban Water Supply Project (P091092)
Name:
Task Team       Madio Fall
Leader(s):
Estimated       10-Dec-2015                Estimated    25-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO7                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Water supply (95%), Public administration- Water, sanitation and flood
protection (5%)
Theme(s):       Urban services and housing for the poor (90%), Other public sector governance
(10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     150.00            Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
IDA Grant                                                                 150.00
Total                                                                     150.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 7


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project objective is to increase, on a sustainable basis, access to drinking water in certain
urban centers of DRC.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
The revised project objective is to increase access to sustainable water services in selected urban
areas, and to improve the operational performances and viability of the State Water Utility.
3. Project Description
Under Component A (indicative amount: US$115.1 million): construction of water production,
transmission and storage facilities and provision and installation of distribution networks, social
household connections and public standpipes, including the provision of water meters in: Kinshasa,
Lubumbashi, Matadi and Kindu. Detailed design studies are available for a substantial portion of
these works, while the remainder would be completed through amendments of the consultant
contracts carried out for the Water Supply Master Plans of the targeted cities.
Under Component B (indicative amount: US$34.9 million): (i) support to the Recipient in deepening
the sector reform, including institutional studies and design of the next PSP transactions, financing of
two additional years of the services contract and financing of rehabilitation; and (ii) support to the
Recipient in the areas of Project coordination, supervision, financial management, communication
and outreach, procurement, monitoring and evaluation, supervision of implementation of the
Safeguards Instruments.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will finance investment and rehabilitation programs specific to each city targeted by the
project (Kinshasa, Kindu, Lubumbashi and Matadi).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENO7)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSUO1)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The expected investments within this Additional
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Financing are constituted by construction of water
production, transmission and storage facilities, installation
of distribution networks and public standpipes. These
investments are likely to have moderate adverse impacts
on environment and will be site-specific as activities
realized under the parent project and for which the project
was rated EA category B. If cities to host investments are
known this is not the case for activities exact location. In
Page 2 of 7


﻿such a case the appropriate safeguard instrument is an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF). The existing ESMF has been updated, reviewed,
consulted upon and disclosed both in DRC and at the
Infoshop on December 9, 2015.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           None of the activities to be financed by the AF will be
4.04                                 implemented in natural habitats or induce the use of
resources collected from natural habitats which could
result in their degradation.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Activities under the AF will totally take place in urban
areas. That means no forested area is expected to be
impacted.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project does not have any relation with pest
management
Physical Cultural       Yes          As most of activities to be undertaken will involve
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 excavations with possible discoveries of physical cultural
resources, this policy is triggered in order to anticipate
and to make sure that all the precautions have been taken
to protect and safeguard physical cultural resources.
However, there is no need to prepare specific instrument
on physical cultural resources. A chapter on how to
handle chance finds or cultural assets within the project
area has been developed and included in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous People in the project areas.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project is an infrastructure project. That means
OP/BP 4.12                           constructions and rehabilitation of such infrastructure
raging from water production, transmission and storage
facilities, installation of distribution networks and public
standpipes, may have impact on people and lead to land
acquisition or economic resettlement of population. To
anticipate potential social adverse impacts associated to
investments due to the fact that exact sites are not yet
known, the existing Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) has been updated by the client, reviewed,
consulted upon and disclosed publicly within DRC on
December 8, 2015, and disclosed at the Infoshop on
December 8, 2015.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not finance dam or dam-related
4.37                                 investments, nor rely on dams.
Projects on International  Yes       Among investments to be realized under this Additional
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 Financing, there is the construction of water production
facilities that will use water of Congo river which is an
international water way. The necessary volume to take per
day is 330000 m3. To be in compliance with this policy, a
notification referred CAB.MIN-ENRH/NYB 930/MA/15
Page 3 of 7


﻿dated July 7, 2015, from the Government of DRC was
sent to riparian countries through the CICOS
(Commission Internationale du bassin Congo-Oubangui-
Sangah).
Projects in Disputed    No           This project is not being implemented in any disputed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant or irreversible adverse impacts that are expected from the implementation
of activities that will be financed under this AF. Most of the adverse environmental and social
impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific. Hence, they will
be manageable at an acceptable level.
The project remains EA category B due to the fact that components and activities are nearly the
same as in the parent project. It will trigger, however, a new safeguard policy (OP/BP 7.50), in
respect of which the Government has taken appropriate action. The policies that were previously
triggered are OP/PB 4.01 and OP/PB 4.12. Safeguard instruments (ESMF and RPF) have all been
updated and will be implemented as guidance/guidelines for the activities during the Additional
Financing phase.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential adverse impacts associated with projected activities are anticipated to be minor, site
specific and limited to an acceptable level. The social safeguards impacts identified, are not
expected to have long term or cumulative effects.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
As indicated above, the potential adverse impacts are minimal.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
During the parent project's implementation, screening of sub-projects has taken place to ensure
proper identification and mitigation of any adverse impacts. In addition, limited Environmental
and Social Impact Assessment (ESIAs), Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) have been regularly
developed before the commencement of works on the ground. During works' phase, a monthly
environmental and social report was regularly produced by the PIU which hosts two senior
Environmental specialists. Moreover, Word Bank's safeguard specialists were part of supervision
fields' missions to make sure that the project was implemented in full compliance with safeguard
triggered policies (OP/PB4.01 and OP/PB4.12). These practices will continue during the AF.
On procedural level, as the exact location of future investments are not yet known and activities
are diversified, the borrower has updated the existing Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF). That safeguard instrument contains standards, methods, and procedures
specifying how future activities whose location, number, and scale are unknown will
systematically address environmental and social issues. It includes: (i) a systematic environmental
Page 4 of 7


﻿and social impact assessment for all activities before selection and implementation; (ii) procedures
for conducting activity-specific ESIAs, Limited Environmental Impact Assessment (LEIA) or
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP); (iii) capacity strengthening and awareness-
raising campaigns targeted at relevant stakeholder groups for better implementation and
monitoring of project safeguard measures; and (iv) establishment and implementation of a
consultation framework for the environmental control and monitoring.
To manage land acquisition, involuntary resettlement or loss of livelihoods induced by the
implementation of activities, the client has updated the existing Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF). That safeguard instrument clarifies the principles, organizational arrangements, and design
criteria to be applied to investments to be prepared during AF implementation. Investment-specific
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) will be prepared, as necessary, in line with the RPF and
submitted to the Bank for approval.
All the above safeguard documents provide detailed mitigation measures to ensure sustainability
and compliance with DRC's regulations and legislations, as well as with the World Bank
environmental and social policies.
Activities financed under the project will be screened using a standardized approach based on the
tools developed under the original project. ESMPs will be prepared as needed for the small civil
works expected to be undertaken under this AF. For works with negligible impacts environmental
measures based on national laws and regulations will apply.
As indicated previously, the PIU currently has two environmental specialists who have been
benefitting from safeguards training during Bank supervision missions or specific trainings on
safeguard policies and procedures. Both will continue being responsible for safeguards
implementation within this AF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are communities living in the project areas, particularly poor households,
pupils and teachers in schools which will benefit from water supply, but also the industries that
will connected to water networks. During the preparation of the safeguard instruments all these
stakeholders were consulted and their comments and suggestions taken into consideration in the
finalization of the documents. These series of consultations have been organized through
workshops and communication campaigns. The frameworks have been disclosed in-country and at
the Infoshop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                08-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             09-Dec-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Page 5 of 7


﻿Date of receipt by the Bank                                08-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             08-Dec-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA [    ]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [X]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ]  No [  ]  TBD [X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [X] No [     ]  NA
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 6 of 7


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]   No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Madio Fall
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)          Date: 11-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


