                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA8970
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Afghanistan                       Project ID:   P131228
                            Project Name:     DABS Planning And Capacity Support (P131228)
                            Task Team         Abdul Hamid Quraishi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         25-Jan-2016                       Estimated   25-Feb-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE06                             Lending     Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          6.00               Total Bank Financing: 0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                     6.00
                              Total                                                                                     6.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve DABS capacity in distribution investment
                           planning, implementation, operation and maintenance.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed DABS planning and Capacity Support Project would be comprised of two
                           components: (1) DABS staff capacity building; (2) Training center development. The description and

                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         objectives of each of these components are summarized below:

                         Component 1: DABS staff capacity building. This component would support capacity building for e
Public Disclosure Copy




                         staff of DABS including:

                         •       Providing general and task-specific training to managers and staff on distribution investment
                         selection, planning and implementation

                         •       Providing general and task-specific training to managers and staff on distribution operation
                         planning and implementation.

                         •       Providing one-on-one mentoring support to managers and key specialists in the DABS
                         planning and O&M functions.

                         •     Adopting and integrating the Afghanistan Energy Information Center into the asset
                         management department of DABS.

                         •       Assisting DABS in empowering women’s participation in the sector through provision of
                         learning opportunities to them.

                         Component 2: Training center development. This component would support development of a
                         training center in DABS including:

                         •       Design, construction and furnishing of the training center building.

                         •        Purchase of training and office equipment to equip the Training Center for the DABS that
                         will be used primarily for the capacity building activities
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The project is designed primarily as a capacity development project that will prepare and strengthen
                         the capabilities of DABS for its tasks as a transparent and responsive service provider in the power
                         sector. The project interventions will be consistent with the Government’s and World Bank’s
                         safeguards policies and guidelines. The training will take place in Kabul.

                         The proposed activities under the component 1 of this project will only involve technical and
                         analytical assistance, advisory services, and building capacity of DABS to deliver its services to
                         support the power distribution planning and investment. The training center will be constructed on
                         the premises of the power plant in the Tarakhil area in the Dehsabz district of Kabul which would be
                         the only civil works or tangible investment with salient physical characteristics to be supported under
                         this projec
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mohammad Yasin Noori (GSURR)
                         Obaidullah Hidayat (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is



                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01          triggered because of possible negative impacts associated
                                                        with:
                                                        Component 1, which will finance trainings on preparation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        of feasibility studies, detailed engineering designs and
                                                        bidding documents for the rehabilitation and/or
                                                        construction of future distribution network/lines, and
                                                        therefore, the siting of poles, pylons and substations
                                                        associated with the supply of distribution lines, and the
                                                        safe disposal of removed materials that may contain
                                                        hazardous substances. These are likely to be small,
                                                        temporary, local and readily avoided, reversed or
                                                        mitigated and will be managed through project specific
                                                        ESMPs.

                                                        Component 2 will finance the civil works related to the
                                                        construction of the training center including managing
                                                        construction waste, dust and noise pollution, increased
                                                        construction traffic, establishment of temporary workers’
                                                        camp etc. These impacts are expected to small and
                                                        temporary and either reversed or mitigated through an
                                                        ESMP and construction contracts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    This policy is not triggered, because the project
                         4.04                           components are not expected to be in the area of any
                                                        Natural Habitat or will not have any impact on it.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The project activities do not impact forests in any way, as
                                                        defined by the policy
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project will neither finance pesticides nor will they be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        used in the project
                         Physical Cultural        No    OP/BP 4.11 is not triggered because there is no indication
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           of presence of physical cultural resources within the
                                                        premises of the power plant in Tarakhil village, selected
                                                        for the construction of the training center building.
                                                        However, the site specific ESMP for the civil work under
                                                        component 2, will include guidelines for a Chance Find
                                                        Procedure in accordance to National Law.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    This policy is not triggered as there are no Indigenous
                         BP 4.10                        Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP 4.10 within the
                                                        project area that could potentially benefit or be adversely
                                                        affected by the Project’s investments.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   This technical assistance project will neither involve
                         OP/BP 4.12                     involuntary resettlement nor land acquisition. However,
                                                        this policy is triggered as feasibility studies for future
                                                        power distribution investment projects may recommend
                                                        some limited land acquisition. Training on the preparation
                                                        of pre-feasibility/feasibility studies on power distribution
                                                        planning and investment will be financed under



                                                         Page 3 of 7
                                                                      component 1. Very small areas of land may be bought
                                                                      outright (willing buyer- willing seller) to facilitate the
                                                                      siting of electricity poles and pylons. A Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Policy Framework (RPF) is included as part of the ESMF
                                                                      to guide preparation of Resettlement Action Plan (where
                                                                      required).
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project does not have any activity involving dams.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No            The project does not have any activity that will affect
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The project does not involve any activity in any known
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          disputed area.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No environmental and social impacts are envisaged under component one of this Technical
                              Assistance project. Capacity building to improve preparation of pre-feasibility and feasibility
                              studies is a core element of this component and will include a range of training initiatives to help
                              DABS’ staff identify and address potential downstream environmental and social impacts
                              associated with the planning and implementation of future distribution investment projects. This
                              ESMF, therefore, sets out general policies, codes of practice, guidelines and procedures to inform
                              the content and design of such trainings and help DABS’ staff manage potential environmental
                              and social impacts in future power investment projects. It should be noted that negative impacts of
                              power distribution projects are considered negligible and limited to the siting of poles and sub
Public Disclosure Copy




                              power stations as well as the safe disposal of old transformers which may contain hazardous
                              materials such as polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB).

                              Construction of the training center under component two may cause limited, temporary and
                              localized impacts including dust and noise pollution, increased construction traffic, establishment
                              of temporary workers’ camp etc. These impacts are expected to be small and temporary and either
                              reversed or mitigated through an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and
                              construction contracts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              The DABS Planning and Capacity Support supported activities are not expected to cause any
                              potential indirect or long term impacts because appropriate institutional arrangements for
                              environmental and social management would be put in place throughout project implementation
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The proposed civil work under component two for construction of the training center building will
                              be constructed in the premises of the power plant in Tarakhil village in Dehsabz district, and
                              therefore no alternatives were considered.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an


                                                                        Page 4 of 7
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The implementing agency is Da Afghanistan Brishna Shirkat (DABS), and has prepared an ESMF
                           for this project. The Chief Operating Officer (COO) of DABS will have overall responsibility for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ensuring compliance with the requirements set out in the ESMF. The environmental and social
                           safeguards officers assigned to the Naghlu Hydropower Rehabilitation Project (NHRP) will also
                           take responsibility for overseeing the implementation of this project’s ESMF provisions during
                           preparation, implementation, monitoring and evaluation of all distribution investment projects.

                           DABS will also prepare an ESMP for the project, once the exact location of the training center in
                           Tarakhel compound is determined, and after the completion of the design of the training center.
                           Currently, procurement of a consulting firm to design the training center is under way, but the
                           design can be completed within five months only after the project approval.

                           The NHRP’s safeguards officers have benefited from several training events organized by the
                           Bank office in Kabul, including training in Management of Land Acquisition, Resettlement and
                           Rehabilitation organized by BRAC University/World Bank.

                           Likewise, the capacity building activities under preparation of pre-feasibility and feasibility
                           studies (component one of this project) will include training for DABS staff on all aspects of the
                           ESMF including the ESIA process, preparation of site-specific ESMPs for investment projects,
                           monitoring and reporting on progress of Environmental and Social Management issues or
                           otherwise. Emphasis will be placed on creating/raising awareness of and building capacity to
                           manage social and environmental issues among DABS’ staff, including the relevant safeguards
                           focal officers.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The major stakeholders are MEW, DABS, NEPA, relevant NGOs, relevant private sector entities,
                           academia and particularly the relevant local communities if especially in the distribution system in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the future projects.

                           Also, the DABSs staff will be properly trained how to undertake a meaningful consultation with
                           the relevant stakeholders in a way and format they understand.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   09-Apr-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                05-May-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive   ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Afghanistan                                                   25-Apr-2015
                           Comments: Only an ESMF has been prepared for the project at this stage, disclosed on 25-
                                         Apr-2015.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                   ////
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                ////


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.
                         An ESMF with RPF has been prepared for the DABS capacity development project.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional    Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Abdul Hamid Quraishi
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                           Date: 09-Dec-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Julia Bucknall (PMGR)                       Date: 13-Dec-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
