                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                         Report No.:ISDSA20497
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 06-Apr-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               07-Apr-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Ghana                        Project ID:             P151026
    Project Name:                     Transport Sector Improvement Project (P151026)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Petrus Benjamin Gericke
    Estimated Appraisal               05-Apr-2017                  Estimated Board         23-May-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GTI07                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                       Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           150.00                        Total Bank Financing: 150.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                      Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                               150.00
    Total                                                                                                     150.00
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objectives are to: (i) reduce travel time on selected parts of the classified road
    network in Northern Ghana, (ii) promote road safety, and (iii) strengthen the institutional management of the
    transport sector.
    3. Project Description
    A. Project Components

    1. The Project will be structured around three components. These are the following with a description of the
    major activities included in each Component. Minor activities that will not have an impact on the outcome of the
    Project are excluded in this description:

    Component 1: Road Asset Preservation (Estimated costs US$125.0 million):



                                                    Page 1 of 13
2. This Component aims at improving the sustainable management of the Ghana roads network with support for
the establishment of a network-wide Road Asset Management System and the introduction of performance-
based contracting (PBC), in the form of long-term asset management roads contracts based on design-build-
operate-maintain-transfer principles on rural roads.

3. The PBC- methodology will use World Bank’s Bid Document for Output and Performance-based Road
Contracts (OPRC) on both paved and unpaved roads. These PBCs will include the initial rehabilitation works
and the long-term maintenance services in lump sum contracts where payments are based on achieving
performance targets. Based on experience gained elsewhere, the duration of these contracts and associated
World Bank Projects would be between 7 and 10 years for the paved roads and about 5 years for the unpaved
roads.

4. The Project activities will be spread over two main road networks (trunk and feeder/farm) allowing the two
respective responsible Agencies to gain experience with this new contracting arrangement after which
Government could repeat and roll-out the methodology with similar, but domestically-funded, contracts.

Sub-Component 1.1: Development of a Road Asset Management System:

5. The Project will continue support, commenced in the ongoing TSP, for the development of a Road Asset
Management System (RAMS) to be used by the GHA, DFR and DUR. The support will include expanding the
GIS-system already in place to cover all the classified roads and verifying and uploading key road information
data.

Sub-Component 1.2: Improved Asset Management on the Trunk Road Network (managed by the GHA):

6. This sub-component aims at improving the weak implementation results, both in terms of delayed completion
and cost overruns, that the GHA has experienced in the recent past with the more traditional approach of design-
bid-build contracts. The introduction of performance-based contracts based on lump sum payments for
providing and maintaining (preserving) the selected road links, will provide the GHA the opportunity to assess
the benefits and value for money of this contracting methodology compared to the current Design Bid Build
contracts.

7. The selected road link from Tamale to Yendi and Tatale on the eastern border with Togo, is an integral part of
the central east-west corridor linking the three North-South corridors in the country. The road link consists of
about 118 km of paved and about 62 km of unpaved roads. This sub-component will also provide support to
operationalize the Tatale Border Post, currently manned but not operational due to lack of internet connectivity.

8. This sub-component will also provide support to operationalize the Tatale Border Post, currently manned but
not operational due to lack of internet connectivity. Government has established north-south running fibre-optic
infrastructure along the Central and Eastern Corridors. The Project will support the expansion of this network
with an east-west link from the Eastern corridor at Yendi as well as linking the border post at Tatale. This new
link will provide internet connection opportunities for all communities along the corridor.

9. This sub-component will finance the following activities;
a. Consulting services to undertake the Assessment Study, and develop the bid documents for the Tamale-
Yendi-Tatale road link. The Assessment Study includes the following requirements:
(i) To develop a concept design for any improvements/rehabilitation works, including the set of road asset
performance standards to be used to manage the contractor’s performance on the entire road link.
(ii) To determine the type and extent of the works to be included in the PBCs. These include potential road
realignments to improve road safety on the section west of Yendi, a recommendation on the best horizontal


                                               Page 2 of 13
alignment through Yendi either by expanding capacity of the existing urban roads or by constr ucting a green
field bypass.
(iii) To develop, following community consultations, both measures to minimise the potential negative impacts
of labour influx associated with the works contracts and guidelines for effective community consultations and
engagement for the duration of the contracts. These will include measures to maximize the employment of local
labour and focusing on creating employment opportunities for women.
(iv) To identify, after community consultations, the basic local socio-economic infrastructure and improved
public transport, and pedestrian access to improve the livelihood of these communities.
(v) To undertake a climate assessment on the selected road corridor.
(vi) To identify and assess the risk of disaster events along the road link. While the Bimbila-Zabzugu-road is
currently unfunded, it makes sense to include this link in the Assessment Study, as it will provide both
additional access to the border post at Tatale and the Oti river crossing will provide a second crossing of the Oti
River. This option will provide network redundancy should the current bridge crossing between Yendi and
Zabzugu be compromised in a disaster event. Such an event will cut off the entire part of Ghana east of the Oti
River from the rest of the country.
b. The Performance Based Contracts (PBC) and monitoring services for the improvement of the Tamale-Yendi-
Tatale road link. While the intention is to both improve and maintain the entire road link to uniform levels of
service (e.g. providing a paved surface throughout), the outcome of the assessment study will determine the
extent of the works to be financed under the project. The works contract will also include any socio-economic
infrastructure agreed with the respective communities and fiber-optic infrastructure.
c. Support to the axle load control program with the procurement of equipment for two permanent weigh
stations at Akatsi and Jema stations and four additional portable axle weighing units.

Sub-Component 1.3: Improved Asset Management of the Feeder Road Network (Managed by Department of
Feeder Roads (DFR)):

10. The Project will support the improvement/rehabilitation and long-term maintenance, carried out under the
PBC principles, of about 200 km of Feeder and Farm Roads in a prioritised geographical area in the Northern
part of Ghana. The exact length will be determined following actual works inputs are completed, which includes
the following:

11. Firstly, the prioritisation methodology has been determined, for each of the Northern, Brong Ahafo, Upper
East and Upper West Regions and the districts with the highest poverty incidence based on the 2014 Household
Survey. Given the interest from other donors to provide support for similar Feeder Road activities, the
Assessment Study will cover all four Districts with at least one package in each of the four Regions but the
Project will finance road rehabilitation for only one package.

12. Secondly, Government has already identified and added the influence areas of all active agricultural value
chains to the poverty maps. The Government has several agricultural support programs funded by, among
others, International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD), EU and World Bank. The IFAD-funded Ghana
Agriculture Sector Investment Program (GASIP) is developing support programs for these existing active value
chains. These active value chains include areas where farmers have agreements with specific producers to
purchase their produce. While other interventions will deliver on-farm support, the Project will provide the
much needed road network connectivity and mechanisms to sustain it over the long-term.

13. The MRH will undertake a comprehensive Socio-economic Impact Assessment (SEIA) to determine the
long-term impact of using PBCs on rural development initiatives like the GASIP-activities. This SEIA study
will include the development of an initial baseline, prior to the works contracts commencing and two
community surveys, one about one year and the second survey about three-four years after the initial
rehabilitation works have been completed.


                                                 Page 3 of 13
Subcomponent 1.4: Improved Asset Management of the Urban Road Network (Managed by the DUR)

14. Although the project currently does not target urban road network, should other project Components and
Sub-components generate sufficient savings on the already agreed activities during implementation, the project
will support the improvement and supervision of 3-7 km of lower order urban roads and associated socio-
economic infrastructure in poor areas of Tamale and Bolgatanga in Northern Ghana. The concept design study
will prioritize such proposed improvements and the final length of road will be determined based on the ability
to achieve the desired impact and the availability of funds. The implementation of this Subcomponent will not
require project restructuring since the targeted urban roads will be implemented by utilizing budget savings.

15. The works contracts will introduce Design-Build contracting methodology for urban road infrastructure to
test this contracting methodology against the current DBB contracting practices.

16. Under this Sub-component, if implemented, the project will reflect Ghana’s Decentralization Policy and the
findings of the road reclassification study. These findings will most likely result in the transfer of the lower
order urban roads to the respective District Assemblies. The project will incorporate such changes and will
support the respective Assemblies with institutional strengthening to manage these contracts, if required.

Component 2: Improved Road Safety (Estimated cost US$8 million):

17. This Component will support the activities to be implemented by both the National Road Safety
Commission (NRSC) and the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority (DVLA).

Sub-Component 2.1: Supporting the National Road Safety Commission (NRSC)

18. This sub-component will comprise the following set of activities approximately half of which will directly
support NRSC and the remainder will be linked to the road safety activities of the roads agency components in
the project:
(a) Road Accident Database Management System (RADMS): An important recent investment by NRSC is the
purchase of RADMS (Road Accident Data Management System), a state of the art suite of crash database,
analysis and reporting software, using police crash reports as input. It is not in active use yet. The project will
support the implementation of the system, including upgrading of the software for the use of Smartphone apps
and GIS for reporting, the purchase of equipment such as computers and data entry devices for the traffic police,
training on the system, and processing and analysis of crash data in real-time. The implementation is planned in
phases, starting with the centres with larger vehicle populations, eventually linking all traffic police stations with
internet connectivity with the system.
(b) Lollipop-program at about 500 schools (making pedestrian road crossings safer): The Project will support
the wider deployment of the ‘Lollipop’ program, targeting road crossing by children attending primary and
junior secondary schools. Initially piloted in Volta region by NRSC and expanded to some schools in greater
Accra, the Project will support its further expansion based on already identified national demand. This program
provides roadside stands containing hand-held ‘stop’ signs that children wishing to cross the road hold out to
encourage drivers to stop. The Project support will focus on complementary measures like painted and raised
pedestrian crossings, and other traffic calming measures in the vicinity of the targeted crossings. Combined with
the planned volunteer wardens and supportive teachers who train the children in proper use, the approach
provides a comprehensive solution. The funding would be used for awareness building among all stakeholders,
printing and distributing materials and the design and implementation of the associated traffic calming measures
on the pedestrian crossings serving the respective schools. The Project will support schools interested in
implementing this program throughout Ghana with a focus on project roads, urban areas and schools in
settlements divided by major roads.


                                                  Page 4 of 13
(c) Training Needs Assessment: Under the ongoing TSP, the NRSC received support to enhance its capacity.
The Project will continue to support the strengthening of the NRSC with a focus on professional development
and training programs for NRSC and other agency staff engaged in road safety, starting with a training needs
assessment and thereafter supporting some of the identified actions.
(d) Other Activities agreed for support: In addition to its coordination role, NRSC is directly responsible for
raising awareness of road safety issues amongst road agencies, road users and preparing public education
campaigns and materials for use in schools. As part of the project, NRSC will receive support for
(i) Pedestrian and child safety activities closely coordinated with traffic police enforcement programs that will
be directed at 116 Districts, including those containing the roads to be improved under other project
components. Specific actions will include printing and distributing posters, handbills and road safety stickers;
and printing and distributing road safety textbooks and teachers’ guides (this activity is to extend the cover on
an existing program).
(ii) Providing additional enforcement equipment to the Traffic Police, in particular to increase activities
targeting drinking & driving, and speeding;
(iii) Road safety research activities as well as strengthening monitoring and evaluation of progress made with
the implementation of the NRSC-Action Plan.

Sub-Component 2.2: Supporting the Driver and Vehicle Licensing Authority (DVLA)

19. The sub-component will finance the following activities;
a. Rollout of vehicle inspections to Private Garages: The DVLA commenced with a program to transfer the
responsibility of vehicle inspections to the private sector. This decision follows an assessment that the in-house
testing facilities lack resources to undertake vehicle inspections as required. The DVLA-program focused on the
larger population centres first and used a PPP-model where the developer would provide the financing to
establish and operate the Private Vehicle Test Stations (PVTS). Cost recovery would come from the inspection
fees paid by vehicle owners. The application of the PVTS-model is limited to centres with large vehicle
populations.
b. The Project will support the development and rollout a system to utilize private garages for vehicle
inspections in smaller towns. The support will include the feasibility study that will review the current capacity
and willingness of the private garages to take on this responsibility, including developing a robust quality
monitoring system for the DVLA, and support with the initial rollout of the system.
c. Establishing an Integrated software Driver and Vehicle Licensing System: The DVLA plans to replace its
current freestanding software systems for Vehicle Registration, Drivers’ Licensing and Education, Authorized
Test Center Databases, etc., with an integrated software system open for online use by others, like the Traffic
Police, the Ghana Revenue Authority and the Road Fund. The Project will finance the feasibility study and, if
funds permit, will support the initial implementation activities.
d. Institutional Strengthening: The project will support training and capacity building of the driver testing and
PVTS-oversight responsibilities of the DVLA through a combination of international and on-the-job training of
DVLA-staff.

Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building (Estimated cost: US$ 17 million):

20. Government has a general vision to modernise the transport sector in general and the Road Sub-sector in
particular to improve the management efficiency of the respective Road Agencies in response to the increasing
demands for reliable road infrastructure. The MOT and MRH will coordinate the agreed activities to assess the
current status of transport sector management in Ghana. These findings will be used to identify opportunities to
improve the management of the road sub-sector through internal reforms and potential restructuring of the
current agencies and ministries.

21. The project will support the implementation of the several updated sector policies, the most important being


                                                 Page 5 of 13
the updated NTP and Tolling Policy. A central part of the institutional strengthening will be the efficiency
assessment of the Road Sub-sector Agencies and the implementation of the initial restructuring and
recommended reform activities.

22. The Government is completing a Public Expenditure and Institutional Review (PEIR) of the Transport
Sector. The PEIR reviewed and analyzed the performance of 14 Departments and Agencies under MOT and 4
under MRH against their mandate and responsibilities and assessed the efficiency of the sector in its planning
and implementation of planned programs. The initial outcomes of the PEIR point to weak policy formulation
and oversight function and inadequate financial reporting capacity while there is a tendency to overcommit
funds. The final analysis of the institutional and financial efficiency will be a building block for the review of
the National Transport Policy, the Road Sub-sector Institutional Review, and the development of the National
Multimodal Transport Master Plan as described below.

Sub-Component 3.1: Institutional Strengthening

23. The Project will support the following activities:
(a) Institutional Review the Road Sub-Sector Agencies: This study will review the current functions and
responsibilities of the MRH and its two Departments, the DUR and DFR, the Local Government Agencies
managing the urban and farm road networks, respectively; GHA; and, the Road Fund. The core function of the
Road Fund is to manage the revenues of the Road Fund and to allocate such funding for both road maintenance
and improvement. Funding allocations for road maintenance has been irregular and inadequate, as about the half
of the road fund is spent in road development, construction and rehabilitation. Related to its core function, there
is a need to reassess its mandate to improve its efficiency and effectiveness in road financing. The initial
findings of the PEIR show that all Road Agencies require improvement of their planning and execution capacity
and strengthening their operational functions. The outcome of this study will define the restructuring options
and implementation actions required to improve and modernise the road sub-sector. These actions would include
amendments to current legislation, to develop a more sustainable funding system and to limit the cost of
managing and implementing works. Future Bank support will build on the outcome of this study and will further
support Government to operationalize the recommended improvements.

(b) Support Road sub-sector Reform: Following Government’s approval of the recommendations of the
Institutional Review of the Road Sub-sector, the Project will support some of the initial restructuring and its
implementation activities, the extent to be agreed once the accepted study recommendations are known. Follow-
on Transport Projects will focus on supporting the remaining reform implementation activities.
(c) Review the National Transport Policy of 2008: The Project will support the dissemination and
implementation of the NTP, currently being updated under the ongoing TSP. The updated NTP will include, for
the first time, the impact of climate change, regional integration and decentralisation, regulation of transport
services and improved management by and oversight of the respective agencies. First order priorities would be
to strengthen the respective Agencies to implement the new requirements of the NTP.
(d) Develop a National Multi-Modal Transport Master Plan for Ghana (NMMTMP). This study will build on the
recommendations of the National Transport Policy review. The outcome of this study will provide Ghana with
a comprehensive, integrated multimodal Master Plan that could be, with regular updates, the basis for
sustainable long-term investment decisions, incorporating their environmental and social implications, in the
transport sector and in response to future transportation demand.
(e) Assist the MOT to implement and operationalize a comprehensive, nationwide Transport Sector Monitoring
and Data Management System. The MOT/MRH already designed a sector-wide Monitoring and Evaluation
System. The Project will support the implementation of this system on a software platform, inclusive of the cost
of the software development, supporting hardware, training and the first data collection activities. The project
will finance a review of the System two years after implementation and will, subject to agreement with the
MOT, provide support for the implementation of some of the recommendations.


                                                 Page 6 of 13
(f) Implement the Ghana Tolling Policy. Government is currently reviewing an earlier draft Tolling Policy with
the aim to develop and submit a Tolling Policy to Cabinet for approval. The new Tolling Policy will address and
modernize general toll collection methods for national roads, as well as providing policy guidance to introduce
PPP-concessions, currently planned for the Accra-Tema and Accra-Takoradi road links and other future PPP
roads. Following approval of the Policy by Government, the Project will support the dissemination and
implementation of the Policy.

Sub-Component 3.2: Supporting Capacity Building

24. Capacity Building: The project will support limited capacity building across the different Agencies
benefitting from the program. This will include a mix of short-term international and local courses as well as
specific, agreed post-graduate training programs, if considered essential. The agreed approach will be for the
MRH/MOT to prepare an Annual Training Program for review and agreement by World Bank. Once agreed, the
respective Agencies will implement the program. Government will provide regular feedback through the agreed
project reporting on the status of implementation and impacts of the training.

Sub-Component 3.3: Supporting Project Implementation

25. This Component will provide for technical assistance, equipment, training and operating costs for:
a. Project management and implementation oversight;
b. Project monitoring and evaluation; and
c. Operating costs of the Project Office including the three AITs.

26. Capacity Building: Project implementation support will specifically include implementation of citizen
engagement (CE) mechanisms, HIV/AIDS, and gender- targeted activities as following:
a. Behavior change and awareness raising interventions on HIV/AIDS and STD-prevention among beneficiary
communities to both increase awareness and knowledge of HIV/AIDS and STD, and to reduce HIV-affected
people’s discrimination and stigma;
b. Awareness raising and behavior change interventions on GBV among female and male beneficiaries to
minimise GBV. This will include trainings on GBV preven tion, care and report mechanisms to community
health workers;
c. Increase the use of community monitoring committees in each beneficiary community to bring back citizens’
ownership on project development and implementation as well as to promote a constant dialogue and
collaboration between communities, Government and campsite workers; and
d. Ad hoc mechanisms allowing beneficiaries to report any questions and concerns associated with project’s
development and including these in the grievance redress system.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
27. The Tamale-Yendi-Tatale corridor and the regions where the feeder roads projects are planned falls within
the general woodland Savanna ecosystem type in Ghana. The topography is gently rolling with average height
of the plain ranging between 180m and 300m above sea level. Small rounded hills composed mainly of granite
are scattered on this plain. The generally flat terrain is characterized by subsurface hard pans. Vegetation is
mainly woodland savannah. This comprises of a mixture of trees, shrub and tall grass species. The trees and
shrub matrix may form a light canopy often less than 15 m high. There is intermittent riparian vegetation or
fringing forest along water courses.

28. With respect to the Tamale-Yendi-Tatale road, there are three forest reserves along the corridor. These are
the Sinsablegbini, Gunkwibi and Biligu forest reserves. The reserves were established primarily to protect the
headwaters of various tributaries, prevent soil erosion as well as ensure the provision of thatch and poles for


                                                Page 7 of 13
local housing needs. Other uses include plantations for fuel wood, fire protection, prevention and control.
Typical of the forest reserves found in the area is the conversion into plantation of various exotic species,
notably Teak and Eucalyptus. Recurrent wild fire is prevalent in the general landscape and occurs annually.

29. The reserves are completely surrounded by predominantly farming communities most of which are situated
right at the boundaries with high dependence of the surrounding communities on the reserves for firewood.
Hunting pressure and human activities in the reserves are high. Besides hunting and collection of fire wood,
local communities also graze their cattle in the reserves.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Anil H. Somani( GSURR )
 Asferachew Abate Abebe( GEN01 )
 Demba Balde( GSU01 )
 Gloria Malia Mahama( GSU01 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                            Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01           Yes            This is a Category B project which includes
                                                             maintenance and rehabilitation of the existing
                                                             Tamale-Yendi-Tatale and feeder / farm roads. The
                                                             potential adverse environmental and social impacts
                                                             are expected to be minor, site specific and largely
                                                             reversible and manageable. The mitigation
                                                             measures will be identified in the project
                                                             Environmental and Social Impact Assessment.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                   Yes            The policy is triggered because some of the feeder /
                                                             farm roads (yet to be identified) may pass through
                                                             or near natural habitats or protected areas.
                                                             However, there are no natural or sensitive or
                                                             protected natural habitats in the vicinity of the main
                                                             Tamale-Yendi-Tatale road to be rehabilitated /
                                                             maintained. Much of the area is already settled and
                                                             cleared for subsistence farming.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                            Yes            In the Tamale-Yendi-Tatale road trunk, there are
                                                             three forest reserves along the corridor. However,
                                                             the forests are all degraded and heavily used by
                                                             communities living around for fire wood and
                                                             grazing. Measures to avoid any further impacts on
                                                             the reserve forests as a result of constructions at the
                                                             Tamale and Tatale road are included in the project’s
                                                             Environment and Social Assessment.
Pest Management OP 4.09                       No             The policy is not triggered because the project is
                                                             not expected to procure or lead to increased use of
                                                             pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11        Yes            The policy is triggered due to potential for chance
                                                             finds during earth works on Tamale and Tatale and
                                                             fedder roads yet to be identified . The policy

                                                Page 8 of 13
                                                                  requirements will be incorporated in the project
                                                                  Environmental and Social Management Plans to
                                                                  include a procedure for dealing with cases of
                                                                  chance finds.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No             The policy is not triggered because there are no
                                                                  indigenous people (as per definition) in the project
                                                                  area.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes            OP 4. 12 is triggered because this project involves
                                                                  rehabilitation of the Tamale-Yendi-Tatale and
                                                                  about 150-250 km of Feeder/Farm roads location of
                                                                  which is yet to be identified. Specific activities
                                                                  include surface paving, drainage, provision for
                                                                  sidewalks, roadside furniture, etc. These activities
                                                                  may result in loss of residential housing and other
                                                                  assets, relocation or obstruction of small business
                                                                  and possible destruction of crops.

                                                                  Given that location of the feeder roads are not
                                                                  known and the concept design of the trunk road is
                                                                  not also confirmed, an RPF has been prepared,
                                                                  reviewed, cleared and disclosed in-country and at
                                                                  Infoshop. In line with OP4.12, follow up
                                                                  Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or ARAP will be
                                                                  prepared when the exact road sections, designs and
                                                                  alignment are known. This will be submitted with
                                                                  the designs for review and approval. The action
                                                                  plan will be cleared, disclosed in-country and at
                                                                  Infoshop, and fully implemented before civil works
                                                                  commence.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No             The Project does not involve construction or
                                                                  rehabilitation / maintenance of dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  The Project does not involve International
    7.50                                                          Waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No             The Project does not involve Disputed Areas.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project is classified as Category B as the project and sub project activities are not expected to lead to any
    large scale, significant, or irreversible environmental or social impacts.

    The improvement of roads in villages would include the provision for an adequate road prism that includes the
    pavement surface, drainage and provision for sidewalks. In some cases, smaller works may be included to
    improve the basic access to local markets. Any potential environmental safeguard concerns related to the project
    are minimal to moderate, given that the project is largely confined to rehabilitation / maintenance of the existing
    roads. Most impacts will be related to dust, noise, soil erosion, safety, drainage, quarry and borrow area

                                                     Page 9 of 13
management. Bridge construction and repairs will require a more extensive environmental assessment and
mitigation / monitoring measures to minimize and ensure minimal water pollution and impacts on aquatic life.
Other environmental issues include water abstraction, erosion control during construction, adequate drainage
(given the flat terrain), etc. from the social side, residential houses, small businesses, crops and other assets may
be impacted during these works. These activities will be carefully reviewed following the procedures set out in
the project ESA and RPF to ensure compliance with the Bank’s safeguards policies and Government
regulations.

There will be an Assessment Study to complete the concept design for all the road works and will develop an
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA)/ESMP and a RAP based on the concept designs. These
ESIAs and RAPs will be developed by the Government and will be approved and disclosed by the Government
and the World Bank.

In 1999, the Government of Ghana by an Act of Parliament, gave high priority to pedestrian safety as well as
bus and heavy goods vehicle safety interventions, reflecting the high numbers of deaths and serious injuries
associated with these road users. In 2014 there were 1,836 deaths on the roads in Ghana, some 40% being
pedestrians and 23% of the total deaths were children under 16. The project will support Road Accident
Database Management System (RADMS), support wider deployment of Lollipop Program at about 500 schools,
support training needs and pedestrian education and other safety programs.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Given that the project does not open new routes and is largely limited to rehabilitation maintenance of the
existing roads, no indirect or long term adverse environmental or social impacts are expected. On the other hand,
the rehabilitation of the Tamale-Yendi-Tatale road and installation of fiber optic cable could open up the border
post with Togo bringing positive growth to the area. The construction of a potential new bridge over Oti River
would provide second crossing to access Tatale and minimize the potential for isolation of the area if the
existing bridge is damaged or closed. Through consultation, the project will identify and improve other basic
socio-economic infrastructure along the road corridor for improved livelihoods.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
For the feeder roads, the project is expected to consider alternatives, following the suggestion provided in the
ESA, to avoid and minimize adverse impacts. Similarly, design for the Tamale and Tatale road would consider
alternatives to avoid and minimize adverseimpacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Ministry of Roads and Highways has an established record in implementing AfDB and World Bank projects
under the Bank’s safeguard policies. They have a number of professional Environmental Officers in each agency
responsible for infrastructure projects and who have experience in implementing Bank financed transport
projects, but may require skill upgrade, resources and in some cases additional staff. Under TSIP, full time
Monitoring Consultant will be engaged who will monitor the performance of the contractor to deliver the
promised product in terms of safety, riding surface, maintenance, environment, etc. An amount of USD 2.1M
has also been allocated to build sufficient capacity within MRH by hiring safeguards specialists and by
providing logistical support for improved government oversight of the project.

The contractor’s team will also be staffed by Environmental and Social specialist to effectively implement the
ESMP and RAP.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                                                 Page 10 of 13
   The key project stakeholders will include local communities along the roads, businesses, pedestrians, motorists,
   passengers, mini bus drivers, bus operators, farmers, truckers, etc. The key stakeholders have been consulted
   during the preparation of the ESA and RPFand further consultations will be carried out during the preparation of
   ESIAs and RAP. An NGO will also be hired to facilitate consultations guided by a consultation plan throughout
   the project implementation periods. The safeguards instruments will be disclosed at the national, regional,
   district and local levels. Places of disclosure include print media, various institutions including Ministry of
   Roads and Highways, Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development, Ministry of Lands and Natural
   Resources, EPA, Lands Commission, Highway Authority, Feeder Roads and also Urban Roads as relevant,
   LUSPA, District Assemblies within the affected areas and in the affected local communities.

   Copies of the documents will be left with the local authorities and at the Chief’s palace and with the interested
   CSOs and CBOs and the affected communities will be informed appropriately.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                              05-Apr-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                           05-Apr-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Ghana                                                                          05-Apr-2017
 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      05-Apr-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   05-Apr-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Ghana                                                                      05-Apr-2017
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [X]         No []         NA           []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [X]         No []         NA           []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                  Yes [X]         No []         NA           []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes []          No [X]        NA           []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes []          No []         NA           [X]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?

                                                   Page 11 of 13
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural       Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          property?
          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the     Yes []      No []        NA    [X]
          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                 Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards   Yes []      No []        NA    [X]
          or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes []      No []        TBD   [X]
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []      No []        TBD   [X]
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional        Yes []      No [X]       NA    []
          issues and constraints been carried out?
          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to        Yes []      No []        NA    [X]
          overcome these constraints?
          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,      Yes []      No [X]       NA    []
          does it include provisions for certification system?
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]     No []        NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                  Name:Petrus Benjamin Gericke
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                   Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)           Date: 07-Apr-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:             Name: Richard Martin Humphreys       Date: 07-Apr-2017
                                               (PMGR)


                                                        Page 12 of 13
Page 13 of 13
