INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 176
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Mar-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ecuador                    Project ID:  P151963
Project Name: Ecuador - Sustainable Family Farming Modernization Project (P151963)
Task Team       Remi Charles Andre Trier
Leader(s):
Estimated       24-Mar-2015                Estimated    02-Jul-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (56%), Irrigation and drainage
(37%), Agricultural extension and research (4%), Agr o-industry, marketing, and
trade (3%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (50%), Water resource management (20%),
Rural markets (20%), Climate change (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     129.10            Total Bank Financing:   80.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   20.50
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      80.00
SPAIN, Govt. of                                                            20.00
LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                         8.60
Total                                                                     129.10
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 12


﻿The project development objective is to enhance incomes of small and medium sized farm
households by supporting more productive and climate-smart use for land and water.
3. Project Description
O
U         Project Beneficiaries and areas
The project beneficiaries groups are small and medium-sized family farmers, including indigenous
communities. Small and Medium farmers are established by MAGAP according agroclimatological
regions:
*      Sierra: 0 - 5 ha. (small farmers) - 5 to 20 ha. (medium farmers)
*      Costa: 0-20 ha. (small farmers) - 20 to 40 ha (medium farmers)
Project areas. While the project is national in scope, the Sierra Central and the Coastal regions are the
main target areas for investment subprojects where climatological conditions justify investments in
water storage and irrigation to foster diversification and intensification of agriculture. It is expected
to benefit 14,150 families in a total area of 12,400ha in 17 Provinces
The proposed project (US$80 million in IBRD financing and US$20 million of co-financing from
the Spanish Cooperation/AECID) will be implemented over a period of five years and comprises
three components: (1) Investments for climate-smart sub-projects; (2) Capacity building for
institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries' organizations and; (3) Project Management.
Component 1: Investments for climate-smart sub-projects (US$100.5 million; US$ 63.8 million from
World Bank loan)
Subcomponent 1.1: Productive Investments (US$ 93.7 million; US$ 59.5 million from WB Loan)
This sub-component 1.1 will finance subprojects aligned with the project objective and provincial
priorities related to the following investments: (i) individual and/or collective small water storages
(ponds); (ii) on-farm investments for modernization of irrigation techniques (drip, sprinkler or
modern gravity techniques) and; (iii) complementary works aiming at improving off-farm irrigation
and drainage networks.
o         The proposed sub-project cycle is divided into six main phases: (i) Identification, (ii) Pre-feasibility,
(iii) Feasibility / Pre-investment, (iv) Procurement process and implementation of Investment, (v)
Technical assistance and support activities, (vi) Closing and transfer of the investments to the
beneficiaries. Detailed description of sub-project cycle including the eligibility criteria is shown in
Annex 2 of PAD.
Subcomponent 1.2: Improvement of Agricultural Practices, Water and Soil Management (US$ 6.8
million; US$ 4.3 million from WB Loan)
This sub-component will finance small investments linked to the subprojects of subcomponent 1.1,
and will support the implementation of climate smart agriculture activities. The sub-component will
adopt an integrated and participatory approach intended to encourage rural populations to manage
their land and natural resources in a more sustainable manner. This would also support building and
strengthening the capacity of beneficiaries to adopt new farming techniques aiming at: (i) increasing
productivity and yields, (ii) improving the resilience of their crops to the impact of climate change
and (iii) creating more sustainable plant, soil and water management. Thus, this sub-component
Page 2 of 12


﻿would contribute to: (i) promoting agricultural best practices, particularly integrated crop
management, conservation agriculture, intercropping, improved seeds and fertilizer management
practices; (ii) increase productivity and sustainability of agricultural production based on
agroecological and agroforestry technologies; and (iii) strengthen the management of sustainable
O
agriculture to improve the environment and living conditions and reinforcing local and cultural
identity. Examples of investment sub-projects are listed in annex 2.
The design of the activities of this sub-component will be defined according to the demands
generated by the subprojects proposed under subcomponent 1.1. The identification of investments
under subcomponents 1.1 and 1.2 will be done together in the feasibility study thru a participatory
process and participation of an environmental specialist to ensure adequate integration of
environmental aspects.
Component 2: Capacity building for institutional stakeholders and beneficiaries' organizations (US
$5.9 million; US$ 5.3 million from World Bank loan)
This component will provide technical assistance and training services to help optimize the
productive use of the off- and on-farm irrigation systems and water ponds that will be improved or
built under Component 1. Additional support will be provided to strengthen organizational and
business capacities of producer groups, communities and small producer organizations as well as
broad activities fostering smallholder linkages to markets. These activities will be focused on
improving and supporting the outcomes related with the subproject investments.
The component will support the Water Users' Organizations, Farmers' Organizations, and producers
by providing technical assistance and training, amongst others, on: (i) management and optimization
of off- and on-farm irrigation systems and water ponds, (ii) adoption of good agricultural practices to
improve production and productivity, value-addition and post-harvest management, (iii)
improvement of market linkages and access of small-size producers to agricultural value chains,
organizational development and legal advice, and (iv) environmental management at community or
farm levels (connected to investments under sub-component 1.2). Also, this component will help
improve the local supply of technical services available to producers by building capacity amongst
key institutional stakeholders (i.e. MAGAP central and territorial offices, provincial and municipal
GADs, and local providers of agricultural technical services). Additionally and when necessary, this
a        component will prepare general analytical information (i.e. diagnostics of relevant productive
systems, catalogs of agricultural technologies and climate-smart innovations, analysis and mapping
of agricultural value chains, and characterization of commercial opportunities to improve access to
markets for beneficiary groups).
Identification and design of the required technical support activities will be part of the feasibility
studies to be carried out for subproject investments under component 1. The studies will include a
specific training and technical assistance plan for each subproject and group or producers, to be
financed by the project. In addition to this, the component will help identify, design, and materialize
long-term investments in the beneficiaries' productive and commercial systems that would be
financed by the existing MAGAP programs (i.e. Estrategia Hombro a Hombro, Buen Vivir Program,
and Programa Innovacion - PITPPA) under a broader Agricultural Development Plan. See details
about this component in Annex 2 of PAD.
Examples of these small investments could be: (a) determining and implementing, through
participatory intervention, local strategies for controlling erosion, arresting gullies and reducing the
Page 3 of 12


﻿sediment load of river runoff. Some activities will focus on strategic anti-erosion works (through,
among others, biological methods and technologies); and (b) interventions on communally-owned
land to improve plant cover, reforestation and pastures through strengthened technologies and
management transfer of natural resources.
O
U         Concrete investments, depending on the site, could be the following:
* Shelter belt and wind breaks (natural fences), including reforestation using seeding and
native or indigenous shrubs and trees (within plots).
* Implementing sustainable land management practices, increasing infiltration rates in soil
through padding and improving vegetation cover.
* Sustainable land management practices, increasing infiltration rates in the soil through
mulching, and improved plant cover.
* Improving soil fertility through (i) use of organic matter as a natural fertilizer (such as
compost and others), and (ii) the importance of nutrient fixing plants planted either in sequence,
intercropped or in rotation; (iii) agricultural terraces, and other good practices; (iv) diversification of
agriculture products and the development of productive value chains and markets.
* Conservation and efficient management of irrigation water.
* Reestablishing vegetation cover to reduce erosion to improve the land-use productivity of the
lands: (a) improved pasture management, including the cessation of fire use, establishment of
drinking points for cattle, and rotational grazing; (b) awareness raising campaigns that address
destructive traditional practices such as fire use for pasture and agriculture, and providing support in
developing technical alternatives with a participatory approach; (c) reforestation of degraded land;
(d) provision of support to protect natural forest and its biodiversity.
Component 3: Project Management (USD 16.9 million; estimated amount US$ 6.9 million from
World Bank loan)
This component will support: (i) the functioning of the Project Implementation Unit (PIU) to be
installed within the Sub-Secretary of Irrigation and Drainage in the MAGAP in Quito and; (ii)
eligible costs and staffing related to the Project on 7 decentralized offices of MAGAP (Zonales) .
The component will also finance Monitoring and Evaluation, impact evaluations, progress reports,
and audits.
The Project Implementation Unit (PIU) will be responsible for the overall administration of the
a         Project, within the MAGAP in Quito. The PIU in Quito will be responsible for all the procurement
activities during Year 1 and will transfer progressively responsibilities to the Zonales upon creation
of local capacities, as described in Annex 2 and Operation Manual.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Specific subprojects are not yet identified and therefore the specific locations and environmental and
social conditions and impacts of each subproject are not known at this stage. While the project is
national in scope, the Sierra Central and Coastal provinces constitute the target area for investment
subprojects, which constitute the most sizable part of the operation.
The central Sierra in Ecuador is inhabited by a significant number of indigenous communities and for
this reason it is expected that a large number of potential beneficiaries will be indigenous families.
We are unable to identify the specific locations for project intervention as this is a demand-driven
project.
Page 4 of 12


﻿The project is not expected to resettle people, however there is a small likelihood that the project
could require rights of way or even the possibility of small land acquisition as well as small
compensation in case crops are affected by the civil works required under the irrigation systems.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Q
Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (GENDR)
Alonso Zarzar Casis (GSURR)
Nicole Andrea Maywah (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The proposed project is expected to generate overall
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                positive environmental and social impacts given its
objective to increase agricultural revenues and resilience
of Ecuador's family farming sector by promoting on farm
investments geared toward a more efficient use of natural
resources, especially water, increased adaptation to
climate change, improvement in productivity and market
access, overall contributing to an increased
competitiveness and sustainability of agricultural
production systems. This policy is triggered as the project
may involve investments in productive activities and
construction or rehabilitation of small irrigation
infrastructure that is expected to have limited
environmental impacts.
As specific sites and exact activities are not known at this
stage, an environmental and social management
framework (ESMF) has been prepared to screen, assess,
and mitigate environmental impacts related to proposed
subprojects that may involve investments in productive
activities and construction or rehabilitation of small
irrigation infrastructure. The ESMF will outline the
process to identify and prepare the necessary
environmental and social safeguards instruments for each
investment activity that may be required to mitigate and
manage potential environmental impacts. The ESMF will
also provide specific guidelines to avoid or minimize risks
and manage potential environmental impacts. Any
subprojects considered as Category A will not be eligible
for funding by the project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          The proposed project promotes intensification of family
4.04                                 farming in Ecuador. The project may include subprojects
in the proximity of the pdramos, important critical natural
habitats within high priority ecosystems in Ecuador.
The project activities will promote environmentally sound
agricultural practices in areas, which may include
innovative ideas to protect environmentally sensitive
Page 5 of 12


﻿habitats. Human activity in the buffer zones induced by
the project may indirectly impact natural habitats. But the
project will not finance any activity that could potentially
cause significant conversion or degradation of natural
habitats.
The ESMF will outline the procedures and mechanisms
for screening out activities that may cause degradation or
contemplate any significant conversion of natural habitats.
The ESMF will include provisions to assess possible
impacts prior to any actions being undertaken on the
ground. Monitoring activities will be established during
implementation to ensure that critical natural habitats are
not adversely affected.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No            The project will focus on connecting small farming plots
to the already existing irrigation infrastructure by
providing farmers access to irrigation equipment. None of
these activities are expected to impact forested areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes            The intensification of agriculture through irrigation and
potential change in production systems may involve pest
management and the use of agro-chemicals in subproject
activities. The ESMF will include screening procedures
for pest management and pesticide use. A Pest
Management Plan will be prepared to build capacity
among project staff and raise awareness among farmers
on the rationale use and responsible management of
pesticides. The project will not procure any pesticides as
the focus is on irrigation equipment and infrastructure.
The ESMF will describe the risks associated with
pesticide use and the proposed measures for managing
these risks.
Physical Cultural        Yes           The policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11)
Resources OP/BP 4.11                   applies given the uncertainty regarding the exact locations
of activities to be carried out under the project. The
project may finance activities in areas with historical or
cultural significant resources or sites such as spirit forests,
sacred valleys or other features of the natural landscape.
The ESMF will include specific provisions to assess the
potential impacts on sacred valleys or landscapes
considered to have historical or cultural significance prior
to any activities being undertaken on the ground. The
ESMF will also include provisions for the treatment of
physical cultural resources that may be discovered during
project implementation (chance-finds).
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes           This policy is triggered because the Sierra Central
BP 4.10                               provinces constitute one of the two target areas for
investment subprojects, an area that is inhabited by a
Page 6 of 12


﻿significant number of indigenous communities. It is
expected that a significant number of potential
beneficiaries will be indigenous families. At project
identification however we are unable to identify the
specific beneficiaries for this is a demand driven project.
The borrower has prepared an Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework (IPPF) with support from the team
social specialist. This framework will guide project staff
to prepare Indigenous People Plans (IPPs) whenever these
are required, and to follow its principles for adequate
consultation with indigenous communities.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes           This policy is triggered because there is a small likelihood
OP/BP 4.12                            that the civil works for the irrigation systems could
require rights of way, or even small land acquisition and
potentially also compensation for affecting crops. Since
project locations are not known before appraisal the
borrower has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) with support from the team social specialist. The
framework included a gap analysis of the national
legislation vis a vis our policy. It will guide the project
team in the preparation of land acquisition, compensation
and the like. No physical displacement is expected due to
the nature of the civil works required.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           This policy is not triggered as the project will not support
4.37                                  the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will it
support other investments which rely on the services of
existing dams. It may finance the construction/
rehabilitation of small ponds of a maximum of 1,200 m3
(microreservoirs) or small works connected with these for
irrigation water distribution but these would be smaller
than 8 meters tall.
Projects on International  No          This policy is not triggered because project activities are
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  not expected to impact international waterways. The
criteria for reviewing eligible sub-project proposals will
include trans-boundary impact considerations and will
screen out sub-projects that would involve the use or
potential pollution of the waters of an international
waterway.
As agreed during the Concept Review meeting, the team
has consulted LEGEN regarding the potential triggering
of the safeguard on International Waterways. LEGEN
showed their agreement that OP 7.50 should not be
triggered. They also agreed that the criteria for reviewing
eligible sub-project proposals should include trans-
boundary impact considerations i.e. any sub-projects that
would involve the use or potential pollution of the waters
Page 7 of 12


﻿of an international waterway should be excluded from
eligibility.
Projects in Disputed     No           This policy is not triggered as there will be no subprojects
Areas OP/BP 7.60                      in disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Social Aspects:
The project will benefit a large number of small and medium size farmers in the highlands and
coast of Ecuador. A significant number of those families benefited by the project are expected to
be from indigenous communities in the highlands as well as from afro-ecuadorian communities in
the coast. For this reason the Indigenous Peoples safeguard policy (OP/BP 4.10) has been
triggered. Because the project is demand driven, it is not possible to learn before appraisal the
precise locations for project intervention.
The small amounts of land to be used by the project for installing the small reservoirs will not be
taken involuntarily by project activities, but will rather be land voluntarily provided by the
beneficiary and used for the benefit of his/her family. However there is a small likelihood of
requiring right of way, or even small areas of land as well as potential compensation for affecting
crops and for these reasons the Involuntary Resettlement policy (OP/BP 4.12) has been triggered.
The project is not expected to have adverse social impacts; it would rather improve family
livelihoods and income generation while at the same time make a more efficient use of natural
resources, in particular water resources. The most important social risk the project faces is the
exclusion of the posesionarios, farmers who have not formalized their land tenure. Since a secure
land ownership is one of the eligibility requisites, the project will follow two paths to solve this
issue and successfully include the posesionarios. In discussions with MAGAP, it has been
proposed to recognize them as legitimate owners through their membership in the Juntas de
Regantes, as it has been done in other projects led by MAGAP. Another way is to coordinate with
MAGAP Land Department that has the mandate to support land title formalization. During project
preparation, the Bank team held meetings with this department and it was agreed that a strong
coordination will be pursued during project implementation to identify the locations where they
will intervene to support land tenure formalization. It is estimated that such a process could last
around 4 months.
Environmental aspects:
The proposed project is expected to generate overall positive environmental and social impacts
given its objective to increase agricultural revenues and resilience of Ecuador's family farming
sector by promoting on farm investments geared toward a more efficient use of natural resources.
The focus will be on efficient water use, increased adaptation to climate change, improved
productivity and market access, overall contributing to an increased competitiveness and
sustainability of agricultural production systems. The project may involve investments in
productive activities and construction or rehabilitation of small irrigation infrastructure but these
are expected to have limited environmental impacts.
Page 8 of 12


﻿The safeguard policies on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01), Natural Habitats (OP/BP
4.04), Pest Management (OP 4.09), and Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11) have been
triggered. As specific sites and exact activities are not known at this stage, an environmental and
social management framework (ESMF) has been prepared to screen, assess, and mitigate
O
environmental impacts related to proposed subprojects that may involve investments in productive
activities and construction or rehabilitation of small irrigation infrastructure.
The ESMF and all other safeguards instruments will be adequately consulted and disclosed to the
public both in country and at the World Bank InfoShop.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Since the proposed project promotes agricultural intensification, it may include subprojects in the
proximity of the pdramos, high priority ecosystems that constitute important critical natural
habitats within in Ecuador and human activity in the buffer zones induced by the project may
indirectly impact them as well as other natural habitats. So, the project activities will promote
environmentally-sound agricultural practices in areas, which may include innovative ideas to
protect environmentally sensitive habitats. The project will not finance any activity that could
potentially cause significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats. Also, the intensification
of agriculture through irrigation and potential change in production systems involves pest
management and may promote a change in types of produce grown and could increase include the
use of agro-chemicals (including pesticides) in subproject activities. Overall, the project is
expected to have positive environmental impacts through a better management of irrigation
systems and more efficient water use. No significant or irreversible impacts are foreseen as a
result of project activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project decided not to involve any subprojects which may negatively affect the quality of
source waters.
O
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In order to improve project implementation and in compliance with the Bank safeguard policies,
MAGAP has prepared a Socio-Environmental Impact Management Framework, a Resettlement
Policy Framework, and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework; the latter will guide project
activities whenever indigenous families and afro-ecuadorians are involved. The Socio-
Environmental Impact Management Framework provides overall guidance on potential socio-
environmental impacts of the proposed project activities and guidance on how to manage and
mitigate them as well as screening mechanisms to reject undesirable subprojects. Finally, the
Socio-Environmental Framework will include a gender approach to reinforce women's role and
enhance women's participation in project activities, and to ensure women's participation in the
decision making process. The management and mitigation measures will be designed to be
appropriate to MAGAP, contractor and other project implementer capacities.
In order to promote project inclusion of indigenous families and afro-ecuadorians it has been
agreed that the project will hire local social promoters as it was done in the Chimborazo project
(PIDD) with great success.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Page 9 of 12


﻿The main local organizations that will be actively involved in project implementation are the
Juntas de Regantes, these are legally recognized and are nationally grouped in the Juntas
Administradoras de Agua Potable y Riego (JAAPRE).
O
The Project will also seek close collaboration with the GADPS (Autonomous Provincial
Development). The MAGAP will establish, at provincial or lower level, a formal Articulation
Committee with main institutional key players in rural development (GADPs, NGOs, other
MAGAP's projects and programs, etc.). The Committees will evaluate the sub-projects' profiles.
*           Minutes of meetings will record all the comments, agreements and commitments. After approval
of profile, the next stages of sub-project preparation (pre-feasibility, feasibility, design) will be
procured by the PIU in Quito. The final technical studies (including economic, environmental and
social dimensions) will need to be validated by the beneficiaries' organization and the Articulation
Committee before the procurement of works.
The Socio-EnvironmentalEnvironmental and Social Impact Management Framework, Indigenous
People's Plan Planning Framework and Resettlement Policy Framework will be consulted with the
public and disclosed both in-country and in the InfoShop before Appraisal.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           23-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Ecuador                                                  23-Mar-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              19-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Ecuador                                                  19-Mar-2015
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           18-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Ecuador                                                  18-Mar-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           23-Mar-2015
Page 10 of 12


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Ecuador                                                    23-Mar-2015
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]    NA [    ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes    ]  No        NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
O
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Page 11 of 12


﻿If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes  No      NA    X
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes[X]  No[   ]  NA
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
o
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Remi Charles Andre Trier
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Laurent Msellati (PMGR)              Date: 24-Mar-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


