INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 13457
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Madagascar                 Project ID:   P154440
Project Name:    MG ethanol clean cooking climate finance program (P154440)
Task Team        Giovanni Ruta,Nuyi Tao
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Feb-2016
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN01
Sector(s):       Other Renewable Energy (50%), Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (50%)
Theme(s):        Climate change (60%), Other rural development (20%), Pollution management
and environmental health (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      28.20             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         16.34
Carbon Fund                                                      11.86
Total                                                            28.20
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective is to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions and
deforestation from unsustainable use of woody biomass by promoting the distribution of ethanol
stove and use of ethanol by households in Madagascar, demonstrating good practice of distillery
design and operations, and establishing an ethanol production safeguard system for future scale-up.
C. Project Description


﻿The project aims to support the Government of Madagascar: (i) to alleviate environment and health
burden of burning unsustainable woody biomass, integrated perspective is needed to address trade-
offs among forest management, rural livelihood, agriculture supply chain, and energy consumption;
(ii) to adopt Adequate policy and regulatory framework; and (iii) to access to Carbon finance
mechanism to be secured with Ci-Dev that can help buy down the initial high cost of ethanol stoves
and overcome the barriers to market adoption.
o
The project components are:
Component 1. Results-based Climate Finance Payment (estimated US$11.61 million - Ci-Dev
Carbon Fund)
The program will make results-based carbon revenue payment against Certified Emission Reductions
(CERs) that are to be generated from the 100,000 household adopting the ethanol cooking solution
during the five years of the program implementation period. Each household participating in this
program expects to consume 220 liter ethanol which replaces two tons of charcoal consumption and
reduce five tons of GHG emissions. Green Development AS, a Norwegian company, acting as the
Coordinating and Managing Entity (CME) will implement this program in partnership with the Local
Program Implementation Partners (LPIPs). Each LPIP will have equal access to the carbon incentive
and will sell qualified ethanol stoves in a competitive environment to Malagasy consumers mainly in
the country's urban and peri-urban area. Besides making carbon incentive payments to LPIPs to
enable buy-down of stove cost, this program will support 1) program management including carbon
credit measurement, reporting and verification (MRV), 2) Market development of ethanol
cookstoves, a public campaign to raise awareness of ethanol cooking, and promotion of good practice
of distillery design and production, 3) Establish a sound ethanol production safeguard system, 4)
capacity building to the government to harmonize policy on clean cooking. n.
Carbon Incentive to enhance affordability of ethanol stoves. Carbon incentive for each qualified
stove will be paid to the LPIP who distributed the stove over a period of 4 years from the time when
O
a stove is sold to a household. The incentive scheme motivate LPIPs to sell stoves as quickly as
possible, and it will give an extra incentive to compensate for the risk associated with an "early
mover". The affordability of ethanol stoves are significantly enhanced with carbon revenue
payment.
Qualification of ethanol stoves. The program established an open platform that any qualified ethanol
stove can receive carbon incentive if it meets the following technical standard:
*      Minimum thermal efficiency of 50%
*      Minimum heat power of 1.5KWthermal
*      Emission of CO and PM2.5 meet Tier-3 stove standard as defined in the International
Workshop Agreement 11:2012 Guidelines for evaluating cookstove performance
*      The manufacturer provides 3 year product warranty
To confirm that the qualified ethanol stoves meet the performance standard, the task team contracted
SeTAR center at the University of Johannesburg to test all the qualified ethanol stoves (three up to
date) as well as the baseline and improved charcoal stove to verify independently the stove
performance and the claimed emission reductions.
Supply of Ethanol. Uninterrupted availability of ethanol is the key to maintaining ethanol stove


﻿users' confidence and sustaining program success. Ethanol production and distribution is a profitable
business on its own once the market demand for ethanol cooking has been established. Therefore
ethanol distribution, ethanol production in EMDs and the upstream sugar cane planting will all be
indirectly supported by this program and will be happening in a market-oriented competitive
O
environment. At the initial market introduction stage, the LPIPs will diversify source of ethanol.
Ethanol will be primarily supplied from the 4 existing EMDs supplemented by potential supply from
sugar factories in Madagascar after price confirmation. Meanwhile, the program will pilot two EMDs
in cooperation with local partners to test different distillery technologies and equipment in
preparation for the future expansion of ethanol production by the LPIPs under decentralized model.
Safeguarding feedstock production. Although LPIP investment in starting and maintaining sugarcane
plantation was not financed directly by the Ci-Dev funding, the task team decide to include
sugarcane plantation into the program boundary because sugarcane plantation is induced by the
program and there is a concern that sugar cane production might potentially cause competition for
food production and encroach upon protected forest area. To address this concern, a geospatial
bioresource mapping study has been commissioned by the task team. The study took into account
data on agro-ecological zones (soil, climate, geology, topography etc.), recent land use changes
(including current information on agricultural land use), national and regional land use planning,
socio-economic data, protected area network definition and other relevant information and mapped
out the zones suitable for sugarcane production. The study also recommended establishing a control
and monitoring system to ensure LPIPs' compliance with the guidance recommended by the study.
Proposed contractual arrangements. Green Development as the CME will sign Emission Reductions
Purchase Agreement (ERPA) with the Ci-Dev to secure a forward purchase of Certified Emission
Reductions (CERs). Green Development will sign sub-agreement with LPIPs covering the
following aspect:
*      Each qualified stove will be eligible for receiving the annual carbon incentive payment for
four years.
* LPIPs will surrender the CER ownership to Green Development.
* LPIPs have the obligation to monitor and report the sales of stoves according to CDM
requirements and the sales receipts should specify that the CER ownership belongs to LPIPs and will
be further transferred to Green Development.
 *    The LPIPs that also participate in the ethanol production and distribution business agree to
a      voluntarily subscribe to the Code of Sustainable Practice on Environmental Health and Safety (EHS)
aspects of ethanol production and marketing.
Piloting two EMDs. Green Development will set up two micro distilleries in order to build
experience on EMD design, equipment procurement, construction and operation. It is proposed one
EMD will serve as a training and technical support center and spare parts warehouse for all the future
EMDs. The other EMD will be built in partnership with a conservation NGO in an area close to, but
not in a protected forest area (to be selected during the preparation) in order to demonstrate tangibly
in one single location a multi-win situation of reduced deforestation, improved rural livelihood
through enhanced agriculture value chain, and time saving from fuel collection and reduced health
risk. This conservation EMD model can be potentially replicated to other areas with suitable
conditions. These two EMDs will be operated as "Not for profit" entities. All the cash flow from the
operations will be invested back into the program and be used to provide continued financial and
technical support to LPIPs after the expiration of the carbon purchase program, and hence providing
an exit plan for Green Development, while at the same time securing long term sustainability of the
program.


﻿Component B: Technical Assistance ($250,000)
This small bank-executed TA grant will be used to support setting up the two pilot EMDs. Tasks
O
U       include feasibility study, feedstock planning, and preliminary engineering design of EMDs.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
analysis (if known)
The project has a country-wide perspective although the ethanol stove distribution would primarily
be implemented in selected urban and peri urban areas while the ethanol micro distilleries and
sugarcane plantation will be mainly implemented in the rural area where the feedstock production
cost is the lowest. The proposed bioresources study mapped out the low-risk and medium-risk
production zone which will guide the selection of micro distillery site and sugarcane plantation
Table 1. Summary of Feedstock Zoning Study
Category      Definition    Estimated Area (ha)
Zone 1
No-go Zone: No production of biomass allowed because of potential conflicts with protected
zones, competition with food production, or potential generation of important environmental impacts.
38,865,758
Zone 2 Medium-risk Zone: Biomass production is feasible and production of biomass is allowed if
predefmed environmental and social restrictions and standard environmental and social safeguards
are put in place. 39,445,371
Zone 3
Low-risk Zone: Biomass production is feasible and production of biomass is allowed if
standard environmental and social safeguards are put in place.  19,508,712
0
All the micro distilleries will be certified by Green Development in order to sell ethanol to the local
implementation partners and they have to provide a list of their sugarcane growers. The locations of
sugarcane growers can only be within the low-risk and medium risk production zone.
o      E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The program will be implemented by Green Development AS, a Norwegian company, acting as the
Coordinating and Managing Entity (CME) in partnership with the Local Program Implementation
Partners (LPIPs). These entities didn't have any prior experiences to implementWorld Bank funded
operations. Depending on the size of EMDs and sugarcane companies in the Country and local
sugarcane producers, the compliance with the National Environmental Laws is different following
the own commitments of those investors. The Malagasy Environmental law mentions that
Environmental assessment for both private and public development is regulated under D6cret No
2004-167 (MECIE). This is fairly effective but institutional capacity needs to be developed to ensure
more widespread application and improved monitoring. The national environmental law will be
reinforced by the world bank safeguard policies for this proposed program.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Demba Balde (GSU01)
Paul-Jean Feno (GENO1)


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment  Yes         The proposed activities under the component A may
OP/BP 4.01                               lead to some social and environmental impacts that
require the establishment of appropriate mitigation
measures to set up the way forward. In fact, the
potential micro distillery sites and sugarcane
companies could involve risks and impacts on: (i) the
water quality, soil pollutions and waste management;
and (ii) transportation and storage sites of ethanol. At
this stage and depending the criteria access to the
project, since the exact locations of construction of
distilleries and sugarcane production cannot be
determined prior to appraisal, the Borrower through
Green Development AS will prepare an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) that. The ESMF document will be publicly
disclosed both in - country and at the World Bank
Infoshop prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          This policy is not expected to be triggered by any of
the Project activities. The activities under the project
are largely existing land and not located within any
protected areas or critical habitat, or any area with
high biodiversity value. The feedstock mapping
study has excluded all the national parks and
protected areas for feedstock production.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          No investments in forests will be supported under the
Project.
Pest Management OP 4.09     Yes         The sugarcane companies in the Country including
local sugarcane producers are expected to extensive
use some pesticides and fertilizers in their respective
parcels to boost agriculture productivity and
harvesting. To ensure safe pest and pesticides
management, the project will prepare an integrated
Pest Management Plan (IPMP) for Sub-project,
building on experience gained under the current
agriculture project. The IPMP will be a short
standalone safeguards instrument, and just like the
ESMF and RPF documents, Publicly disclosed both
in - country and at the World Bank Infoshop prior to
appraisal.
Physical Cultural Resources  No         Proposed activities under the project are not expected
OP/BP 4.11                              to trigger this policy since no excavations, or
demolitions are planned.
No           There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/BP
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         Activities under Component 1 (i.e. construction of
BP 4.12                                   distilleries and sugarcane production) are expected to
require land acquisition that could lead to loss of
asset and source of livelihood, resulting in possible
resettlement of beneficiary rural communities. Since
Details of the proposed project area are still
unknown, the policy is triggered and the Borrower
will prepare a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
to set forth the basic principles and prerogatives to be
followed by eventual Resettlement Action Plans
(RAPs) to be prepared, reviewed, cleared and
disclosed, once the details of the project intervention
area are known. The RPF will be consulted upon,
reviewed and cleared from the World Bank and the
Government ONE and ultimately disclose publicly
both in-country and at the Infoshop prior to appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           This policy is not expected to be triggered by any of
the Project activities. The project activities do not
involve the construction of new or use of existing
dams.
Projects on International    No           This policy is not expected to be triggered by any of
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      the Project activities. The project activities do not
involve international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         This policy is not expected to be triggered by any of
BP 7.60                                   the Project activities. The activities under this project
do not involve disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
At this stage, the potential small micro-distillery partners of the project are not identified before
implementation following a detailed criteria.  The Green Development AS should submit to the
Bank for its approval prior to project appraisal the required three standalone social and
environmental safeguards instruments, namely ESMF, IPMP and the RPF. These reports will be
publicly disclosed both in - country and at the World Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal tentatively
targeted on January 20, 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Giovanni Ruta,Nuyi Tao
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 06-Jan-2016
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿Practice Manager!     Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                Date: 06-Jan-2016
Manager:
0
G-)
0
Ut
0
Ut
0
0
G-)
0
Ut
0
0
Ut
0


