                     INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                           ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA14198

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Nov-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          West Bank and Gaza               Project ID:   P155268
                                                      Parent        P127163
                                                      Project ID:
   Project Name:     GZ-Second Municipal Development Project AF (P155268)
   Parent Project    GZ-Second Municipal Development Project (P127163)
   Name:
   Task Team         Christianna Johnnides Brotsis
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         26-Oct-2015                      Estimated   08-Mar-2016
   Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GSU11                            Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                      Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (26%), Other Renewable Energy (5%),
                     Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (23%), Urban Transport (23%),
                     General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (23%)
   Theme(s):         e-Government (8%), Gender (5%), Urban services and housing for the poor
                     (76%), Municipal governance and institution building (5%), C limate change
                     (6%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       6.90           Total Bank Financing:               0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                   Amount
     Borrower                                                                             0.00
     Partnership for Water and Urban Development in the West
                                                                                            6.90
     Bank
     Total                                                                                  6.90
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:



                                            Page 1 of 7
Is this a           Yes
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objective of the Project is to improve the Recipient’s municipal management practices for
   better municipal transparency and services delivery.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
Remark on the PDO: The PDO was revised during the first Additional Financing, approved in
October 2014 to the following “to improve the Recipient’s municipal management practices for
better municipal transparency and service delivery, and to restore priority municipal services
following the conflict in Gaza”.

Introduction

This Project Paper seeks the approval of the Executive Directors to provide an additional grant in an
amount of US$6.9 million to West Bank and Gaza, P127163, [loan/credit number].

The Municipal Development Project 2 (MDP2) was designed in two cycles, each with a duration of
18 months. The financing was anticipated in the beginning of the project and fully accounted for
within the Project Development Objective (PDO) and indicators at that time. The proposed additional
loan would help close the financing gap of the second cycle of the project under Component 1,
Municipal Grants for Capital Investments. It was anticipated that there would be a financing gap due
to an increase in the population and number of municipalities (7% population growth over the last
two years) and the increased incentives based on performance. However donor budget cycles were
such that the funds were not available at project approval. In addition, the conflict in Gaza during the
summer of 2014 further increased the need for funding for infrastructure. The request for additional
financing will help close the financing gap for cycle 2 which funds infrastructure sub-projects that
the municipalities rely upon as part of their capital investments. The project is expected to be
completed by February 28, 2018 the current closing date established at the approval of the first
additional financing. While there will not be any changes in the institutional arrangements, the
financing plan will be revised to reflect the additional funding from the PID Multi-Donor Trust Fund
(MDTF).

Partnership arrangements. The Project is co-financed by Denmark and Sweden through the World
Bank administered PID MDTF for US$25.8 million equivalent. Other Funding Partners are providing
funding in parallel in the total amount of US$32.5million.

The project will continue to be implemented in 5 components. These include (i) Component 1:
Municipal Grants for Capital Investments allocates performance-based grants to municipalities for
capital investments or operating expenditures through a transfer formula; (ii) Component 2: Support
to Municipal Innovations and Efficiency facilitates learning and innovation to promote municipal


                                              Page 2 of 7
development; (iii) Component 3: Technical Assistance for Municipalities and the Municipal
Development and Lending Fund (MDLF) supports municipalities to graduate to a higher
performance category, and supports the implementing entity to build its capacity; (iv) Component 4:
Project Implementation Support and Management Costs finances project management. Component 5:
Gaza Municipal Emergency Grants. Social Accountability and gender inclusion will be
mainstreamed across all Components.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
138 municipalities in the West bank and Gaza.

 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Hana Salah (GSU05)
Mariana T. Felicio (GSURR)

 6. Safeguard Policies     Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental             Yes            OP 4.01 is triggered and requires an environmental
 Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    assessment for activities that involve infrastructure
                                          construction. The development and rehabilitation of
                                          municipal infrastructure includes roads, rehabilitation of
                                          water wells, water networks, and wastewater and
                                          sanitation facilities, parks, and others. Negative
                                          environmental impacts, associated with municipal
                                          subprojects, are expected to be minor during the
                                          construction phase. These impacts will be mitigated by
                                          the MDLF through EMP implementation and the project
                                          is classified as category "B". Furthermore, the size of
                                          funds available to municipalities under this program limit
                                          the scope of the subprojects, and hence larger scale
                                          subprojects which require a full-fledged EIA (category A)
                                          will be excluded (negative list) in the sub-project
                                          screening process and will not be feasible due to the
                                          ceilings of funds available under the project. An
                                          Environmental and Social Management Framework has
                                          been prepared by MDLF since all sub-projects are not
                                          fully known a priori. The ESMF contains provisions for
                                          screening of sub-projects and acceptance/rejection
                                          criteria, negative lists. MDLF will monitor compliance on
                                          EMP provisions of different municipalities during
                                          implementation.
 Natural Habitats OP/BP    No
 4.04
 Forests OP/BP 4.36        No

 Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes              OP 4.09 is triggered, a few municipalities, particularly in
                                          Gaza support subprojects which may require financing to
                                          purchase of some chemicals for pest control, primarily



                                           Page 3 of 7
                                             mosquitoes. A pest management plan which is based on
                                             lessons learned under the MDP 1 has been updated for
                                             this project to ensure compliance with OP 4.09 policy on
                                             chemical purchased for pest management and proper
                                             storage and handling during project implementation.
   Physical Cultural           No            The project will contain a “chance find clause” in its
   Resources OP/BP 4.11                      bidding documents which will be described in the ESMF/
                                             EMP. Any sub project activity that might trigger cultural
                                             heritage operational polices will be excluded.
   Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
   BP 4.10
   Involuntary Resettlement No               Any land requirements (temporary or permanent) for
   OP/BP 4.12                                investments to be financed under the project will be met
                                             through lands that are owned by municipalities. Any sub-
                                             projects that may trigger the World Bank Policy OP 4.12
                                             will be excluded, which include those thatinvolve
                                             relocation of households, temporary or permanent land
                                             take, and impacts on livelihoods, including those that may
                                             occur through restriction of access to resources. To
                                             screen for this exclusion, the projects will rely on
                                             guidelines in the Operations Manual (OM), which will
                                             include a rigorous sub-project screening process. In cases
                                             of voluntary land donation (VLD), municipalities will
                                             need to ensure the appropriate documentation for the
                                             power of choice for the sub-project screening.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
   4.37
   Projects on International   No            Water and wastewater rehabilitation sub-projects are of
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      limited scope and minor extensions to existing networks.
                                             No new water wells are allowed under the project and the
                                             impacts of the activities are minor and easily mitigated by
                                             EMP implementation. No significant impacts are expected
                                             to the shared groundwater aquifers in West Bank and
                                             Gaza.
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The environmental and social impacts caused by the activities of the sub-projects funded under
     this project are minor and of temporary nature such as noise, dust, disruption of access to roads
     and facilities, and safety issues. Those impacts are identified for each sub-projects and ESMP is
     devised to mitigate those impacts and implemented by the beneficiary municipalities with direct
     supervision by the MDLF staff and their hired local technical consultants (LTC). Three LTCs are


                                               Page 4 of 7
  hired in West Bank and 1 LTC in Gaza to help municipality engineers and staff devise and
  implement the provisions of the ESMPS, report to MDLF on compliance and any social impacts.

  Any land requirements (temporary or permanent) for investments to be financed under the project
  will be met through lands that are owned by municipalities. Any sub-projects that may trigger the
  World Bank Policy OP 4.12 will be excluded, which include those that involve relocation of
  households, temporary or permanent land take, and impacts on livelihoods, including those that
  may occur through restriction of access to resources. To screen for this exclusion, the projects will
  rely on guidelines in the Operations Manual (OM), which will include a rigorous sub-project
  screening process. In cases of voluntary land donation (VLD), municipalities will need to ensure
  the appropriate documentation for the power of choice for the sub-project screening.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  No long-term environmental and social impacts are expected as a result of the municipal
  investments funded under the project. Any projects that might cause significant environmental
  impacts (category A) are excluded in the screening process when sub-projects are appraised by
  MDLF.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  MDLF is staffed by experienced environmental and social specialists who are responsible for
  screening the sub-projects proposals submitted by municipalities and reviewing the specific
  ESMPs for the project. MDLF also hired regional local technical consultants (LTCs) who give
  hands-on experience to municipal engineers, build their capacity for environmental and social
  management and supervisions of contractors. Several sub-projects in the first cycle of the project
  (project is 2 cycles in total) have been successfully implemented and the activities were carried in
  accordance to the ESMF. The Bank team has been continually monitoring the compliance during
  implementation support missions, via MDLF progress reports, and site visits to sample projects,
  and the safeguards performance was rated satisfactory all through project implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders are the MDLF and beneficiary municipalities in West Bank and Gaza. During
  project identification, municipalities conduct their own consultations with their constituents on
  priority projects, MDLF provides backstopping and oversight on the process as well as project
  implementation. MDLF requires municipalities to disclose their projects ESMPs and document
  and respond to complaints using the Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM).
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                          25-Mar-2013
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                       25-Mar-2013
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          ////
 Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors



                                             Page 5 of 7
"In country" Disclosure
  West Bank and Gaza                                               24-Mar-2013
  Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      25-Mar-2013
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   25-Mar-2013
"In country" Disclosure
  West Bank and Gaza                                               24-Mar-2013
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the project cost?


                                           Page 6 of 7
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Christianna Johnnides Brotsis
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                               Date: 04-Dec-2015
   Practice Manager/    Name: Ayat Soliman (PMGR)                         Date: 23-Dec-2015
   Manager:




                                             Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
