                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA17833
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           West Bank and Gaza                Project ID:    P150991
                            Project Name:      GZ-Integrated Cities and Urban Development Project (P150991)
                            Task Team          Noriko Oe
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          20-Jun-2016                       Estimated   19-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU11                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (50%), General water, sanitation and
                                              flood protection sector (10%), Urban Transport (40%)
                            Theme(s):         Urban services and housing for the poor (10%), Urban planning and housing
                                              policy (60%), Urban Economic Development (20%), City-wide Infrastructure
                                              and Service Delivery (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   0.00
                              Special Financing                                                                          5.00
                              Total                                                                                      5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed PDO is to enhance the capacity of participating urban areas to plan for sustainable
                           urban growth.



                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Planning for Sustainable Urban Growth.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component strengthens the institutional and technical capacity of participating urban areas to
                         plan for sustainable urban growth through, inter alia, the provision of TA, goods, and training. To
                         ensure a robust process of collaboration among LGUs comprising of participating urban areas and
                         their strong ownership and commitment, this component will first facilitate intra-urban area
                         coordination mechanisms to be operational in all of the participating urban areas. Through the intra-
                         urban area coordination mechanisms, the participating urban areas will be supported to conduct
                         urban growth planning. The objective of capacity development support for urban growth planning is
                         to enable the urban areas to respond to the needs of their growing population and private sector with
                         more sustainability and efficiently planned urban spaces and infrastructure.

                         Sub-Component 1: Structured capacity development support for urban growth planning. This sub-
                         component will equip the urban areas with, inter alia, the necessary information, tools, and analysis
                         to achieve four milestones of urban growth planning: (i) establish and actively maintain intra-urban
                         area mechanism; (ii) complete baseline assessment of existing urban extent; (iii) complete exercise
                         for cost-analyzed urban growth scenarios for urban growth planning, and to publicize them; and (iv)
                         modify respective member LGUs➢❨ plans based on the optimum urban growth scenario chosen at
                         the urban area level.

                         Sub-Component 2: Demand-driven customized support for urban growth planning for the West Bank
                         urban areas. While the urban growth planning exercises by the participating urban areas are
                         progressing over the course of the project life, it is likely that interim opportunities to improve urban
                         space management and services will be identified. Accordingly, this sub-component will provide the
                         urban areas with, inter alia, TA, goods, and training, to conduct activities throughout the life of the
                         project in order to continually encourage and maintain the momentum and ownership for the longer-
                         term urban growth planning exercise. The support will be demand-driven and will be provided only
Public Disclosure Copy




                         if the urban areas steadily meet urban growth planning milestones (see Sub-Component 1), and the
                         support content is justified to benefit the urban area as a whole. Such support may include, for
                         example, TA to develop mini-bus time tables and suggested routes to ease traffic congestion and
                         enhance predictability of public transportation.

                         Sub-Component 3: Demand-driven customized support for urban growth planning for Gaza City.
                         This sub-component will provide Gaza City with, inter alia, TA, goods, and training, to conduct
                         interim activities to improve urban space management and services over the course of the project. In
                         the same manner as sub-component 2, the support will be demand-driven and will be provided only
                         if Gaza City steadily meets urban growth planning milestones. Such support may include, for
                         example, TA to conduct joint-neighborhoods public space cleaning campaigns.

                         Component 2: Project Implementation Support and Management Cost.

                         This component will finance training, operating costs, and goods necessary for the technical
                         oversight and implementation support of the project to be performed by Technical Supervisor, Local
                         Coordinators, existing Local Coordinator for the Ramallah-Al Bireh-Beitunia Joint Coordination
                         Unit, and Gaza City representatives. This component will also finance the management fee of the
                         Municipal Development and Lending Fund (MDLF) that will manage procurement, finance,
                         safeguard, and reporting for the project based on technical inputs from the Technical Supervisor


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         West Bank and Gaza - areas under Palestinian Authority's administrative responsibility. Particularly,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the project is targeting 5 urban areas in West Bank and Gaza, namely, (1) Ramallah area, (2) Nablus
                         area, (3) Hebron area, (4) Bethlehem area, and (5) Gaza city.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Dania Mosa (GENDR)
                         Hana Salah (GSU04)
                         Tracy Hart (GEN05)
                         Zeyad Abu-Hassanein (GEN05)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            To safeguard for potential downstream environmental and
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     social risks of the project activities, project is categorized
                                                                    as a category B and the instrument used is an
                                                                    environmental and social management framework
                                                                    (ESMF). This ESMF will screen all ICUD planning
                                                                    studies, exclude those with category ➢❨ A➢❨ impacts,
                                                                    identify potential downstream environmental and social
                                                                    risks, and guide preparation of safeguards-specific studies
                                                                    in parallel to technical planning studies. More
                                                                    specifically, ToRs for the studies financed under the first
                                                                    and second components will contain provisions to
                                                                    examine the environmental and social implications of any
                                                                    policy changes, modifications in land use, detailed studies
                                                                    of specific infrastructure, and any issues of potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    impact to beneficiaries.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No             Sub-project screening forms will ensure exclusion of any
                          4.04                                      studies with potential OP 4.04 impacts.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No             Sub-project screening forms will ensure exclusion of any
                                                                    studies with potential OP 4.36 impacts
                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No                Sub-project screening forms will ensure exclusion of any
                                                                    studies with potential OP 4.09 impacts.
                          Physical Cultural          No             Sub-project screening forms will ensure exclusion of any
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11                      studies with known OP 4.11 impacts. Chance finds
                                                                    procedures will be included in every sub-project ESMF.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/   No               N/A
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement No               As the ICUD only finances studies and training and there
                          OP/BP 4.12                                will be no land acquisition financed as part of this project
                                                                    or added at a later stage to this Project, the World Bank
                                                                    (WB) Policy on Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.12, will
                                                                    not apply to ICUD. This project will not recommend,
                                                                    endorse, or facilitate future pipeline investments that are



                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                                                                       on private land as well as municipally owned land that has
                                                                       squatters/ users of the land for livelihoods. This is due to
                                                                       the delays that would be incurred for the implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       of investments if OP 4.12 were triggered. Additionally,
                                                                       because studies might lead to expropriation beyond the
                                                                       time of World Bank involvement, Recommended
                                                                       Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) Contents were
                                                                       prepared and attached as an Annex to the Environment
                                                                       and Social Safeguards Manual (which has been prepared,
                                                                       consulted on and disclosed prior to appraisal), to provide
                                                                       guidance on any potential involuntary land acquisition
                                                                       after the lifetime of this project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             Sub-project screening forms will ensure exclusion of any
                            4.37                                       studies with potential OP 4.37 impacts
                            Projects on International   No             Sub-project screening forms will ensure exclusion of any
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       studies with potential OP 7.50 impacts
                            Projects in Disputed        No             N/A
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              As explained above in section 6, as the ICUD only finances studies and training. Therefore, as
                              there will be no land acquisition financed as part of this project or added at a later stage to ICUD,
                              the World Bank (WB) Policy on Involuntary Resettlement, OP 4.12, will not apply. This project
Public Disclosure Copy




                              will not recommend, endorse, or facilitate future pipeline investments that are on private land as
                              well as municipally owned land that has squatters/ users of the land for livelihoods. This is due to
                              the delays that would be incurred for the implementation of investments if OP 4.12 were triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Because studies might lead to environmental and social impacts, and/or expropriation beyond the
                              time of World Bank involvement, an ESMF has been prepared to screen for such impacts,
                              Recommended Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) Contents and general ESIA ToRs per the
                              Bank requirements have been attached as annexes to the ESMF to provide guidance on any
                              potential impacts, and/or involuntary land acquisition after the lifetime of this project. The POM
                              will detail the documentation of power of choice in cases of willing-seller willing-buyer and
                              voluntary land donation (VLD).
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              See point 2 above.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The responsibility to oversee the safeguards compliance of the project will be given to the MDLF
                              who has a long history with the Bank implementing operations of municipal development (i.e.,


                                                                         Page 4 of 6
                           EMSRP, MDP1, MDP2, LGSIP). MDLF retains competent environmental and social staff familiar
                           with Bank policies and have a good track record through previous operations. Through
                           22MDLF➢❨ s role as the safeguards agent, all project-financed studies will be screened for
Public Disclosure Copy




                           downstream impacts, ToRs of the studies will contain provisions to ensure environmental and
                           social implications are taken into considerations, and any necessary follow-up instruments such as
                           specific ESMPs. Throughout the project duration, the MDLF will work closely with the MOLG
                           and the beneficiary urban areas to ensure those aspects are adequately addressed.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The main stakeholders of this project are MOLG, and MDLF. As this project finances plans/
                           studies, TA and goods, the principle beneficiaries include 16 municipalities, 14 VCs, and 6
                           refugee camps that comprise the targeted urban areas (Nablus, Hebron, Bethlehem, Ramallah
                           areas, and Gaza City). The indirect beneficiaries include communities living in these urban areas.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Jun-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Jun-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           West Bank and Gaza                                               15-Jun-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                    Page 5 of 6
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Noriko Oe
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                 Date: 21-Jun-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ayat Soliman (PMGR)                           Date: 21-Jun-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
