                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC12579

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Aug-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Liberia                          Project ID:      P149683
                            Project Name:      Liberia Renewable Energy Access Project (P149683)
                            Task Team          Clemencia Torres De Mastle,David Vilar Ferrenbach
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          08-Oct-2015                      Estimated        22-Jan-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEE07                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Hydropower (40%), Other Renewable Energy (40%), Transmission and
                                               Distribution of Electricity (20%)
                            Theme(s):          Infrastructure services for private sector development (50%), Rural services and
                                               infrastructure (50%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     25.00                     Total Bank Financing:          0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      0.00
                              Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                 25.00
                              Total                                                                        25.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           16.     The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to electricity and to foster
                           the use of renewable energy sources.
                           C. Project Description
                           1.      The proposed Project would support the implementation of the Liberia Investment Plan for
                         Renewable Energy (IPRE) prepared by the Government in October 2013. The financing plan of
                         IPRE amounts to US$178.5 million. Other financing sources for the IPRE will include AfDB,
                         Government of Norway, USAID, the EU, and the Government of Liberia. The Project would also
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support the scale-up of the Government’s initiative to foster the creation of a market in Liberia for
                         modern solar lanterns that will provide sustainable lighting solutions to improve living conditions of
                         the population. Other financing sources to foster the market of modern solar lanterns include the EU
                         and the Government of Liberia.

                         2.       The proposed Project would finance three main activities. First, the Project would finance
                         the implementation of decentralized electrification through mini-grids in Lofa County, in the North-
                         West of Liberia. Second, the project would finance the elaboration of regulations for decentralized
                         electricity services. Third, it would support the market for scaling-up of stand-alone solar systems.

                         The proposed Project components are the following:

                         3.       Component 1. Decentralized electrification in Lofa County (estimated cost US$23 million).
                         This component would finance investments in renewable generation with diesel back-up, and in
                         mini-grids to distribute this electricity to the local population. Financing would be provided for
                         installation of facilities, implementation of safeguards measures, and operation and maintenance
                         (O&M) services. This component will be targeted at the North of Lofa County, a rural economic and
                         agricultural hub on the border with Guinea and Sierra Leone. The capital of this county is Voinjama.
                         This county is more than 200 km from the national grid; there are no prospects in the medium term to
                         provide service to this area from the national grid that serves Greater Monrovia. Currently,
                         households and businesses in this area do not have any electricity services or have limited, unreliable
                         and expensive electricity supply from informal diesel generators.

                         4.       Subcomponent 1A: Investment in decentralized generation and hybrid minigrids in Lofa
                         County. This subcomponent would finance installation of hybrid mini-grids, possibly using the
                         options of hydro, PV, and diesel generation plants in combinations that are still under evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Support would be provided to: (i) a hybrid generation plant and mini-grid in Voinjama (estimated
                         50,000 inhabitants); and (ii) a hybrid generation plant and mini-grid to serve Zorzor (estimated
                         30,000 inhabitants). Financing would include the generation facilities as well as distribution lines and
                         connections for households and small businesses, and the choices of generation technologies will be
                         finalized during Project preparation.

                         5.       Subcomponent 1B: Operation and maintenance contracts to ensure the sustainability of the
                         rural electricity mini-grids established in Subcomponent A. This subcomponent will finance the
                         technical assistance needed to define the best business model for the sustainable operation and
                         maintenance of the hybrid mini-grids, to ensure the sustainability of the provision of electricity
                         services in this remote region, isolated from the national grid. The selection of this business model
                         will be grounded on a sound business plan and on the new legal framework of the sector (see
                         component 3). Technical assistance will also be used to define the tariff needed to be charged to
                         users that will ensure the sustainability of the services once they enter into operation. Another
                         important aspect that will be defined through the technical assistance will be the ownership of the
                         assets after they have been built and have started operations. RREA, with the help of international
                         consultants financed by USAID, has already begun work on the ownership and business models for
                         commercialization of the systems based on a menu of possible options (e.g., public rural utility,
                         cooperative, private operator and hybrid business models). Technical assistance provided under this
                         component will build on this work.
                         6.       Component 2: Technical assistance for rural electrification regulations and project
                         implementation (estimated cost US$1 million). This component would finance assistance to develop
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the regulations for decentralized electricity services to complement the new Electricity Law and the
                         sectoral regulatory framework currently being finalized. This component would also support
                         preparatory studies for future investments, capacity building, and Project implementation support.

                         7.       Subcomponent 2A: Regulation of decentralized electricity service using isolated grids. The
                         new Electricity Law and regulations focus mainly on the national grid. Areas not reached by the
                         national grid are not regulated and rely on informal service providers that offer expensive and
                         unreliable service based on small diesel generators. This subcomponent would support the
                         development of regulations for isolated mini-grids. These regulations would develop the technical
                         and financial standards and mechanisms for the establishment and operation of the decentralized
                         mini-grids and for monitoring their performance, possibly including models of O&M contracts and
                         concessions with private operators and developers. It would also establish the quality-of-service,
                         technical, and safety standards of isolated grids in Liberia. Equally important, these regulations
                         would include transitional clauses to ensure a smooth transition in the longer term between the
                         current isolated nature of the mini grids and the new situation that will arise when the national grid
                         will reach these communities in Lofa County.

                         8.      Sub-Component 2B: Preparatory studies to develop a pipeline of rural electrification
                         projects. This subcomponent would support the preparation of decentralized rural electrification
                         investment projects to build a robust pipeline for future funding. The studies would cover project
                         preparation activities such as pre-feasibility studies, demand assessment, energy systems
                         optimization, etc.

                         9.       Sub-Component 2C: Project Implementation support and capacity-building. The proposed
                         Project would support the strengthening of the technical capacity of RREA and MLME in areas
                         related to rural electrification and renewable energy, mainly in planning, policy, regulation, project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         identification, and project implementation. Other stakeholders like LEC, local authorities and
                         community members, and private companies would also benefit from capacity building with respect
                         to such rural electrification systems.

                         10.Component 3. Market development of stand-alone solar systems (estimated cost US$1 million).
                         This component would finance the scaling-up of the GEF-financed and World Bank administered
                         Lighting Lives in Liberia activity that has been underway to supply pico-PV products in Liberia
                         since 2012. It would further develop the distribution, marketing, and sale of pico-PV products and
                         scale up into supporting plug-and-play SHSs on a broad national scale by assisting the transfer of the
                         solar products procurement and importation from RREA to commercial importers/distributors. Under
                         this component, the proposed project would create a credit facility providing access to working
                         capital to importers/distributors to incentivize the engagement of a commercial actor to procure the
                         products and distribute to the 15 retailers operating in the country. The establishment of the credit
                         facility is considered a crucial step to transition from a small, public-sector initiative to a sustainable,
                         private-sector led and commercially viable market for solar products (implementation arrangements
                         are to be defined during preparation). The allocated amount will be used as a capital endowment for
                         the credit facility, and during preparation the team will look for additional funding to cover financing
                         costs and technical assistance to the financing institutions and the importers/distributors interested in
                         participating actively in this market.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           11.The identified rural area is in the North of Lofa County, a rural economic and agricultural hub in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the border with Guinea and Sierra Leone. The capital of this county is Voinjama, a highly populated
                           center in the area. This area is located more than 200 km from the national grid and there are no
                           prospects in the mid-term to reach this area with the national grid, nowadays only serving Greater
                           Monrovia. The area is mostly an agricultural area.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           12.The Rural Renewable Energy Agency (RREA) will finance the safeguard-related studies. RREA
                           will carry out the safeguards studies, which include an Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework (ESMF), since the exact location of the project footprint is not yet known. An ESIA will
                           be carried out when the preliminary results of the technical studies provide an exact indication of the
                           project footprint. It will identify potential environmental and social impacts and devise mitigation
                           and monitoring measures. In order to address potential land acquisition and/or resettlement and/or
                           losses of assets or access to resources, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) will also be prepared.
                           During project implementation, once the physical area for the small hydropower plant and PV-diesel
                           facilities has been identified in the feasibility study, the RPF will guide the preparation of a
                           Resettlement Action Plan (RAP). The safeguard-related studies will be approved by the Ministry in
                           charge of Environment and by the World Bank, and disclosed in the country and at the Bank
                           InfoShop prior to appraisal.

                           13.RREA has very weak social and environmental management capacity and to strengthen the E&S
                           department, it will hire new staff. RREA will also be provided with adequate Technical Assistance to
                           improve the capacity to supervise the implementation of the ESIA/ESMP and RAP.

                           14.The recommended safeguards category for the project is “B”, as the type of interventions foreseen
                           would not have major impacts on the population or the environment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSURR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            Because the location of the works is not known, an
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      ESMF will be prepared, consulted upon, and
                                                                           disclosed prior to appraisal. An ESIA will be
                                                                           prepared, once feasibility studies confirm the
                                                                           physical footprint, to manage and mitigate the
                                                                           construction and operational environmental and
                                                                           social impacts of the small hydropower plants and
                                                                           PV facilities.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04      TBD            The presence of natural habitat at the location of the
                                                                           facilities to be built is not yet known.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36               No

                           Pest Management OP 4.09          No
                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 TBD                        It is not yet known if Physical Cultural Resources are
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             present at the project sites.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No
                                 4.10
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        Since the exact location of the works is not known,
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                an RPF will be prepared, consulted and disclosed
                                                                                                                        prior to appraisal. It addresses potential land
                                                                                                                        acquisition/resettlement and/or losses of assets or
                                                                                                                        access to resources. In case land acquisition and/or
                                                                                                                        resettlement is required in relation to the construction
                                                                                                                        of the hydropower plant and PV-diesel facilities, the
                                                                                                                        RPF will guide the preparation of a RAP.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No

                                 Projects on International      No
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 13-Jul-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Update of ESMF and RPF will be launched in June by LEC.
                                      ESIA and RAP will be elaborated after the feasibility studies of the mini-grids and electrical lines
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      in January 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Clemencia Torres De Mastle,David Vilar Ferrenbach
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                   Date: 17-Aug-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)                 Date: 17-Aug-2015
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
