INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA13206
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Uzbekistan                 Project ID:  P152801
Parent       P 112719
Project ID:
Project Name: Additional Financing for Bukhara and Samarkand Sewerage Project (P152801)
Parent Project Uzbekistan Bukhara and Samarkand Sewerage Project (P112719)
Name:
Task Team       Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Mar-2015                Estimated    18-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWADR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Sanitation (100%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (80%), Municipal governance and
institution building (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     105.00            Total Bank Financing:  105.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
IDA Credit from CRW                                                       105.00
Total                                                                     105.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 9


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The project development objectives (PDO) are to mitigate the environmental impact from
wastewater pollution and improve the efficiency and sustainability of wastewater management in
Bukhara and Samarkand. This will be achieved through (a) rehabilitating select sections of the
sewerage system that are deteriorated; (b) limited expansion of the sewerage system into currently
unconnected central historical areas, (c) installing more energy-efficient equipment such as
wastewater pumps and aeration systems at the wastewater treatment plants and pumping stations;
and (d) improving the capacity of the water utilities (vodokanals) in the areas of management,
communications and public outreach.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
The proposed PDOs are to reduce wastewater pollution and improve the performance of utilities
responsible for wastewater management in Bukhara and Samarkand.
3. Project Description
Component A: Physical Investments. This component will finance the provision of goods, works,
and consultants' services in Bukhara and Samarkand for (a) rehabilitation/construction and upgrade
of WWTPs, including effluent quality-monitoring laboratories and reuse facilities; (b) replacement
and construction of new wastewater collection systems (about 110 km in both cities); and (c)
rehabilitation and construction of sewage PSs. This component will incorporate the lessons learned
during implementation of the original project.
Component B: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building. This component will support a
range of institutional strengthening activities to be implemented at the vodokanal and national levels.
It will also strengthen the capacity and performance of the Bukhara vodokanal (BVK) and the
Samarkand vodokanal (SVK) to operate, plan, and manage their systems and social accountability
mechanisms. It will support strategy development for improved service delivery and regulations at
the national level. Specific activities targeting these issues have been incorporated under this
component. It will also include preparation of feasibility studies, preliminary designs, and bidding
documents for future investments.
Component C: Project Management. This component will finance the PCU in Uzkomunkhizmat in
Tashkent and two PIUs in each of the BVK and SVK. Support will include training, staffing, and
M&E, as well as the annual project financial and technical audits of the utilities.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project investments are located in the cities of Bukhara and Samarkand, two historical cities in
the Republic of Uzbekistan and two of the oldest towns in Central Asia. Rehabilitation of sewerage
networks and partial extension of existing ones will take place in several parts of the cities, including
their historical centers. The city of Samarkand is located on the left bank part of Zaravshan River -
international waterway that arises in Tajikistan and river connects from Bukhara to Amu Darya river
through an irrigation channel. The city of Bukhara is located in Zaravshan valley in the lower part of
Zaravshan river basin on the right bank.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mark C. Woodward (GSURR)
Rebecca Emilie Anne Lacroix (GSURR)
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Page 2 of 9


﻿6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes          The project has been classified as environmental category
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 "B" primarily due to the rehabilitation nature of the
proposed sanitation works and limited scale of works,
which will take place within the footprint of existing
sewage networks in Bukhara and Samarkand. Extension
of existing sewerage networks will be minor, not such as
to change the nature of the existing scheme. Minor
temporary environmental impacts typical for
rehabilitation works of the existing sewerage systems are
expected during the proposed investments.
Environmental impacts associated with reconstruction and
minor extension of existing sewerage networks as well as
with rehabilitation and upgrade of existing wastewater
treatment plant pumping stations and related equipment in
these cities will be minor, short-term and easily identified
and addressed through adequate mitigation measures
using good construction management practices. The
physical rehabilitation of existing infrastructure will not
involve significant structural modifications or alter
operation. For the proposed AF investments, and to meet
project appraisal conditions, the PIUs have prepared EIAs
(based on existing EIA documents developed in 2009 for
the original project) with site specific EMPs/EMP
Checklists. Two draft revised EIAs (one for each city)
have been disclosed, and it was subject to public
consultations in local language on April, 14-15 2015 and
in English in Infoshop on April 28, 2015.
The AF will also finance preparation of feasibility studies,
preliminary designs and bidding documents for future
investments that will have impact of category "B" level.
The Terms of References (TORs) for these various
technical studies, including the feasibility studies of
investments, will incorporate environmental and social
impact assessments and considerations to ensure that
safeguard issues and measures are mainstreamed into
these studies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No           There are no known protected areas in the project area.
4.04                                  The physical interventions will not lead to conversion or
degradation of critical or other natural habitats. The EIAs
assessment note that there are no known endangered or
critical fauna or flora in the project areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No           The project will not finance activities that will affect
forest, forest health and forest-dependent communities.
Page 3 of 9


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09 No            The project activities are not expected to use pesticides,
nor lead to increased usage of pesticides.
Physical Cultural        Yes          There are historical monuments and cultural sites located
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  within the project area. The revised EIAs have identified
Physical Cultural Resources (PCR) in the project areas
and assess potential impact. New network expansion will
be selected in such way as to minimize any impact on the
surrounding landscape and existing protected sites.
Specific mitigation measures for possible impacts to
PCRs have been included in the general EMPs and will be
implemented in line with national laws and this WB
policy provisions. Chance find procedures will be include
in the site specific EMPs and in contracts for works.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No           NA
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes          OP 4.12 was triggered in the original project. The
OP/BP 4.12                            investments are expected to take place on publicly owned
land but minor impacts associated with the loss of land/
assets or loss of access to land/assets cannot be ruled out
at the moment. The exact locations willnot be known until
after the project is under implementation because the final
designs are not yet in place. A reconnaissance of potential
sites where the new construction is likely to occur indicate
possible temporary impacts upon small enterprises (for
example, kiosks along the pipeline right of way) or
permanent impacts on small structures that have been
informally built (or crops/fruit trees that have been
planted) within the right of way or on public land. Thus
the project could lead to some loss of income for
potentially affected parties.
The existing RPF prepared in 2009 was revised to reflect
the investments part of AF. The revised draft RPF was
publicly disclosed and consulted upon on April 14. It was
disclosed in Infoshop as draft on April 28, 2015.
Disclosure of final version is expected in May, pending
Bank clearance.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           The Project will not finance any activities related to the
4.37                                  construction of dams nor affect operations of existing
dams or affiliated reservoirs.
Projects on International  Yes        This project qualifies for exception to notification of the
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  riparian countries under para 7(a). A memo requesting
such exception has been prepared by team and cleared by
RVP on February 11, 2015. The proposed investments are
mainly for rehabilitating the existing wastewater schemes,
and includes minor extensions that will not change the
nature of the existing schemes and which are not expected
Page 4 of 9


﻿to change the quality or quantity of water in the nearby
Zerafshan and Amu Darja Rivers. The project will also
finance rehabilitation and upgrading of the existing
wastewater treatment plants (without expanding these
plants). These plants discharge their treated waters in
channels that finally after several km reach the Zerafshan
river (that flows further into the Amu Darja River at about
100Km from Bukhara and about 200 km from Samarkand
respectively.
Projects in Disputed     No           The project is not located in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed AF project is categorized as "B", based on the fact that the project will comprise of
rehabilitation of existing sewerage networks (with some limited new expansion) and wastewater
treatment facilities (no construction of new facilities or changes of current rights-of-way are
envisaged). The project investments will trigger the World Bank Policies OP/BP 4.01 on
Environmental Assessment, the OP 4.11 on Physical Cultural Resources, the OP/BP 4.12 on
Involuntary Resettlement, the OP/BP 7.50 on Projects on International Waterways and the OP
17.50 on Disclosure Policy.
The rehabilitation related impacts are likely to be localized and efficiently prevented by applying
international construction practice and planning. Such potential impacts may be related to: (i) dust,
noise, vibration, temporary access restriction and temporary closure of traffic during works, (ii)
improper disposal of construction related waste; (iii) temporary pollution of soil, groundwater and
surface waters as a result of leaching of chemicals used sometimes as pipe coating or lining, and
by accidental spillage of oil and other products used as lubricants and fuel during works; (iv)
impacts and risks associated with leaks and spills chemicals or safety hazards including worker
safety specially related to dismantle of asbestos containing materials or pipes; and (vi) chance
finds of physical cultural resources. However, these impacts will need to be properly managed
during the construction phase by the contractor and closely supervised by PIUs respective
vodokanals, and designated supervisor engineer.
The OP/BP 4.11 on Cultural Physical resources is triggered since the proposed rehabilitation
sewerage networks cover the central parts of Bukhara and Samarkand cities known for their
historical monuments and overall cultural assets. EIAs identified specific physical cultural assets.
Provisions for chance finds are included in the EMP and will be part of the contractors bidding
documents.
The OP/BP 7.50 on Projects on International Waterways is triggered by the proposed investments.
However, although the project areas are on two international waterways, the rivers Zerafshan river
and Amu Darja, the proposed project investments are mainly for rehabilitating and improving the
existing wastewater schemes, with minor extensions, not such as to change the nature of the
existing scheme and which are not expected to change the quality or quantity of water in these
Page 5 of 9


﻿rivers. Consequently, the project falls within the exemption set forth in paragraph 7 (a) of the
Policy as: (i) it will not adversely affect the quality and quantity of water flows to the other
riparians; and (b) it will not be adversely affected by other riparians water use. Therefore, given
the rehabilitation nature of the activities under the project, it has been decided that notification to
other riparian states is not required under the bank policy.
OP 4.12 is triggered since the proposed rehabilitation may lead to minor impacts associated with
the loss of land/assets or loss of access to land/assets. The investments will take place on public
land but since the exact locations have not yet been finalized risks related to informal users of
public land or impacts upon vendors cannot be ruled out at the moment.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Water and soil pollution could remain temporarily affected during operational phase of the project
(once works are finalized) due to accidental water bursts (at pumping stations or along the
rehabilitated water supply networks) potential natural disasters and extreme climate events (e.g.
floods, earthquakes). The Climate and Disaster Risk Screening Tool developed for this AF looked
into potential climate hazards and its impact to the wastewater sector countrywide. The results
obtained by running the tool showed that there is a low risk to the overall project development
objective. The non-physical components, transportation systems and development context of the
sector are expected to pose slightly reduces impact. Some potential risks are those considered
highly exposed to earthquakes.
Overall, the proposed AF project is expected to have significant positive environmental impact
due to improved coverage and efficiency of sewage services in the cities of Bukhara and
Samarkand. It is also expected to contribute to decreased health risks associated with the current
poor sanitation conditions in the area. Environmental impacts associated with the partial
reconstruction and limited expansion of existing sewerage networks as well as the rehabilitation of
the existing wastewater treatment plants, pumping stations, and related equipment (e.g., screens,
aeration system, grit chambers) in these cities will be minor, short-term, and easily identified and
addressed through adequate mitigation measures using good construction management practices.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The technical designs are reviewed by the PIU (screening) for social impacts covered under OP
4.12. If necessary, alternatives will be considered and discussed with architects to avoid or
minimize any possible impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The PIUs in Bukhara and Samarkand have acquired sufficient capacity for managing
environmental and social safeguards under the current project. In addition, selected members of
the PIU participated in a dedicated two day training organized by the Bank in Bukhara in
November 2013.
The Bukhara and Samarkand Vodokanals (BVK and SVK) in collaboration with local
environmental and sanitary authorities, engineering and PIU consultants are in charge of
administrating and coordinating the implementation of the project monitoring plan that have been
identified in the EA analysis of mitigation measures. In addition to recommended preventive
actions and mitigation measures, supported by environmental monitoring, the EMP includes
Page 6 of 9


﻿activities for training of BVK and SVK staff and engineers in proper environment and water
quality/quantity monitoring to address the potential threats to the environment during project
implementation, and a public awareness campaign to address public health and concerns from
improper sanitation management.
The PCU will hire a consultant to develop the site-specific RAPs, as necessary. A dedicated
safeguards specialist within the PIUs in BVK and SVK (two in total) are responsible for screening
the project sites for social impacts as well as for implementing any RAPs. PCU will hire a
consultant to carry out independent monitoring and assessment of the land acquisition process to
determine if any land acquisition and provisions for compensation were carried out as planned.
The draft revised EIAs with EMP acceptable to Bank standards were subject to one public
consultation and disclosure by to stakeholders involved and benefiting from the proposed project
investments. Public discussions on the draft reports took place in each city during April 2015.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key project stakeholders are the vodokanals in Bukhara and Samarkand, local municipalities
(Khokimiyat), and other Government bodies. Their respective roles and responsibilities are clearly
spelt out in the ESMF and RPF. Local communities and customers are direct beneficiaries and
stakeholders of the Project. A wider range of the population in Bukhara and Samarkand will
benefit in the longer term from improved access to sewerage services.
Consultations on the ESMF and RPF were held on April 14 in the Khokimiyat (local
municipalities) in the respective cities. The key stakeholders identified in the EIAs and RPF were
invited, as well as project affected people. A notification in the local newspapers was published on
April 11. The minutes of the public consultations have been attached to the RPF and EIAs. The
draft RPF and EIAs were disclosed in-country on April 14/15 on the website of the vodokanals
and copies were made available to participants at the public consultation meeting.
In case site-specific RAPs are necessary, additional consultations will be held both during the
preparation of the RAP and EMPs as well as disclosure and public consultation on the RAP and
EMPs.
The GRM is outlined in the EIA and RPF and will cover all social and environmental questions,
concerns and complaints related to the project. The GRM is under the overall responsibility of the
PIUs, also tasked with monitoring and reporting on this as part of the quarterly reports to the Bank.
The GRM utilizes well-known local mechanisms (Makhalla and Khokimiyat), though complaints
can also be received by the PIUs. A brochure detailing the mechanism will be available to project
affected people at the vodokanals and Khokimiyats.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                14-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 7 of 9


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Uzbekistan                                                14-Apr-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                               14-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            28-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Uzbekistan                                                14-Apr-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ]  No [   ]   NA [ X]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [X] No [     ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 8 of 9


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Sana Kh.H. Agha Al Nimer
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)          Date: 05-May-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


