                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC15678

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mali                             Project ID:       P151449
                            Project Name:       Mali Support to Agroindustrial Competitiveness Project (P151449)
                            Task Team           Alexandre Hugo Laure,Cheick Omar Tidiane Diallo,Remileku Rakiatu Cole
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           26-Sep-2016                      Estimated         22-Nov-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GTC07                            Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     30.00                       Total Bank Financing:         30.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                              Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                    30.00
                              Total                                                                          30.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to generate investments in commercial agriculture and
                           increase processing of agricultural products for targeted agro industrial segments in selected basins.

                           Project beneficiaries will include: MSME and family farms in targeted agro industrial segments (incl.
                           producers, processors, exporters and traders); private sector representatives such as farmers
                           associations/ cooperatives (inter-branch organizations of contributing value chains to targeted
                           segments), chambers of agriculture and regional assemblies (APCAM, CCI), membership based
                           employers’ associations (CNPM, OPI, REAO, etc.); rural population in the Project’s basin; financial
                           and non-financial institutions (e.g., MFI, banks, funds) that contribute to agricultural businesses
                           financing in Mali; and line ministries/ departments (e.g., rural development, investments promotion,
                         transport, and trade and industry), their agencies and local authorities (Sikasso region and its
                         municipalities and circles). The number of beneficiaries under each category will be determined
                         during the preparation phase.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         C. Project Description
                         The Project will only be a subset of Government commercial agriculture growth strategy and
                         program, focusing on one region and two agro industrial segments.

                         a) It will focus only in one specific production basin (Sikasso region), where the Project has highest
                         chance to succeed (versus for examples: Office du Niger in Segou [governance], or Kidal in Northern
                         Mali [security]), and where agriculture, despite favorable growing conditions and diversity of crops
                         and production techniques, remains associated with high levels of poverty, mostly subsistence
                         farming (outside of cotton production).
                         b) Building on existing Bank experiences (former and ongoing operations), two agro industrial
                         segments have been selected: (i) the animal feed industry as an intersection of both maize and
                         livestock value chains and (ii) the mango value chain, already semi-industrialized but with important
                         potential that may still be unlocked. To support the development of these segments, agro-
                         industrialization entry points in the form of private operators (e.g., Cediam, Atrafel, Grands Moulins
                         du Mali) and associations (Mango association, FIFAM, OPI) have been identified, and key activities
                         have been discussed to address binding constraints to their competitiveness and build on
                         demonstrated potential growth, existing and future processing activities, and increased access to
                         domestic, regional and international markets.
                         c)        No large infrastructure development (such as agro-hydraulic ones) will be undertaken and
                         only critical rural roads rehabilitation and small infrastructure (collection center and silos with access
                         roads) works will sequenced as required to comply with implementation readiness.

                         With an estimated USD 30 million (IDA), the Project will support the GoM strategy through two
                         interrelated components: (i) the first one at national level, aiming at facilitating the implementation
                         of the Malian government commercial agriculture strategy and the generation of agribusiness
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investment in Mali, and (ii) the second one in the Project’s basins, aiming at strengthening linkages
                         between the primary, secondary and tertiary sectors in targeted value chains through combined
                         interventions in agro industrialization and agribusiness services development in selected agro
                         ecological basin(s) .

                         The first component will address the following constraints: (a) stakeholders’ lack of implementation
                         capacity, (b) lack of processes predictability for investors worsen by negative perception of Mali as
                         an investment destination, (c) weak and ineffective investment promotion efforts, (d) limited capacity
                         and knowledge of local financial intermediaries in appreciating and mitigating risks pertaining to
                         agriculture and agribusiness financing, and (e) limited financial and banking literacy and borrowing
                         capacity in agricultural value chains.

                         With US$ 10 million, it aims at strengthening capacities of the stakeholders in charge of the
                         implementation of Mali commercial agriculture program, supporting investments in agricultural
                         enterprises and developing capacity of the banking sector as well as farmers associations,
                         aggregators, industries and wholesalers to ensure a better development of targeted agro industrial
                         segments. A focus will be on commercial agriculture; i.e. agro industrial competitiveness and private
                         sector provision of agribusiness services in animal feed and mango agro industrial segments. Entry
                         points to promote Mali agricultural potential will be successful private sector actors such
                         aggregators, processors and wholesalers (i.e. relatively organized and potentially credit worthy
                           actors).

                           The second component will address the following constraints: (a) inefficiencies along targeted value
Public Disclosure Copy




                           chains due to inadequate integration of actors and coordination failures amongst stakeholders, (b)
                           limited reliable access to quality raw material in key value chains to support secondary sector
                           expansion, (c) lack of post-harvest facilities linking primary to secondary sectors, (d) limited rural
                           accessibility and rural connections to markets, (e) limited knowledge of sanitary, quality and
                           technical standards, and poor implementation of modern practices, and (f) lack of private sector
                           participation in agribusiness services.

                           With US$ 20 million, it aims at improving value creation in targeted value-chains and developing
                           sustainable infrastructure services to targeted beneficiaries. The activities under this component will
                           be organized around strategic entry points in the maize, livestock and mango value chains such as
                           aggregators, processors and wholesalers so to focus on two strategic agro industrial segments (animal
                           feed and mango processing). The Project will seek relatively organized and potentially credit worthy
                           actors as anchors, and seek to forge with or around them productive partnerships/ alliances with
                           small holders and farmers a ssociations. A particular attention will be given to the process to
                           accessing land, in respect to the existing land tenure rights. The better integration of local suppliers
                           (primary sector) around agro industrial units (secondary sector) and support to private sector
                           provision of agribusiness services (tertiary sector) will augment revenues and lower costs of actors in
                           a way it maximize economic benefits derived from crop yields, rural accessibility and post-harvest
                           gains, processing facilities, better organized value chains, and access to new markets.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The Project will target specific value chains in a given production basin. The chosen area is the
                           Sikasso region. Two main project activities could have direct or indirect adverse impacts on the
                           environment: (i) rehabilitation of rural roads, and (ii) construction of collection centers and silos
                           (with access roads). The project’s support to MSMEs activities, through professional organizations
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and financial institutions by way of non-financial technical assistance to farmers, cooperatives,
                           traders and processors in the form of trainings, coaching and business development services support
                           is not expected to have any adverse environmental or social impacts.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Bank’s involvement in the agriculture and transport sector has been significant and the clients
                           have shown relatively sufficient capacity and good will in implementing World Bank funded
                           projects. It is anticipated that the interim PIU for the Agricultural Competitiveness and
                           Diversification Project will take on this project preparation together with the PST2 PIU on E&S
                           safeguards. Both PIU have experiences in implementing Bank safeguards policies and it is expected
                           that the new Project will recruit a dedicated environmental and social safeguards specialist to
                           strengthen their capacity. If needed further capacity strengthening will be provided to allow a good
                           deliver of this project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Melissa C. Landesz (GEN07)
                           Salamata Bal (GSU01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                         Safeguard Policies             Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment       Yes        The rehabilitation of rural roads and construction of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.01                                collection centers and silos (with access roads) may
                                                                   have adverse impacts on soil, water, air quality, flora
                                                                   and fauna. Since the exact locations of project
                                                                   interventions are unknown at this stage, the borrower
                                                                   will prepare an Environmental and Social
                                                                   Assessment Framework (ESMF) to help mitigate the
                                                                   potential environmental and social impacts of those
                                                                   project activities in the Sikasso region.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    TBD        Rural roads improvements may happen in proximity
                                                                   to national parks or protected areas and therefore
                                                                   impact wild flora and fauna. However in the Sikasso
                                                                   region, the specific areas have not yet been
                                                                   identified. Should the policy be triggered, the ESMF
                                                                   will include the appropriate mitigation measures.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             TBD        Rural roads improvements may require
                                                                   compensatory reforestation and tree maintenance
                                                                   along the rehabilitated roads. Should the policy be
                                                                   triggered, the ESMF will include the appropriate
                                                                   mitigation measures.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        Yes        Although the project will not directly or indirectly
                                                                   finance any pesticides, fertilizers or application
                                                                   equipment, the Technical Assistance to farmers,
                                                                   cooperatives, traders and processors in the form of
                                                                   trainings may include the promotion of integrated
                                                                   pest management (IPM) practices. The ESMF will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   include an annex on IPM as guidance on best
                                                                   practices to the TA activities.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    Yes        Rural roads improvements may potentially impact
                         OP/BP 4.11                                cultural and historical heritage along the selected
                                                                   road corridors. The ESMF will include the
                                                                   appropriate mitigation measures (chance find
                                                                   procedures) as well as clauses for contractors.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No         There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project areas,
                         4.10                                      as defined by OP/BP 4.10.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes        The policy is triggered since the project will finance
                         BP 4.12                                   rehabilitation of rural road, and collection and silos
                                                                   (with access roads) construction that could possibly
                                                                   necessitate involuntary land acquisition resulting in
                                                                   potential loss of access to assets, means of
                                                                   livelihoods or resources. The detailed description of
                                                                   these infrastructures are yet unknown, the
                                                                   Government will prepare a Resettlement Policy
                                                                   Framework (RPF) to set forth the basic principles
                                                                                                                        and prerogatives to be followed during project
                                                                                                                        implementation once the details of construction and
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation are known and to guide the client in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        likelihood of preparing site specific Resettlement
                                                                                                                        Action Plans (RAP) during project implementation if
                                                                                                                        needed. The RPF will be consulted upon and will be
                                                                                                                        disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior
                                                                                                                        to appraisal. The team will provide support to ensure
                                                                                                                        proper implementation and monitoring of the RAP if
                                                                                                                        needed.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project does not involve construction of dams
                                                                                                                        nor will it rely on dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project does not involve international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The proposed activities under this project do not
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                involve disputed areas between countries, as defined
                                                                                                                        in OP 7.60.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Apr-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      March to April 2016
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alexandre Hugo Laure,Cheick Omar Tidiane Diallo,Remileku
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Rakiatu Cole
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor:                             Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                                                    Date: 27-Apr-2016
                                 Practice Manager/                               Name: Rashmi Shankar (PMGR)                                                                       Date: 28-Sep-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
