                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC1174

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sri Lanka                        Project ID:       P151800
                            Project Name:      SL- Climate finance for renewables (P151800)
                            Task Team          Keisuke Iyadomi,Zhuo Cheng
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          31-Oct-2016
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU18

                            Sector(s):        Other Renewable Energy (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        12.00             Total Bank Financing:                0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                             Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       0.00
                              Carbon Fund                                                                   12.00
                              Total                                                                         12.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           i)       To support institutional development and capacity building to access international climate
                           finance;
                           ii)      To reduce Greenhouse Gas (GHG) emissions by increasing renewable energy generation.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will support GoSL’s efforts for the development of renewable energy to
                           increase the share of NCRE in the energy mix to 20 percent by 2020. Given that Sri Lanka heavily
                         relies on imported fossil fuels to meet the growing energy demand, diversifying energy generation
                         away from imported fossil fuels is critical to accommodate fluctuations in international oil and coal
                         markets to improve the country’s fiscal resilience. Renewable energy provides an opportunity for Sri
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Lanka to limit import dependence and vulnerability to fossil fuel price shocks, and move toward
                         energy self-sufficiency.

                         Climate finance is key for increasing renewable energy generation and mitigating barriers to
                         renewable energy development in Sri Lanka. In addition, the country needs to build capacity and
                         prepare a robust institutional framework to access international climate finance. With the recent
                         operationalization of the GCF, climate finance is expected to grow rapidly and reach the level of US
                         $100 billion per annum as agreed in the Copenhagen Accord (2009). Based on lessons learned from
                         Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), result-based climate finance at the sectoral level would be
                         ideal for supporting the national NCRE target by reducing high transaction costs which Sri Lanka
                         had faced for CDM development, and further accessing a bulk of funds available from GCF or other
                         sources to support the country’s NCRE target.

                         The proposed project will enhance Sri Lanka’s capacity to access international climate finance and
                         improve fiscal resilience through the achievement of national NCRE targets. It will also assist GoSL
                         in identifying and developing a long-term strategy to achieve green and climate resilient growth by
                         facilitating low-carbon interventions across various different sectors. The proposed components,
                         based on the consultations with the government and relevant stakeholders, are the following:

                         Component 1: Supporting institutional development and capacity building to access international
                         climate finance

                         The proposed project will enable Sri Lanka to receive direct access to climate finance, including
                         GCF, develop business models, including public-private partnerships, and enhance the effectiveness
                         of financial instruments, with the objective of catalyzing and supporting private sector investment in
                         renewable energy. This component will be supported by a combination of multi-trust funds,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         including the Public-Private Infrastructure Advisory Facility (PPIAF).

                         Component 1-1: Strengthening the capacity of Sri Lanka Climate Fund to play a catalytic role for
                         GHG reduction by accessing climate finance and promoting public private partnerships

                         Sri Lanka Climate Fund (Private) Limited (SLCF) was established under the purview of Ministry of
                         Environment and registered under the Companies Act No.7 of 2007. SLCF’s objective is to promote
                         clean technologies and channelize climate finance from different sources toward climate change
                         mitigation and adaptation projects in order to reduce GHG emissions at the country level. SLCF also
                         aims at demonstrating commercially viable, public-private business models as a way to address
                         climate change and environmental problems more effectively. The SLCF’s corporate structure is
                         allowed to unlock sources of private finance to address investment needs specific to climate-relevant
                         sectors, and act as a conduit for receiving international climate finance.

                         SLCF still needs to grow to use a combination of public and private sector participation to achieve its
                         objectives, as opposed to the wholly government-owned model that it adopted initially. Hence, there
                         is significant scope for capacity building within SLCF to leverage investments and the expertise of
                         its investors effectively to promote private participation for scaling up climate mitigation activities in
                         the country. Accordingly, GoSL has requested the Bank to assist Sri Lanka in strengthening the
                         capacity of SLCF in order to facilitate dialogue with the private sector, accelerate mobilization of
                         private sector investment and expertise, and increase access to international climate finance.

                         Activities: In order to strengthen the capacity of SLCF, the proposed project plans to:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a.       Improve their knowledge on basic PPP concepts and fundamentals and various climate
                         financing options as well as developing financing instruments, where possible;
                         b.       Strengthen SLCF’s capacity to develop climate transactions through PPP-based GHG
                         mitigation activities and access to climate finance including accreditation of GCF application;
                         c.       Update SLCF’s business strategy to scale up the business model; and
                         d.       Identify potential GHG mitigation activities to begin piloting under the Carbon Partnership
                         Facility.

                         Component 1-2: Supporting participation of the Green Climate Fund readiness activities

                         The Climate Change Secretariat (CCS) under the Ministry of Mahaweli Development and
                         Environment is the national designated authority (NDA) for Sri Lanka to GCF. The CCS submitted
                         Sri Lanka’s request for GCF readiness support on March 31, 2015 and requested that the World Bank
                         become a technical partner to implement the readiness program.

                         Activities: As a part of the Bank’s readiness support to Sri Lanka, the proposed project will support
                         CCS in preparing, implementing and managing GCF readiness activities funded by the GCF
                         Secretariat and provide the requisite technical expertise in order to help increase Sri Lanka’s capacity
                         to access the Green Climate Fund through local institutions.

                         Component 1-3: Supporting a South-South exchange to formulate a nation-wide carbon neutral
                         strategy

                         The Costa Rican government has an ambitious plan in place to begin offsetting all of the country’s
                         CO2 emissions by using budgeting, laws, and incentives, including measures to promote biofuels,
                         hybrid vehicles, and clean energy. Since Costa Rica has made significant progress in its transition
Public Disclosure Copy




                         toward low carbon growth. Sri Lanka’s economy will likely be required to undergo a similar
                         transformation in order to implement its ambitious energy development plan and become a carbon
                         neutral nation.

                         Activities: Sri Lanka will benefit by learning from Costa Rica’s experiences by contextualizing
                         various initiatives in the energy sector, foreseeing potential challenges and formulating a nation-wide
                         strategy that reflects development priorities. The proposed project will provide an opportunity for
                         capacity building exchanging knowledge and lessons learned from Costa Rica. This will inform and
                         guide Sri Lanka’s national strategy to achieve carbon neutrality.

                         Component 2: Developing a result-based climate financing with sectoral methodology and MRV
                         systems

                         The World Bank supports GoSL’s objective of promoting NCRE generation by demonstrating new
                         applications of result-based financing through the Carbon Partnership Facility (CPF). CPF is one of
                         the carbon trust funds managed by the World Bank to promote scaled-up carbon crediting activities
                         via a sector-wide program or an economy-wide policy associated with GHG emission reduction
                         impacts.

                         The World Bank as a Trustee of CPF will purchase emission reductions under the agreed CPF
                         methodology and MRV systems to be developed by the project and as a return generate financial
                         flows to promote further NCRE generation in the country. GoSL has appointed SLCF and Ceylon
                         Electricity Board as implementing entities to manage the CPF program and agree on emission
Public Disclosure Copy




                         reductions purchase agreement with the World Bank on behalf of GoSL.

                         There would be no direct financing by the Bank to development of any individual renewable energy
                         projects. Subject to further discussion with GoSL, carbon revenues generated by the CPF program
                         will be either injected to the existing Sri Lanka Sustainable Energy Fund or utilized by individual
                         project developers for their own NCRE development.

                         The following key methodological elements will be discussed to set up a robust carbon-crediting
                         scheme for the whole NCRE development in the country:

                         •       Setting a baseline at the sector level to reflect the share of NCRE in the total generation mix
                         without the support of carbon finance;
                         •       Establishing ex-ante aspirational targets for NCRE power generation in the next 10 years;
                         •       Establishing an approach for determining the “own effort” of Sri Lanka which can be
                         differentiated from the creditable amount of GHG emission reductions;
                         •       Establishing an approach for determining creditable greenhouse gas emission reductions
                         based on the performance achieved beyond the baseline, after deducting the “own effort ”;
                         •       Developing monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) systems; and
                         •       Monitoring the implementation progress towards meeting these aspirational targets.

                         With carbon revenue and appropriate methodologies and MRV systems on emission reductions at the
                         sectoral level, this component will facilitate the removal of barriers and create a favorable business
                         environment, thereby catalyzing greater private sector investment in renewable energy generation,
                         and help increase the share of renewable energy in Sri Lanka’s electricity generation mix.
                         Furthermore, the establishment of a robust MRV system will also help the country fulfil its reporting
                         requirements under UNFCCC and other relevant international organizations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Specific sites and exact locations of sub-projects have not been identified at this stage. The proposed
                         project aims at building technical and institutional capacities to access international climate finance
                         for non-conventional renewable energy (NCRE) projects, which typically include wind, mini hydro
                         (hydro less than 10 MW), biomass/dendro and solar projects. Typical size varies depending on the
                         type of NCRE, subject to further identification and determination of sub-projects at the preparation
                         stage. The eligibility of sub-projects will be clarified during the preparation stage.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         A comprehensive policy and regulatory framework for the conservation of natural resources and
                         environmental management is in existence Sri Lanka. The Central Environmental Authority (CEA) is
                         the key regulatory body that is mandated by the National Environmental Act (NEA) to implement all
                         regulatory provisions outlined in its statutes. All development projects, that fall in to a set of
                         prescribed categories are required to conduct a comprehensive environmental screening and
                         mitigation planning process (EIA or IEE). These processes are largely consistent with the Bank’s
                         safeguard policy on Environmental Assessment. With over three decades of experience the CEA
                         demonstrates the technical expertise in evaluating environmental impacts of development projects.
                         However even with an enabling legal environment and an able CEA, field level enforcement of legal
                           instruments and subsequent monitoring of environmental and social management activities has been
                           very low. There is a capacity building component planned under the project that will also support
                           strengthening their capacity to implement the project on the ground.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Institutional Capacity of Sector Ministry and Implementing Ministry:

                           Sri Lanka Climate Fund (SLCF) and Ceylon Electricity Board will be in charge of program
                           implementation. The program intends to provide capacity building activities in order to strengthen
                           the capacities of SLCF and Ceylon Electricity Board in key areas relevant to the project.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Mohamed Ghani Razaak (GSU06)
                           Samira El Khamlichi (GCCIA)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes           The project will mainly focus on capacity building
                           OP/BP 4.01                                     activities and technical & institutional support.

                                                                          Considering the use of renewable energy
                                                                          technologies will yield net positive environmental
                                                                          impacts, with only minor reversible adverse impacts,
                                                                          in general the sub-projects should not contribute
                                                                          towards any negative or cumulative adverse impacts.
                                                                          However, Investments in renewable energy
                                                                          technologies would need screening and assessment
                                                                          of likely impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          Taking this into account, the team proposes a
                                                                          Category B rating for this project.

                                                                          Based on the experience of the last renewable energy
                                                                          project (RERED) the risks associated with
                                                                          environmental flows would need to be looked at in
                                                                          the case of Mini-Hydro sub-projects.

                                                                          As specific sub-project sites are yet to be identified,
                                                                          sub-project specific environmental issues cannot be
                                                                          identified at this stage.

                                                                          In order to ensure that all project interventions are
                                                                          environmentally sound an Environmental
                                                                          Management Framework (EMF) will be prepared to
                                                                          screen, assess, and mitigate environmental impacts
                                                                          related to proposed sub-projects. The EMF also will
                                                                          outline the process to prepare the necessary
                                                                          environmental safeguards instruments such as
                                                              Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for each
                                                              investment activity in environmentally sensitive area
                                                              and provide specific guidelines to avoid or minimize
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              risks and manage potential environmental impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    Yes   OP/BP 4.04 is triggered as some of the potential
                                                              projects, especially in the wind energy and in the
                                                              mini-hydro sectors may have adverse impacts on
                                                              natural habitats. A detailed screening procedure will
                                                              be defined in ESMF at the preparation stage, which
                                                              should contain the mechanisms to capture the
                                                              potential ecological impacts of the sub-projects and
                                                              to propose the proper mitigation measures
                                                              commensurate with the scale of the impacts.

                                                              The project will not finance any activity that could
                                                              potentially cause significant conversion or
                                                              degradation of natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    OP 4.36 is not triggered as the project is not expected
                                                              to cause any adverse impacts to health and quality of
                                                              forests or significant land use changes within forests
                                                              in the project area
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        No    OP 4.09 is not triggered as the project is not expected
                                                              to procure pesticides, equipment or lead to a
                                                              substantial increase in the use of pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    No    Social and environmental screenings will be carried
                         OP/BP 4.11                           out for all the potential sub-projects. Sub-project
                                                              sites close to the known cultural assets will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              excluded through the screening process.

                                                              Measures to safeguard chance finds will be included
                                                              as part of the measures taken under Environmental
                                                              Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       No    The project will not finance any activity in locations
                         4.10                                 where identifiable indigenous communities live.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   OP/BP 4. 12 is triggered as some of the potential
                         BP 4.12                              projects, especially in the wind energy and in the
                                                              mini-hydro sectors may involve small scale land
                                                              acquisitions. However, specific sites and exact
                                                              locations of sub-projects have not been identified at
                                                              this stage.

                                                              A social assessment/ screenings will be carried out as
                                                              part of SMF to assess potential impacts for each sub-
                                                              projects to ensure safeguards due diligence and will
                                                              prepare necessary instruments to address IR impacts,
                                                              if necessary.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         OP/BP 4.37 It is expected that the project will
                                                                                                                        support run of the river small hydro power projects
                                                                                                                        of more than 10 MW capacities, but not large enough
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        to be classified as large hydro, thus it is not
                                                                                                                        anticipated that Dam safety will be an issue.
                                 Projects on International                                   No                         This policy is not triggered as any sub-project
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   activities that may affect International Waterways
                                                                                                                        will not be eligible.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This policy is not triggered as there will be no
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                subprojects in disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Apr-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The ESMF is scheduled to be completed prior to appraisal.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Keisuke Iyadomi,Zhuo Cheng
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                                                                                                Date: 24-Mar-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Bernice K. Van Bronkhorst (PMGR)                                                                                       Date: 28-Mar-2016
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
