INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12089
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Kyrgyz Republic            Project ID:  P151102
Project Name: Integrated Forest Ecosystem Management (P151102)
Task Team       Nathalie Weier Johnson
Leader(s):
Estimated       22-Jun-2015                Estimated    24-Nov-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal       Multi-focal area
Area:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (30%), Forestry (50%),
General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (20 %)
Theme(s):       Environmental policies and institutions (30%), Other environment and natural
resources management (20%), Biodiversity (10%), Climate change (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      16.11            Total Bank Financing:   12.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                12.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                                           4.11
Total                                                                      16.11
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s) / Global Environmental Objective(s)
Page 1 of 12


﻿A. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to strengthen the capacity of government institutions and
communities to improve sustainable forest ecosystem management through investments in
management planning, ecosystem restoration, and infrastructure.
B. Global Environmental Objective(s)
The Global Environmental Objective is to strengthen the capacity of government institutions and
communities to improve sustainable forest ecosystem management through investments in
management planning, ecosystem restoration, and infrastructure.
3. Project Description
1.     The forestry sector in the Kyrgyz Republic has the potential to provide additional but more
importantly more sustainable benefits to the national economy and local communities and to help
address local and global challenges brought on by poverty, land degradation and climate change. The
inability of government to support existing forest policies such as the National Forest Program to
Support the Implementation of the Concept of the Development of the Forest Sector (2005-2015) and
the current management structure of the forestry sector perpetuate a cycle of inadequate oversight
and inefficiency. This is due primarily to the centralized top down nature of the management, the
lack of adequate information and investment in the sector, weak capacity, and perverse incentive
structures which may lead to rent seeking behavior.
2.      The Project aims to support an ecosystem-based approach to the improved management of
the area controlled by the leskhozes including forested lands, pasture, and unproductive or marginal
lands. This will be done through support for institutional reform and capacity building, the
introduction of integrated natural resource management planning at the leskhoz level and support for
the implementation of these plans in pilot areas.
3.     The Project will build upon the work and policy reform agenda that the government has
initiated and which is currently being supported by a number of donors. The Project will complement
the ongoing World Bank "Pasture and Livestock Management Improvement Project" by
strengthening the management and coordination of pasture under leskhoz jurisdiction as well as
0        through adoption of lessons learned from the implementation of the sub-component, 'Forestry
Enterprise Pasture Management and Investment,' which will support the piloting of co-management
arrangements between pasture user unions and the leskhozes. The technical underpinnings of the
Project design are informed by the PROFOR-funded study entitled, "The Development Potential of
Forests in Kyrgyzstan" (2012), as well as preliminary case studies from pilot leskhozes which are
testing new management models. The results of the analytical study, "Understanding Communities
Roles in the Governance of Forests and Pastures in Kyrgyzstan" (April 2015), which examined the
institutional, legal and operational capacity development needs for integrated territorial governance,
the opportunities for improved forest management, and the potential to limit land-based conflict,
environmental degradation and improve local livelihoods, have also been used to elaborate the
project's design.
4.     World Bank involvement in forestry sector reform is seen as critical because of the unique
expertise that the Bank brings from similar experiences from other countries in the region and around
the world and specifically in assisting governments to reform state-owned enterprises. The World
Bank also has a comparative advantage in combining its convening power with the provision of
significant additional resources required to achieve the objectives of meaningful reform.
Page 2 of 12


﻿5.     The Project will sponsor interventions in rural areas and support communities through
improved access and management of the natural resource base they depend upon. Specifically,
development of integrated natural resource management plans and support for the implementation of
these plans will improve the sustainable management of natural resources to protect rural livelihoods.
O
Through more inclusive and participatory management planning, the Project will also empower the
sometimes disenfranchised rural poor to engage in decisions on the development and use of resources
that they are dependent upon. The process of integrated natural resource management planning will
also create opportunities and incentives for the leskhozes to work in partnership with communities to
reach the objectives of improving sustainable forest ecosystem management and rural livelihoods.
6.     The Project will utilize experiences and lessons learned from the recent piloted forest sector
reforms to broaden and solidify the institutional frameworks that support local level involvement in
decision making and actions towards more sustainable management of forest resources in the Kyrgyz
Republic. With regard to implementation, the Project will support the development of a framework
approach for adaptive management during Project implementation to provide flexibility in defining
training, capacity building, investment and TA needs based on lessons learned.
7.     The Project has four components:
COMPONENT I: Forest Sector Institutional Reform (US$ 1.5 million)
8.     Institutional reform and capacity building will be required at the national, local and
community level. To develop and implement the new approaches required for the different models of
leskhoz and community participation, substantial support will be required to develop the framework
and to build capacity within the government structure (horizontal and vertical) as well as within all
stakeholder groups. The Project will provide technical assistance, training, and capacity building at
the national level to support the development of the policy, legal, regulatory and institutional
framework, based on the lessons learned through the implementation of the pilot activities. This
support will be undertaken in a consultative and participatory manner, to ensure that all relevant
stakeholders' views and opinions are considered and to develop ownership and support for the way
forward.
9.      At the local level, support will be provided for the development of a framework to create the
o        enabling environment for more decentralized management and planning of natural resources at the
national, leskhoz, Rayon, and Ayil Okmotu administration levels. The goal of this new approach is to
provide more transparent and sustainable management of the country's natural resources with
participation at all levels. The Project will finance a national public awareness campaign aimed at
educating the public about the new decentralized and participatory natural resource management
planning approach and its benefits. The Project will also finance training at the SAEPF, leskhoz and
municipal level to support the planning and implementation process as well as technical training.
Capacity building will be provided at all levels for activities ranging from the development of
legislation at the national level to the development of public-private partnerships at the local level.
The training and capacity building will be combined with targeted community mobilization activities
to ensure full participation of all citizens in this new approach to natural resource management.
COMPONENT II: Strategic Investments and Piloting of Sustainable Management Approaches (US$
11.00 million)
10. This component will support the development of Integrated Natural Resources Management
Page 3 of 12


﻿Plans (INRMPs). It will also provide funding for the implementation of these plans and the priority
activities at the leskhoz level. The activities under this component will help increase community and
leskhoz income and long-term financial sustainability. The management planning will be based on
integrated ecosystem approaches that manage multiple objectives of ecological services including
biodiversity, forest and pasture rehabilitation, tree cover and sustainable economic use. The Project
will help improve land use management practices and provide resource users with alternative
livelihood opportunities identified during the management planning exercise. The INRMPs will be
based on the assessment of the available natural resources and their conditions, as well as the
sustainable levels of production. They will be developed with the involvement of relevant
stakeholders (e.g. users' groups, pasture committees, leskhoz staff, local governments/AO, as well as
the relevant technical departments within the SAEPF). The planning process will help the leskhoz
administration collect all stakeholders' perspectives while assessing and developing priority
strategies and measures. The plans will be based on physical, ecological and socio-economic baseline
data. In addition to the INRMPs, annual operational plans will also be prepared. These plans will be
reviewed and approved by the Leskhoz Steering Committee.
11. The Project will finance the implementation of the INRMPs in 12 leskhozes and several
municipal forests. The participating leskhozes include 6 leskhozes (Achi, Kyzyl, Nookat, Jety Oguz,
Balykshi and Frunze) where co-management approaches are being piloted in other partner-funded
projects and programs, and an additional 6 leskhozes to be identified in the first 6 months of Project
implementation. The selection will be based on well-defined criteria which may include, inter alia:
willingness of leskhoz director and staff to participate in the consultative planning process, previous
participation in any of the joint forest management pilots funded by other donors, amount of natural
resources-especially forest and pasture lands, biodiversity, tourism and other ecosystem service
values of the leskhoz, importance of leskhoz generated income to SAEPF budget, etc.
12. The priority interventions will include: (i) silvicultural measures like thinning and establishment
of plantation forests with short rotation for biomass; (ii) selective timber harvesting; (iii) production
of high quality seedlings for afforestation and reforestation; (iv) investments in other value chains
like processing of nuts/fruits, eco-tourism; (v) improvement of common or shared resources (such as
construction of water points or overnight shelters to encourage the use of currently underutilized
summer pastures; (vi) establishment of nurseries with improved seed stock and advanced technology;
(vii) creation of silvopastoral systems (i.e. walnut forests or spruce with hayfields, pine with pasture);
a         (viii) provision of irrigation for fruit trees and nurseries. The funding mechanism for the strategic
investments will be direct financing to leskhoz administrations based on individual partnership
agreements between SAEPF and each participating leskhoz.
13. The investments to implement the INRMPs and annual operational plans will vary in each
leskhoz based on the priority measures identified in the plans, available funding envelope and the
Project timeframe.
COMPONENT III: Information and Monitoring and Evaluation (US$ 3.1 million)
14. Better and more accessible information at the national and local level on baseline resources,
tenure, land degradation, supply and demand, poverty, etc. will be required to support the
development and implementation of new leskhoz management plans. Baseline information
collection and processing, maps, and surveys will all be funded under this component. This
component will include an update of the National Forest Inventory (NFI) which was partially
completed in 2010 with the support of FAO. This partial update did not include the use of new
Page 4 of 12


﻿remote sensing or interpretation but relied on old forest boundary definitions with some new field
sampling. This component will provide for the interpretation of new free satellite imagery to define
the extent of forest and SFE pasture resources. The methodology for modem statistically sound
sample-based NFI will be established and the capacity built within the Department of Forest and
O
Hunting Inventory and Planning (DFHIP) to continue to update the NFI on an ongoing basis post
project. As part of project monitoring and for the continued improvement of the NFI, a second set of
images will be interpreted in the project's final year. The Project will emphasize the active
participation of leskhoz level staff in the inventory and ground-truthing, planning and monitoring in
this component in order to support vertical planning and mon itoring procedures and communication.
15. This component will also provide the technical assistance and capacity building required for the
establishment, operation and maintenance of the Forest Management Information System (FMIS)
which will feed into to theNational Forest Inventory, Participatory Management Planning process
within the Department of Forest Hunting and Inventory Planning (DFHIP). Technical assistance will
be provided to users of the FMIS including the Forestry Departments, leskhozes, local and regional
governments, and local users and user associations. The SAEPF will be given specific support in
developing a sound monitoring framework for the ongoing development of the sector.
16. The FMIS will be established in the DFHIP to store, analyze, retrieve and report on the data that
will be generated during the implementation of the national forest inventory, the preparation of
management plans and the monitoring of the management plan implementation (and other relevant
sector indicators). This system will be developed to facilitate the monitoring of management plan
implementation based on various physical, ecological, economic and social indicators. The proposed
system will include a web-based portal which will allow for various levels of access (with password
protection for confidential information) to facilitate greater transparency and online submission of
data, and reporting by users and leskhozes. The system will be modular and would include: remote
sensing of land cover and land use data, and online reporting of economic activities, financial and
administrative data, forest inventory data, biodiversity data, and forest law enforcement activities.
The FMIS will support the generation of summary statistics and reports on critical indicators at local,
national, and international levels.
17. Given the fluid and progressive nature of the proposed support for reform in the forestry sector,
the monitoring and evaluation elements of this project are particularly critical. The M&E framework
a        for the project will be designed to closely monitor and track lessons learned, both failures and
successes so these can be incorporated into the project implementation plans. The monitoring and
evaluation of the ongoing piloting process will be crucial to defining and agreeing on how best to
deploy the resources available under the Credit and GEF Grant.
18. To fully inform the development of national level policy and strategy for implementation of the
reform process, it is necessary to understand the external factors that influence the forest and pasture
sector, such as: the full economic and social costs associated with the current management of the
resource (including erosion and degradation); the impact of climate change; the changing
demographic situation including the dimensions of poverty and culture; current numbers of livestock
and the trends; and above all, the linkages between all of these external factors not traditionally
considered in forest management. Component 3 therefore includes socio-economic surveys, support
for natural capital accounting and research into the possibilities to mitigate and adapt to climate
change.
COMPONENT IV: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$.50 million)
Page 5 of 12


﻿19. This component will finance Project management activities which will be undertaken by the
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) established in the SAEPF. This will include budgeting, preparing
annual work plans, contract management, financial management, procurement, and monitoring and
O
U         evaluation. Under this component all reporting on implementation progress will be prepared,
including monitoring of the PDO and the Project Results Framework indicators.
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The participating leskhozes include 6 leskhozes (Achi, Kyzyl, Nookat, Jety Oguz, Balykshi and
Frunze) where co-management approaches are being piloted in other partner funded projects and 6
other leskhozes to be identified in the first 6 months of the project implementation. The selection will
be based on well-defined criteria which may include inter alia willingness of leskshozes's director
and staff to participate in the consultative planning process, previous participation in any of the joint
forest management pilots funded by other donors, amount of natural resources especially forest and
pasture lands, biodiversity and tourism values of the leskhoz, importance of leshkoz generated
income to SAFEP budget etc. As these participating leskhozes will be determined through the course
of project implementation, specific project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the
safeguards analysis are yet to be determined.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alisher Khamidov (GSURR)
Asli Gurkan (GSURR)
Rustam Arstanov (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project will support activities in lands managed by
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               the Forest Enterprises (i.e. no natural forests) with the
intention of improving the environmental management of
6                                             these areas. Any tree planting undertaken will avoid the
use of invasive non-native species, as well as monoculture
establishment. EMF outlines the procedure for site
specific environmental screening for beneficiaries and the
PIU. One of the screening criteria for sub-projects is to
avoid the use of invasive non-native species.
Due to the unknown nature of the grant activities/
subprojects under Component 2, the Environmental and
Social Management Framework (EMF) has been
developed by the borrower to define the procedures for
environmental screening and the development of the
grant/ site specific environmental impact assessment
studies (EIAs) and the site specific Environmental
Management Plans (EMPs). The environmental
assessment conducted will cover both environmental and
social risks of the project including potential tensions
between forests and pasture communities, assessing
different scenarios, opportunities and risks of community-
Page 6 of 12


﻿based forest management, as well as gender-specific roles
and impacts, if any, of proposed forest management
measures.
Should activities under Component 3 include the
rehabilitation of the facilities of SAEPF and other
institutions Environmental Management Plans and
checklists will be developed by the borrower.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          While the project will specifically limit/prohibit activities
4.04                                  in natural habitat areas, the team is triggering this OP to
ensure that the accompanying EMF includes actions and
safeguards in the case that natural habitats will be
impacted by project interventions.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes          This project is aimed at the improvement of public and
private forest management practices. All forest blocks/
concessions covered by this project are already under
management plans under implementation. Under
Component II, the Integrated Ecosystem Management
Plans will be designed and implemented consistent with
sustainability criteria and practices set out in OP 4.36.
Specifically, under the Project Component 2 will provide
seed grants to forest enterprise ecological and
environmental diversification activities. These may
include sustainable timber management including value
chain, nursery/seedlings, agroforestry, silvo-pastoral
systems, plantation forests with short rotation for biomass
production, nuts/fruits and processing, livestock/pasture,
eco-tourism, payments for environmental services as
determined by assessments and community co-managed
enterprise process. Thus the project aims at bringing
changes in the management, protection, or utilization of
forest resources. For community or small-scale
harvesting forest projects by small-scale landholders or
local communities accreditation system will not be
required. At the same time the EMF outlines the
requirements for sub-projects to adhere to forest
management standards consistent with Paragraph 12 (a) of
the World Bank OP 4.36 Forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes           The project will not finance the purchase of pesticides,
but can generate a need to establish nurseries, in particular
in the framework of agricultural activities. No separate
pest control plan was developed; however, the EMF has
sections that describe the measures to ensure compliance
with national laws and requirements of the World Bank
for the purchase and use of chemicals and development
IPM approaches for the safe use of pesticides to reduce
Page 7 of 12


﻿risks to people and the environment. In addition, the EMF
contains a list of authorized pesticides and guidelines for
their use.
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project support is aimed at the improvement of public
OP/BP 4.12                           and private forest management practices as well as
supporting community-based natural resource
management approaches. There is a possibility that as a
result of the participatory management planning exercise,
some short term and maybe permanent changes to access
of pastures, forests and other lands might be proposed and
supported under the project.
The Forest Code of the Kyrgyz Republic specifies that
forests have 'environmental, sanitary, recreation and other
protective functions', meaning that commercial felling is
prohibited. Sanitary felling (felling and removal of
damaged or diseased trees to protect the remaining forest)
is also prohibited in the walnut and juniper forests.
As Kyrgyz forests are protected under this law, A Process
Framework has been applied. The borrower has provided
the Bank with a draft process framework that conforms to
the relevant provisions of OP 4.12 as a condition of
appraisal. The framework establishes a participatory
process by which appropriate restrictions and mitigation
measures, as well as implementation and monitoring
arrangements, are to be considered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Under Component 2, the Project may support activities
4.37                                 involving minor rehabilitation, minor additions or
alterations of existing irrigation infrastructure in 6 known
leskhozes: Achi, Kyzyl, Nookat, Jety Oguz, Balykshi and
Frunze, and an additional 6 which remain to be
determined. Irrigation systems in the 6 known leskhozes
are not dependent on dams, and it is expected that the
same will be true for the additional leskhozes to be
selected. Should this turn out not to be the case, the
project will be restructured to trigger this policy.
Projects on International  Yes       The activities involving minor rehabilitation, minor
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 additions or alterations of existing irrigation infrastructure
in the context of the proposed Kyrgyz Republic Integrated
Forest Ecosystem Management Project fall within the
exception to the notification requirement under Paragraph
Page 8 of 12


﻿7 (a) of OP 7.50. The Project Team has consulted with
LEGLE, LEGEN and OPSOR on this matter and has
requested an exception to the notification requirement.
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
O
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This Project's planned activities are anticipated to result in largely positive environmental and
social impacts and no major adverse environmental impacts are anticipated. The project supports
investments in sustainable forest and land management, consistent with existing management
plans and therefore legislation in place. The project is expected to increase the adoption of
effective forest, land, and water management practices on the project sites and thus contributes to
biodiversity, soil and water conservation, and building climate resilience.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The works that may have minor and easily mitigated environmental impacts will follow the
guidelines set forth in the accompanying Environmental Management Framework, and the
provisions of the specific Integrated Ecosystem Management Plans (under Component II).
Activities such as afforestation and low-risk forest management activities may also have minor
associated environmental impacts, which shall be incorporated into the Environmental
Management Framework and future Environmental Management Plans. These EMPs can be
a           applied at all project sites, and will include criteria and procedures to be applied at each individual
site, in order to account for any unusual and site-specific conditions. Some general environmental
impacts have been described further in the EMF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Mechanisms to responds to potential access restrictions resulting from the project are detailed in
the accompanying Process Framework.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                01-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             05-Jun-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 9 of 12


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Kyrgyz Republic                                            20-May-2015
Comments: Original documents were disclosed by the Borrower in Russian.
O
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                01-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             05-Jun-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?            NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                                //
Date of submission to InfoShop                             //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/
or EMP.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
Q)        OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [    ]
Page 10 of 12


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
a          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ] No [X]      NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [   ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [  ] No [X]      NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nathalie Weier Johnson
Page 11 of 12


﻿Approved By
Practice Manager/    Name: Gayane Minasyan (PMGR)            Date: 04-Jun-2015
Manager:
P
Page 12 of 12


