INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA15003
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Aug-2015, 16-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Cambodia                  Project ID:  P154911
Parent       P102284
Project ID:
Project Name: Third Additional Financing for Second Health Sector Support Program
(P154911)
Parent Project Cambodia Second Health Sector Support Program (P102284)
Name:
Task Team       Laura L. Rose,Pema Lhazom
Leader(s):
Estimated                                 Estimated    01-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNO2                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (80%), Sub-national government administration (20%)
Theme(s):       Social Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (50%), Health system
performance (50%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     12.14            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                       Amount
Borrower                                                                  0.00
Cambodia - Free-standing Trust Fund Program                              12.14
Total                                                                     12.14
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 8


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
To support the implementation of the Government's Health Strategic Plan 2008-2015 in order to
improve health outcomes through strengthening institutional capacity and mechanisms by which
the Government and Program Partners can achieve more effective and efficient sector
performance.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The HSSP2 has a health system strengthening focus, with four components that are aligned to the
government's Second Health Strategic Plan (HSP2). It includes: Strengthening Health Service
Delivery through: (a) the provision of SDGs and contracting for health services at provincial level
and below; and (b) investments for the improvement, replacement, and extension of the health
service delivery network. Improving Health Financing supports (a) health protection for the poor
through the consolidation of HEFs under common management and oversight arrangements and
expansion of HEF coverage; and (b) the development of health financing policies and institutional
reforms. Strengthening Human Resources focuses (a) strengthening pre- and in-service training; and
(b) strengthening human resource management in the Ministry of Health (MOH). Strengthening
Health System Stewardship Function supports (a) development of policy packages identified,
strengthening the institutional capacity (in particular meeting the demands from decentralization and
deconcentration); (b) private sector regulation and partnerships; (c) supporting governance and
stewardship functions of the national programs and centers overseeing the three HSP2 strategic
programs; and (d) empowering new structures for increasing local accountability of health care
providers to citizens.
The Third Additional Financing (AF3) will support the followings:
* Component A: Strengthening Health Service Delivery. Financing SDGs in existing 36
Special Operating Agencies.
* Component B: Improving Health Financing. Financing HEFs in the existing 61 Operational
Districts (ODs) and scaling up in 27 additional ODs (to cover all 88 ODs in the country) covering all
estimated 3 million poor people or 100 percent of the poor in Cambodia. The existing Subsidy
Schemes (SUBOS) at the HC level financed from the national budget will be streamlined into the
HEF scheme.
* Component C: Strengthening Human Resources. No additional funding.
* Component D: Strengthening Health System Stewardship Functions. No additional funding.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project would be national in coverage. Component A finances SDGs in existing 36 SOAs.
Component B finances HEFs in the existing 61 ODs and scaling up in 27 additional ODs to cover all
88 ODs in the country.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Page 2 of 8


﻿Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Original Program is classified as category B. It triggered Environment Assessment (OP/BP
4.01), Pest Management (OP 4.09), Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10), and Involuntary
Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). These safeguard policies remain relevant for and are triggered by
AF3 activities. The Social Assessment conducted and the updated Indigenous People Framework
(IPPF) developed as part of the Second Additional Financing (AF2) in 2014 are still valid for AF3
because under AF3 IP are expected to face similar constraints on accessing quality health care.
The Framework for Land Acquisition Policy and Procedures that was updated as part of AF2 is
also still valid for AF3 because civil works that will be executed under AF3 have been identified
and their land titles have been comprehensively review during implementation of the Original
Program. The Environmental review/due diligence has been conducted for the ongoing activities
and the Environmental Management Plan has been updated as part of preparation of AF3. These
relevant updated safeguard documents will be disclosed prior to AF3 Appraisal. There is no
potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts is foreseen. The implementation of
various safeguard policies has been satisfactory so far.
Environmental aspects:
Page 3 of 8


﻿Civil Works Impacts and Management. The Original Program funds that have not been fully
disbursed will be used during the implementation of AF3 to finance construction and/or
rehabilitation of small commune and district level health care facilities such as health centers,
hospitals, the clean room of Laboratory for Drug Quality Control, and a bunker for installation of
Linear Accelerator (medical equipment). The experience in HSSP2 and the environmental
assessment conducted as part of AF3 preparation confirmed that civil works and the corresponding
environmental impacts were minimal, temporary and limited to the construction phase. The
impacts included noise, air emissions and generation of construction wastes from the construction
of facilities. These are, however, temporary and site specific, and have been mitigated through
good construction and good construction management practices. The impacts are monitored by the
construction supervision firm, the MOH and the Bank's task team. Civil works execution under
the AF3 are not expected to affect natural habitats, forests, and/or physical cultural resources.
Asbestos Management. The main activities that might have had implications under the original
program were for management of asbestos-related materials during the construction/rehabilitation
of health care facilities. The Environmental Review suggested that asbestos in Cambodia is a
problem in existing buildings containing fiber cement products/materials. While clay roofing tiles
are preferred in provincial and district HCFs, fiber-containing ceiling sheets are still commonly
used. However, since 2000 the Social Fund of the government has banned the use of asbestos-
containing fiber concrete materials, and construction is closely supervised to ensure that
contractors will not use cheap asbestos-containing materials. The civil works contracts also
contained a provision on the use of asbestos-free building materials and activities funded by AF3
should follow practices regarding asbestos that meet the Good Practice Note provided in the WBG
Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines. All constructions funded by this Program will use
clay roofing tiles. This provision is part of the EMP which is also a part of the bidding documents
for the construction of facilities funded by the Ongoing Program. The WBG Good Practice Note
on Asbestos is annexed to the revised EMP.
Health Care Waste. The environmental review conducted as part of AF3 preparation found that
the guidelines under the existing HCW Generation and Management Plan are deemed adequate for
AF3 activities and compliance during HSSP2 has been acceptable. The Guidelines incorporate
best HCW management practices and are intended for practical application at health care facilities.
Training on the Guidelines has been provided to health facility staff all over Cambodia by
Department of Hospital Services of the MOH. However, implementation of the guidelines by
health care facilities is hindered by limited budget for purchasing waste bins (for wa ste
segregation), and in some case limited space and structure for proper storage and limited budget
for maintenance of HCW site specific incinerators. These will be mitigated through mandatory
spending of operating costs generated from HEFs and SDGs on health facility waste management.
Compliance with the guidelines will be continued to monitor during regular supervision.
Pest Management. Control procedures are set out in the Pest Management and Monitoring Plan.
Larvicides (Abate/BTI) that are being used for dengue control are considered to pose low risks to
humans if used correctly and certified by WHO's Pesticide Evaluation Scheme (WHOPES). The
products are transported in safe containers provided by the vendors and used containers are
disposed of according to best practice; they are not used for storage or other purposes. Spoons are
provided by manufacturers to ensure proper quantity of Abate/BTI distributed in the communities.
Social aspects:
Page 4 of 8


﻿Indigenous Peoples. The social assessment conducted during the preparation of AF2 found that IP
communities still face particular challenges in accessing health services and tend to be particularly
vulnerable to poor health. Many minority groups live in rough-terrain - highland and border areas
that are hard to reach, and are generally poorer than average. The sheer physical geography of
these settings poses special challenges, as well as costs, in terms of accessing, providing and
maintaining health care services. The IPPF developed under HSSP2 has been updated under AF2.
The nature, scale and scope of impact that may occur on IP under AF3 are expected to be similar
to those under AF2, and IP communities will continue to benefit from the Program. During the
implementation of HSSP2, steps were taken to address issues found during preparation based on
the free, prior and informed consultations with affected IP communities. Such measures include:
(i) building technical capacity of health facility staff at primary care level for providing quality
health services to IP; (ii) providing SDGs, particularly to areas where most IP reside, to improve
the management and functioning of health facilities- 24 hours opening, and improve staff
attendance so that IP can access health care services at any time as needed; (iii) financing health
outreach activities so that IP in remote and difficult to access communities can receive basic
preventive and curative services; (iv) establishment of HEFs to pay for health care services on
behalf of the poor, including poor IP; and (v) construction of new health facilities for bringing
health services closer to IP. Regular exit interviews were conducted with users, including those
from ethnic minorities, as part of the implementation of HSSP2, which found that they are
satisfied with the services provided and that no negative impacts occurred to them under the
program. Under AF2, SDG operating costs are mandated for conducting health outreach activities
in remote and difficult to access areas.
Involuntary Resettlement. A comprehensive review of land acquisition conducted during the
Original Program carried out by MOH under the support of the World Bank confirmed that almost
all construction sites were on state land. In a few instances, private land was acquired (either
through voluntary donations or land swap, or against compensation at market prices agreeable to
affected people), as per provision of the Land Acquisition Framework Policy and Procedures.
According to the inventory, all plots of land acquired were less than 5 percent of the owners'
properties, and no physical relocations took place. During the implementation of the AF2, the
Bank team as well as the representatives of the Ministry of Health assessed the selected number of
health facilities where the project financed civil works in order to monitor and verify that no social
impact that triggers OP 4.12 has occurred based on the documentation review and site inspection.
The assessment found no private land acquisition or any other negative impacts on private assets
occurred during the AF2. It also found that the MoH keeps all necessary documents in the project
file.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No negative long-term impacts are foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The MOH carried out social assessments including free, prior and informed consultations with IP
communities during the preparation of AF2, and updated the IPPF based on the findings as well as
Page 5 of 8


﻿the experience of HSSP2 and AFl. The MoH also carried out an Environmental Assessment to
generate findings and recommendations for updating EMP to be implemented during AF3. The
MOH has gained some good experience implementing World Bank-financed programs with its
specific requirements such as those under the World Bank's policies triggered by HSSP2. The
MOH, with support from the World Bank, will continue to provide training to relevant
stakeholders in implementation of the safeguard policies triggered by the program.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The primary stakeholders of the program are MOH policy makers, program planners and
managers who will benefit from systems strengthening and capacity building activities, as well as
from the program's endorsement of the MOH's HSP2. Ministry of Economy and Finance
continues to play an important role during implementation and monitoring. Civil society and
communities also play important roles in the monitoring of services to increase public
accountability. Civil society members are invited to attend important bid openings and contract
awards. Exit interviews at health facilities will continue to be carried out which will further
improve accountability to users of services supported by AF3.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Jul-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Cambodia                                                 08-Jul-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Cambodia                                                 08-Jul-2015
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Cambodia                                                 08-Jul-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                              //
Date of submission to InfoShop                           //
Page 6 of 8


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes [  ] No [ X ]    NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [ X ]    NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes[X] No[  ]  NA[
World Bank's Infoshop?
Page 7 of 8


﻿Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ]  No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X]  No [  ]   NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X]    No [  ]   NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Laura L. Rose,Pema Lhazom
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Toomas Palu (PMGR)                    Date: 16-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


