                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA15190
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Feb-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Feb-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Indonesia                          Project ID:   P154782
                            Project Name:      Indonesia National Slum Upgrading Program (P154782)
                            Task Team          George Soraya,Evi Hermirasari
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          10-Feb-2016                        Estimated   13-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU08                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (20%), Urban Transport (20%), Solid waste management
                                              (60%)
                            Theme(s):         Other social development (25%), Urban services and housing for the poor
                                              (25%), Urban planning and housing policy (25%), Other urban development
                                              (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    1743.00           Total Bank Financing:                 433.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  1310.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      433.00
                              Total                                                                                     1743.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall project development objective is to improve access to urban infrastructure and services in
                           targeted slums in Indonesia.



                                                                       Page 1 of 19
                         3. Project Description
                         A. Project Design
                         About 22% of Indonesia’s urban population (approximately 29 million) is estimated to be living in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         slums with low levels of access to basic services. More than 50% of the poor live in the slum areas.
                         In 2014, the Government of Indonesia (GOI) identified approximately 38,000 hectares of slum areas
                         based on the Ministry of Public Works and Housing’s (MPWH) area-based definition of slums as
                         dense neighborhoods lacking in access to infrastructure and with irregular buildings. These slums are
                         spread across more than 3,500 urban wards and are generally characterized by substandard housing,
                         inadequate access to basic urban infrastructure and services (water, sanitation, roads etc.), poor
                         health, vulnerability to disaster risks and, in larger cities, overcrowding. It is estimated that in 2014,
                         30% of slum dwellers (approximately 9 million) resided in units that lacked safe water and 37% of
                         slum dwellers (approximately 11 million) with inadequate sanitation. In addition, about 30% of the
                         roads and 50% of the drainage are considered to be in poor quality. Due to inadequate infrastructure
                         and utility services, slum dwellers pay disproportionately more than other urban residents. While a
                         large proportion of households in Indonesian slums have secure tenure, some slums are informal
                         settlements situated on illegally occupied land; however, current urban policy and planning does not
                         address this issue.

                         Slum characteristics in the project. In the 154 targeted cities, a total area of about 13,000 ha has
                         been identified as slums, of which 5% falls into the category of heavy, 72% medium, and 23% light
                         slums. These slums are home to about 12.7 million people, accounting for about 22% of the total
                         urban population (57.9 million). Among these slum dwellers, 2.1 million people are poor, which is
                         about 55% of the total urban poor (3.7 million) in the targeted cities. Overall there is a lack of access
                         of improved water supply and proper sanitation facilities. For example, 60% population has less than
                         60l/per capita/day water supply; 75% are without adequate solid waste removal (i.e., twice a week at
                         a minimum); 75% live in housing that does not meet building codes, and 25% live in housing space
                         less than standard of 7 m2/person.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Beneficiaries. The project is expected to directly and indirectly benefit 9.7 million slum dwellers
                         living in 154 cities, of which 4.85 million are expected to be women. Slum dwellers are likely to
                         experience significant betterment of living conditions due to improvements in access to and quality
                         of basic services. The project will cover access to the following infrastructure and basic services: (1)
                         building regularity; (2) water; (3) sanitation; (4) roads; 5) drainage; 6) solid waste; and (7) fire safety.

                         Geographical distribution. Within the context of NSUP roll out, infrastructure investments under the
                         proposed project will focus on 154 cities in the central and eastern parts of Indonesia; the Islamic
                         Development Bank (IDB) is expected to support about 110 cities in the western part of Indonesia,
                         and the Asian Development Bank (ADB) is expected to support 20 cities nationally. Tertiary
                         infrastructure investments and institutional capacity building support will be provided in all 154
                         project cities. However, construction of small or limited scale connecting infrastructure as well as the
                         improvement of small or limited scale primary and secondary infrastructure in the vicinity of slums
                         will only take place in a subset of 50 cities.

                         The subset of 50 cities (out of a long list 65 cities; refer to PAD Annex 2) will be finalized at
                         appraisal, based on: (a) population characteristics, including population density and percentage urban
                         population; (b) area of the city in slum status; (c) gaps in access to infrastructures and services; and
                         (d) commitment of local government to implement NSUP.



                                                                        Page 2 of 19
                         Phasing of project implementation. The project implementation will follow a phased approach that
                         will ensure local government and community buy-in as well as institutional capacity development.
                         The initial phase of planning and capacity building, to be financed by Component 2, will start
Public Disclosure Copy




                         simultaneously in all cities.

                         At the city level, the city governments will prepare or finalize their Slum Improvement Action Plans
                         (SIAPs). It is expected that towards the end of 2016, 20 cities of the subset 50 cities will have final
                         SIAPs, identified priority slum areas for intervention, and will have final detailed engineering
                         designs (DEDs) for first priority infrastructure sub-projects. Construction related activities for these
                         first priority sub-projects, to be financed by Component 3.1 will be undertaken in 2017. DEDs for the
                         second priority sub-projects as identified by the SIAPs will be completed in 2018 and their
                         construction will take place in 2018. This cycle will continue for the remaining priority sub-projects
                         until 2021. Simultaneously during 2016, the remaining 30 cities from the subset of 50 cities will start
                         preparing their SIAPs which will be final in 2017 and have DEDs for selected priority infrastructure
                         sub-projects completed in end of 2017. Construction of these sub-projects will start in 2018. The
                         cycle will continue for the next priority sub-projects in the following years. Gradually all of the
                         subset of 50 cities will complete their DEDs for all identified priority infrastructure sub-projects in
                         2018 onwards, and their construction to be financed by the project is expected to be completed in
                         2021. In summary, during the project period, there will be simultaneous activities across the 154
                         participating cities with different levels of progress, i.e. SIAP preparation, DED preparation,
                         construction, and operations and maintenance for the completed sub-projects.

                         At the kelurahan level, where priority slum areas as defined in the completed SIAPs are located, the
                         kelurahan community (LKM or BKM) will prepare or finalize their Community Settlement Plans
                         (CSPs). In 2016, the project is planning to support construction of small scale tertiary infrastructure
                         in 200 priority slum area sites for kelurahans that have completed their CSPs and proposals for
                         priority sub-projects prepared by community groups (KSMs) have been approved. As the approved
                         proposals will include DEDs for priority sub-projects and estimated costs, construction of these sub-
                         projects will start in the same year. Simultaneously, other kelurahans as identified by the city
Public Disclosure Copy




                         governments that have completed SIAPs, will prepare or review and finalize their CSPs, followed by
                         the completion of KSMs’ proposals and construction in 2017 onwards. In summary, during the
                         project period, there will be simultaneous activities in kelurahans in the 154 participating cities with
                         different level of progress, i.e. CSP preparation, KSMs’ proposals preparation, construction of
                         tertiary infrastructure subprojects, and operations and maintenance of the completed tertiary
                         infrastructure. During the project period, about 6,400 kelurahans would receive financing for tertiary
                         infrastructure including 700 kelurahans that have ongoing and new ND program.

                         Status of planning documents. Since 2015 Slum Improvement Actions Plans (SIAPs) are being
                         prepared in over 100 cities with support from the MPWH under the ongoing PNPM-Urban/ND
                         support, including those of the subset of 50 cities and now they are progressing in different stages.
                         As explained above, among these cities, 20 cities are expected to have their SIAPs ready for
                         finalization during the first year of project implementation (2016). With the support of the ongoing
                         PNPM-Urban/ND, 500 kelurahans already have CSPs which will be updated, while more kelurahans
                         are planning to prepare new CSPs. Under the ND, CSPs have been regularly updated and this
                         practice will continue in the project.

                         Nature of sub-projects. Sub-projects that will be financed by Component 3.1 include improvement of
                         existing small or limited scale secondary and primary infrastructure and small or limited scale
                         connecting infrastructure that connect slum areas with the secondary and primary infrastructure. It

                                                                      Page 3 of 19
                         would include possible improvements to roads, drainage, water supply, and sanitation. This will
                         create an integrated service for the slums with their neighboring areas. The exact nature of sub-
                         projects will be known once the SIAPs are finalized, which for the subset of 20 cities will completed
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the first year of project implementation (2016). Learning from the LGDP (DAK) project,
                         improvement, rehabilitation and maintenance of existing secondary and primary infrastructure (e.g.
                         city roads) have increased the service capacity of the infrastructure. Road improvement includes
                         widening, straightening and/or surfacing/upgrade surface quality of existing roads, as well as wall
                         lining to protect erosion. Road rehabilitation involves holes patching, sidewalk fixing, and
                         maintenance includes resurfacing, cleaning up road shoulders, fixing broken and cleaning up
                         drainage. In LGDP, contract size of these works is relatively small. For instance, in East Java, in
                         2014 average contract size for road improvement was USD 87,000 and for road maintenance was
                         USD 88,085. In West Sulawesi, the figures were USD 111,054 and USD 80,645 for road
                         improvement and maintenance, respectively. In Central Kalimantan, contract amounts were USD
                         293,452 and USD 183,497 for road improvement and maintenance, respectively. Connecting
                         infrastructure, for example, can be installation of collector pipes that connect the underutilized
                         existing waste water treatment plant to the slum area (Margasari) as has been the case of Balikpapan.

                         Similar to the ongoing PNPM-Urban/ND, Component 3.2 will finance small-scale, community
                         infrastructure including new or improvement or rehabilitation of existing facilities such as
                         community roads, footpaths, small bridges, drainage, water supply, communal and individual toilets,
                         solid waste management, sub-standard housing, and community parks and greening. The project will
                         continue support the CDD approach slum improvement through ND that has been piloted in 780
                         kelurahans in 167 cities under the PNPM- Urban/ND. Sub-projects are small. For instance, during
                         2012-2014, median costs of roads, drainage, public toilets, sanitation channels, and greening were
                         USD 26,775; USD 12,554; USD 4,854; USD 6,092; and USD 3,820 respectively. Under this project,
                         GOI will f when needed on in-situ slum upgrading which will avoid or minimize involuntary
                         resettlement unless absolutely needed for local infrastructure improvement and connect the upgraded
                         slums with the city infrastructure services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subproject eligibility. The project funds cannot be used to finance (a) purchase of land; (b) economic
                         activities involving revolving funds; (c) Category A sub-project activities with significant, sensitive,
                         complex, irreversible and unprecedented potential adverse environmental and social impacts that
                         may affect an area broader than the sites or facilities subject to physical work requiring a full
                         environmental assessment to manage and mitigate such impacts in accordance with World Bank OP
                         4.01, Ministry of Environment Regulation No. 5, 2012 and activities with the scale beyond those
                         specified in the Ministry of Public Works and Housing Regulation No. 10, 2008; and (d) a subproject
                         with cost above USD 2,000,000. Sub-projects with significant ancillary and related activities will not
                         be eligible if they are considered as Category A sub-projects. This includes sub-projects that would
                         require expansion of water treatment facilities, wastewater facilities, solid waste disposal facilities
                         and road expansion beyond connecting a slum area. Eligible sub-projects to be financed by this
                         project are Category B sub-projects with impacts that are site specific, few if any are irreversible, and
                         in most cases mitigation measures can be readily designed.

                         Project Components. The project has five components that together will enable the achievement of
                         the PDO, as summarized below:
                         a.      Component 1: Institutional and Policy Development (Cost US$7 million, of which IBRD
                         Loan US$2 million). This component will support institutional strengthening and capacity building
                         of central government agencies (e.g., BAPPENAS, MPWH) responsible for the management of the
                         national slum upgrading program (see Figure A3.1 in Annex 3 of the PAD) and will include:

                                                                       Page 4 of 19
                         institutional analysis at the national level as well as for a sample of municipal governments to
                         identify the nature of support needed to facilitate inter-agency coordination during preparation,
                         implementation and supervision stages; strategic national upstream policy level studies to facilitate
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the development of government policy to support the sustainability of slum upgrading and prevention
                         efforts, including land administration policy reform, policies towards informal settlements and
                         security of land tenure, and synchronization of slum definitions used by MPWH and BPS.

                         b.      Component 2: Integrated Planning Support and Capacity Building for Local Government and
                         Communities (Cost US$95 million, of which IBRD Loan US$89 million). This component will
                         finance the costs of (approx. 200) urban planners and (approx.. 3,000) community facilitators
                         throughout the project cycle to support capacity building (including training, workshops, and
                         knowledge exchange events between cities as well as urban sub-districts) of local governments and
                         communities in 154 cities to design and implement slum improvements, including the development
                         of Slum Improvement Action Plans (SIAPs) at the city level and Community Settlement Plans
                         (CSPs) at the community level.

                         c.      Component 3: Urban Infrastructure and Services in Selected Cities (Cost US$1578 million,
                         of which IBRD Loan US$310 million). This component includes two sub-components as
                         summarized below.
                         Sub-component 3.1: Improvement of Primary and Secondary Infrastructure and Site Development as
                         well as Construction of Conne cting Infrastrcuture in 50 selected cities will mainly consist of
                         improvements identified in SIAPs for area level-small scale sanitation, water and drainage systems
                         (together with strengthening connectivity to tertiary and household-level systems) as well as
                         construction of connecting infrastructure. Based on a survey of SIAPs that are in the advanced stages
                         of completion, the maximum cost for a single subproject under Sub-component 3.1 will be US
                         $2,000,000 (and the average cost will be considerably less). On average, each city would receive
                         USD 20 million during the project period.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Support for Tertiary Infrastructure Upgrading in the project cohort of 154 cities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         based on a community-driven approach and will include, inter alia, small scale water supply,
                         drainage, sanitation, footpaths, fire safety, site improvements, etc. Support will also be provided for
                         strengthening community-based livelihoods through the construction of livelihood-enabling facilities
                         and services at the tertiary level that are identified in CSPs as important for slum prevention. It is
                         estimated that on average, each ND kelurahan would receive USD 150-250 K during the project
                         period.

                         d.       Component 4: Implementation Support and Technical Assistance (Cost US$63 million, of
                         which IBRD Loan US$32 million). This component will finance the costs of: National Management
                         Consultants (NMCs), Technical Management Consultants (TMCs) and Oversight Service Providers
                         (OSPs) to strengthen the capacity of the Project Management Unit (PMU) to oversee implementation
                         of the program at national, provincial and city levels; and monitoring and evaluation, making
                         substantial use of participatory techniques, especially at the tertiary level.

                         e.      Component 5: Contingency for Disaster Response (US$0). This component would finance
                         preparedness and rapid response measures to address disaster, emergency and/or catastrophic events,
                         as needed, through sub-projects and/or using the project implementation arrangements. Due to the
                         high risk of catastrophic natural disasters in Indonesia, a provisional zero dollar component is
                         included in the project to allow for rapid reallocation of loan funds in the event of a natural disaster.



                                                                       Page 5 of 19
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         154 participating cities scattered throughout eastern and central Indonesia (list is available in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project file) will benefit from activities of Component 1, 2, 3.2 and 4, and 50 of those cities will also
                         receive financing from Sub-Component 3.1. The 50 cities will be selected from a long list of 65
                         cities (refer to PAD) that have been selected based on population size, total size of slum areas,
                         infrastructure gaps, and commitment of the city government. The cities in the long list are
                         geographically located in 20 provinces (out of 34 provinces in the country), of which about 38% and
                         22% are located in four provinces in Java and in six provinces in Sulawesi respectively.

                         As explained in the project description, the project implementation will follow a phased approach.
                         At appraisal stage, the 50 participating cities that will receive financing under Component 3.1 will be
                         confirmed, however, the sites of the secondary and primary infrastructure to be improved and
                         connecting infrastructure to be constructed will only be defined after the SIAPs and associated CSPs
                         and detailed engineering designs are completed. The initial phase of planning and capacity building
                         will start simultaneously in all cities, ensuring that by the end of Year 1 (2016), SIAPs will be
                         available for the 20 cities of the sub-set 50 cities. Simple interventions will be carried out first, with
                         the more complicated being tackled later in the project cycle. In 2016, the project will support: (i)
                         tertiary infrastructure development in 200 ND sites in cities where CSPs and SIAPs have already
                         been completed; and (ii) the preparation or review of the draft SIAPs. It is expected that the entire
                         support system, including consultants for this activity will be in place by June 2016. The existing
                         PNPM Urban support system will provide a bridge until the new consultants are in place.

                         Based on the readiness (progress) of SIAPs and preparation of local regulations as well as MPWH’s
                         top priority of cities to receive immediate intervention, 20 cities of the sub-set 50 cities have been
                         recommended as priority cities for project implementation in 2016. These cities, which will be
                         further confirmed during appraisal, include: Surabaya, Malang, Yogyakarta, Samarinda, Gorontalo,
                         Kabupaten Sidoarjo, Mataram, Kendari, Palu, Kupang, Jayapura, Surakarta, Semarang, Banjarmasin,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Ternate, Manado, Makasar, Ambon, Sorong and Balikpapan. SIAPs of this first batch of 20 cities
                         will be reviewed during the early stage of project implementation in 2016. This will be followed by
                         identification of priority slum areas requiring investments in each of these 20 cities, preparation of
                         detail assessment and design for the improvement of the secondary and primary infrastructure and
                         connecting infrastructure (scale 1:100 or 1:50), and estimated costs of the package, which are all to
                         be completed in the end of 2016. Construction is therefore expected to begin in 2017.

                         The project expects that the remaining second batch of 30 cities (out of the 50 cities receiving
                         financing from Component 3.1) will finalize their SIAPs and technical documents in the end of 2017,
                         followed by construction started in 2018.

                         At kelurahan level, the project will continue support the CDD approach slum improvement that has
                         been piloted in 780 kelurahans in 167 cities under the PNPM-Urban/ND. CSPs of these kelurahans
                         are being or will be reviewed and revised as needed. Kelurahans that have not had CSPs prepared
                         under PNPM-Urban/ND will prepare CSPs to receive support under Component 2. The project has
                         allocated budget in 2016 to support tertiary infrastructure construction in existing 200 ND sites
                         where CSPs and SIAPs or their revisions have been completed. Ultimately the project will support
                         6,400 kelurahans including the targeted 700 ND in the 154 cities that have been participated in the
                         ongoing PNPM-Urban/ND.



                                                                       Page 6 of 19
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Indira Dharmapatni (GSUID)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Thomas E. Walton (GENDR)
                         Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        Direct and indirect beneficiaries of the project are
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               expected to be 9.7 million slum dwellers living in 154
                                                             cities, of which 4.85 million are expected to be women.
                                                             Slum dwellers will experience significant betterment of
                                                             living conditions due to improvements in access to and
                                                             quality of basic services.

                                                             Under project component 3, the project will focus on (a)
                                                             construction of small and limited scale tertiary
                                                             infrastructure including roads, clean water, sanitation,
                                                             electricity, solid waste, drainage, and fire safety, (b)
                                                             construction of small and limited scale connecting
                                                             infrastructure from the slum areas to the existing city
                                                             network, and limited improvement of the existing
                                                             secondary and primary infrastructure to which the slum
                                                             areas will be connected. The subprojects will have a
                                                             contract size up to US$ 2,000,000. Eligible sub-projects
                                                             are Category B sub-projects with impacts that are site
                                                             specific, few if any are irreversible, and in most cases
                                                             mitigation measures can be be readily designed. As
                                                             explained in the project description, subprojects eligible
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             for financing should not include Category A sub-project
                                                             activities with significant, sensitive, complex, irreversible
                                                             and unprecedented potential adverse environmental and
                                                             social impacts that may affect an area broader than the
                                                             sites or facilities subject to physical work requiring a full
                                                             environmental assessment to manage and mitigate such
                                                             impacts in accordance with World Bank OP 4.01,
                                                             Ministry of Environment Regulation No. 5, 2012 and
                                                             activities with scales beyond those as specified in the
                                                             Ministry of Public Works and Housing Regulation No.
                                                             10, 2008.

                                                             Potential adverse environmental and social impacts from
                                                             the project are likely from physical construction of
                                                             tertiary infrastructure in slums areas and improvement of
                                                             existing secondary and primary infrastructure as well as
                                                             construction of connecting infrastructure from the slum
                                                             areas to the existing secondary and primary infrastructure.
                                                             Because of the small and limited scale of the subprojects,



                                                              Page 7 of 19
                         these impacts are expected to be low to moderate in
                         magnitude and numbers, local in extent, and not
                         significant/sensitive, irreversible, or unprecedented.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Subprojects will require either environmental and social
                         management plans (ESMP) or can be managed mostly by
                         good engineering design and construction management
                         practices. In some cases an EA, SA or ESA
                         commensurate to potential impacts may also be required.
                         Each sub-project will be screened to determine the type of
                         safeguards instrument required.

                         As explained in Section 4, finalization of SIAPs and CSPs
                         will be completed during project implementation, and
                         therefore the sites of improvement of secondary and
                         primary infrastructure, construction of connecting
                         infrastructure, as well as tertiary infrastructure in the slum
                         areas cannot be defined at appraisal stage. Consequently,
                         an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF) has been prepared and will be disclosed prior to
                         appraisal. The current Technical Safeguards Guidelines
                         of PNPM-Urban/ND will be upgraded into the ESMF to
                         manage the increased risk of types of activities not
                         included in PNPM-Urban as compared to a generic
                         PNPM Urban/ND project. The ESMF will include among
                         other things:
                         (a) Screening process to cover the different categories and
                         types of activities/sub-projects to be supported under the
                         project including SIAP (using eligibility criteria, national
Public Disclosure Copy




                         thresholds, and most importantly impact determination in
                         accordance to OP 4.01).
                         (b) Screening and assessment of ancillary facilities and
                         potentially related activities. Sub-projects with significant
                         ancillary and related activities will not be eligible as are
                         considered as Category A sub-projects; This includes sub-
                         projects that would require expansion of water treatment
                         facilities, wastewater facilities, solid waste disposal
                         facilities and road expansion beyond connexting a slum
                         area.
                         (c) Gap analysis and gap filling measures between
                         Indonesia's Safeguards System and Bank's safeguards
                         policies;
                         (d) Safeguards Instruments
                         (e) Anticipated subproje ct impacts and mitigation
                         measures
                         (f) Process and procedures for preparing safeguards
                         instruments
                         (f) Good Engineering Practices



                          Page 8 of 19
                         (g) WBG Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines
                         (Environmental Health and Safety being a pervasive issue
                         in the Indonesia portfolio);
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (h) Social impact assessment and social management
                         plans;
                         (i) LARPF which includes protocols for VLD and land
                         consolidation;
                         (j) IPPF
                         (k) Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs) Management
                         Plan;
                         (l) Safeguards capacity strengthening plan.

                         The ESMF will also contains detailed guidelines for
                         policy advice and Technical Asssitance to be provided
                         under Compoment 1,2 and 4. Assessment of potential
                         environmental and social impacts will be determined at
                         different stages. During the planning stage of the
                         preparation of SIAPs, the environmental and social issues
                         likely to arise in the different sites will be identified. This
                         planning stage will consider potential impacts that could
                         result from implementation of multiple CSPs. Detailed
                         site-specific assessments and development of impact
                         management instruments will be undertaken during or
                         after the completion of the Detailed Engineering Designs
                         (DEDs). An ESMF is proposed to be the main safeguards
                         instrument during project preparation for this project as
                         specific environmental and social impacts in the possible
                         construction sites at specific targeted slum areas and their
Public Disclosure Copy




                         surroundings cannot be determined prior to appraisal as
                         subprojects are only identified during implementation.
                         Environmental and social impacts screening, impact
                         assessments for subprojects as well as measures to
                         manage impacts will be undertakenduring project
                         implementation based upon the E
                         The potential social impacts of the project covered by OP
                         4.01 other than land acquisition and resettlement are
                         important given the projects urban setting. Social
                         assessments will be conducted during the community self-
                         mapping to better understand of community needs,
                         especially to prevent adverse impact for the poor and
                         vulnerable people (including gender aspect) and to also
                         prevent elite capture and community tension duringsub
                         projects selection. Means to improve livelihood and better
                         community participation shall also be covered in the
                         assessment.

                         As previously mentioned, components 1, 2 and 4 include



                          Page 9 of 19
                                                        upstream policy development advice and institutional
                                                        strengthening as well as TA for project management
                                                        affecting capacity to implement both environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        social impacts of investments.,The ESMF will include
                                                        screening, identification and measures to manage any
                                                        potential impacts that may result from the activities
                                                        supported by these three components in line with the
                                                        Bank's Interim Guidelines on the Application of Bank
                                                        Safeguard Policies for TA and TFs apply to Component
                                                        1and 2 activities. TOR for Technical Asssitance will be
                                                        developed at the beginning of the project implementation
                                                        and submitted to the RSA for review and clearance.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    The project activities will take place on already-developed
                         4.04                           land. . The ESMF will adopt the same principles as in the
                                                        Environmental Guidelines of PNPM-Urban/ND; i.e., the
                                                        project will not finance activities that involve significant
                                                        conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats or
                                                        natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    The project will not finance activities that involve
                                                        conversion or degradation of critical forest areas or
                                                        natural forests as defined under the policy. The project is
                                                        not intended for commercial plantation and there is no
                                                        project component to improve the forest function.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project will not procure or use any pesticide or
                                                        support activities that may lead to the use and/or a
                                                        significant increase in the use of pesticide.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Some possible urban slum improvement areas might be in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           the location of PCR sites, or the slum improvement might
                                                        involve activities to better manage the PCR sites/
                                                        structures. The ESMF will adapt the existing
                                                        Environmental Guidelines of PNPM-Urban/ND that has
                                                        covered the requirements for the preparation of PCR
                                                        Management Plans (PMP) that will be prepared for this
                                                        project and contained in the ESMF and ESMP as needed.
                                                        PMP along with CSP will be prepared by the community
                                                        group for subproject which is designed towards
                                                        supporting the management or conservation of cultural
                                                        heritage assets.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   Based on the World Bank IP Screening Study (2010), IPs
                         BP 4.10                        are present in five areas where the project may be active:
                                                        the Districts of Sumba Barat (East Nusa Tenggara), Toli-
                                                        Toli (Central Sulawesi), Gorontalo (Gorontalo province),
                                                        and Manokwari (West Papua), and the City of Palopo
                                                        (South Sulawesi). The confirmation of the IPs presence
                                                        and potential impacts both positive and adverse on them
                                                        as well as measures to manage such impacts will be



                                                        Page 10 of 19
                                                        carried out during the preparation of the SIAPs and CSPs.
                                                        Confirmation on IPs presence will be done in accordance
                                                        with the requirements specified in the IIPF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        The project will adapt the PNPM Urban IPP Framework
                                                        (including the guideline to prepare an SA for areas where
                                                        IPs communities are present and could be affected
                                                        positively or adversely by the project) which will be part
                                                        of the ESMF, making necessary adjustments to manage
                                                        risks due to the anticipated interventions in slum areas. As
                                                        indicated in the IPPF, in the case that a subproject
                                                        financed under Component 3.1 include the presence of IP
                                                        communities, city government will have to prepare a
                                                        specific SA and IPP as part of the SIAP. Similarly, in the
                                                        case that a subproject financed under Component 3.2
                                                        affect IPs community, the LKM/kelurahan will have to
                                                        prepare an IPP as part of the CSP.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   - Component 1 will support upstream institutional and
                         OP/BP 4.12                     policy development. One of the activities would be
                                                        undertaking strategic studies to facilitate the development
                                                        of policy frameworks to support the sustainability of slum
                                                        upgrading and prevention efforts, including land
                                                        administration policy reform, approaches to address
                                                        informal settlements, and security of land tenure.

                                                        While Component 2 will support the cities in preparing
                                                        SIAPs and the communities at kelurahans level in
                                                        preparing the CSPs. Potential environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        impacts may entail from the products or downstream
                                                        activities supported by these two components. However,
                                                        the type, scope and locations of downstream activities or
                                                        investments resulting from these activities cannot be
                                                        identified at this stage. The approved ESMF and LARAP
                                                        provide guidance to screen, assess potential
                                                        environmental and social impacts that may emerge from
                                                        the downstream activities and provide guidance to define
                                                        and prepare safeguards instruments..

                                                        Subprojects financed by Component 3.1 involve
                                                        improvement of existing secondary and primary
                                                        infrastructure and connecting infrastructure to the slum
                                                        areas. As explained in the project description, subprojects
                                                        will be small and of limited scale. Some land acquisition
                                                        or involuntary resettlement might take place for the
                                                        connecting infrastructure, and is less likely the case for
                                                        the improvement of existing secondary and primary
                                                        infrastructure. Furthermore, since GOI will focus on in-



                                                        Page 11 of 19
                         situ slum upgrading, any land acquisition or involuntary
                         resettlement is expected to be small scale and limited.
                         However, social issues will occur during construction,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         such as temporary disturbance of access to land plots due
                         to the installation of pipes or road improvement,
                         disruption of businesses that lead to temporary loss of
                         income, and the need to set back the structures in some
                         cases where there is road widening.

                         The location and dimension of potential land acquisition
                         and potential involuntary resettlement and potential social
                         issues can only be identified during the project
                         implementation, particularly during the SIAP preparation,
                         and will have to be confirmed during the preparation or
                         after the completion of DED.

                         The approved ESMF provides the cities with the
                         processes, procedures, requirements and institutional
                         arrangements to prepare a Social Assessment (SA) and
                         Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) or an Abreviated
                         Resettlement Action Plan (ARAP) which are all specified
                         in the Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
                         Framework (LARPF). The LARPF also includes:
                         resettlement principles, policies, procedures and
                         requirements, assessment for linked projects, eligibility
                         for compensation and assistance, entitlements, applicable
                         laws and regulations, organizational arrangements and
                         funding, GRM, and monitoring and evaluation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The ESMF including the LARPF is adapted from PNPM
                         Urban/ND’s ESMF. Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) or
                         Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plans (ARAPs) will be
                         developed by cities in the case that infrastructure
                         improvements and/or connecting infrastructure involves
                         involuntary resettlement. The Draft RAPs swill be
                         prepared along with and part of the SIAPs.

                         - Activities financed under Component 3.2 involve
                         investment in slum areas, to be implemented with CDD
                         Neighborhood Development (ND) approach, comprising
                         of construction of new and/or improvement of tertiary
                         basic infrastructure such as water supply, drainage,
                         sanitation, footpaths, fire safety, site improvements, sub-
                         standard house, greenings, measures to disaster risks
                         management, etc. Targeted priority slum areas in 154
                         cities to receive support from the project will be defined
                         during the SIAP preparation and types, size and the



                         Page 12 of 19
                         location of tertiary infrastructure subprojects will be
                         determined in the CSPs. Confirmation of the sitting of the
                         subprojects will be defined by the DEDs. As has been the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         case of PNPM-Urban/ND, each kelurahan will receive
                         about USD 150-250K during the project period and this
                         amount will finance various priority subprojects as
                         identified in the CSPs.

                         -Although the ESMF and LARPF also apply to
                         Component 3.2, it is anticipated that land donation may be
                         predominant. A VLD Protocol has thus been prepared as
                         part of the ESMF and LARPF. Subprojects are small or
                         limited scale. Social impacts of these subprojects are not
                         considered for the part significant and site-specific and
                         manageable by the community beneficiaries. In the case
                         of the ongoing PNPM Urban/ND, new tertiary
                         infrastructure was usually built on land voluntarily
                         donated by the beneficiaries (60 %) and by the kelurahans
                         (36.4%). This common practice will likely continue to
                         take place in this project as the land needed for the tertiary
                         subprojects, which are community-based, is small in size
                         and provides direct benefit for the land owners.
                         Documentation of the voluntary land donation (VLD) will
                         be part of the community’s proposals.

                         - The current VLD Protocol covering principles,
                         procedures and documentation for voluntary land
                         donations under PNPM Urban/ND has been updated and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         adapted for the upcoming project for community
                         infrastructure. Documentation of the voluntary land
                         donation (VLD) will be part of the community’s
                         proposals in line with requirements sets in the VLD
                         Protocol. The update of the protocol also includes the
                         follow-up on the legal status of the donated and remaining
                         land that should be processed by the local government.

                         - In-situ slum improvement may involve small scale
                         community land consolidation, VLD, and small scale
                         limited land acquisition or involuntary resettlement with
                         relocation within the same area.
                         Land involved in in-situ slum upgrading will be indicated
                         in the CSPs. In the case that slum upgrading involves
                         small-scale voluntary community land consolidation, the
                         city government together with the LKM in the kelurahan
                         will prepare a Land Consolidation Implementation Plan
                         (LCIP) as described in the Voluntary Land Consolidation
                         Protocol and LARPF. In cases that involuntary



                         Page 13 of 19
                                                                       resettlement is unavoidable and of limited scale, the city
                                                                       government together with the LKM will prepare a RAP or
                                                                       ARAP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       - The project has revised and adapted the current PNPM-
                                                                       Urban/ND’s ESMF including the Land Acquisition and
                                                                       Resettlement Policy Framework (LARPF) and the IPP
                                                                       Framework for PNPM Urban/ND. The ESMF and
                                                                       LARPF includes a Voluntary Land Consolidation
                                                                       Protocol for implementing small and limited scale land
                                                                       consolidation in compliance with OP 4.12 and the GOI’s
                                                                       regulations on land consolidation. The updated ESMF
                                                                       including LARPF has been based on the experiences and
                                                                       lessons learned from the ongoing PNPM Urban/ND
                                                                       (particularly for the voluntary land donation) and from
                                                                       other World Bank’s supported project on land acquisition
                                                                       and resettlement. The substance and structure of the
                                                                       LARPF follow OP 4.12, and entitlement matrix and GRM
                                                                       are part of it. The LARPF will also adopt GOI’s laws and
                                                                       regulations pertaining Land Acquisition for the
                                                                       Development for Public Purpose.

                                                                       Component 1 will support institutional and policy
                                                                       development. One of the activities would be undertaking
                                                                       upstream strategic studies to facilitate the development of
                                                                       policy to support the sustainability of slum upgrading and
                                                                       prevention policies, including land administration policy
                                                                       reform, approaches to address informal settlements, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       security of land tenure. TORs for activities (studies,
                                                                       training and project management) financed by Component
                                                                       1will be shared with the RSA for review and clearance to
                                                                       ensure that safeguards issues are addressed in accordance
                                                                       with the approved ESMF.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project will not finance construction and/or
                            4.37                                       rehabilitation of dam.
                            Projects on International   No             The project will not be located in the watersheds of any
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project is not located in any known disputed areas as
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           defined under the policy.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Overall, the project will improve the environmental conditions of the city and the slum areas and
                              the living quality of the slum dwellers. Given the nature of the subprojects, their small or limited


                                                                        Page 14 of 19
                           scale and the implementation arrangements of the project as described in Section I, the project will
                           not generate large scale, significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental and social impacts.
                           Environmental and social impacts will take place during construction, especially during the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           construction of the connecting infrastructure and improvement of the existing secondary and
                           primary infrastructure. Disturbance during construction may affect the households and businesses
                           in and surrounding the subproject areas, such as dust, noise, and disturbance of access to houses/
                           businesses that would lead to temporary decline of income from businesses.

                           The connecting infrastructure and improvement of existing secondary and primary subprojects
                           may need to acquire a small or limited amount of land, but locations and potential adverse impacts
                           cannot be determined at this stage, as subprojects will be determined after the SIAPs and CSPs are
                           completed. Further, confirmation of the land needed and affected landowners will be determined
                           as the Detailed Engineering Designs (DEDs) are completed. As has been the case in PNPM-
                           Urban/ND, improvement and/or construction of new tertiary infrastructure in the slum areas may
                           need small land size and it is anticipated that beneficiaries may voluntarily contribute the needed
                           land as is a common practice. Issues on voluntary land donation (VLD) are mainly documentation
                           and legal processing of the donated land.

                           As mentioned, IP communities are indicated to be present in five urban areas in five provinces. As
                           has been the case in PNPM-Urban/ND, it is unlikely that the project would affect or benefit IP
                           communities as most slum areas are located in urbanized and developed urban areas. However,
                           once the slum and subproject locations are identified based on SIAPs and CSPs, the project will
                           verify the IPs presence and if any, will assess the potential positive and adverse impacts and
                           develop measures in accordance with the approved ESMF and IPPF.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           In the long-term, the project will have positive impacts due to the improvement of basic services
                           (tertiary infrastructure) and of secondary and primary infrastructure for sanitation, roads, drainage
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and water supply. The city and the slum dwellers will have improved environmental and living
                           quality. People's health quality will be improved.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project will support in-situ rehabilitation and redevelopment. Connecting infrastructure and
                           improvement of existing secondary and primary infrastructure may acquire a small and limited
                           amount of land but the project will support DEDs that avoid and minimize land loss or acquisition.
                           Environmental and social adverse impacts during construction will be mitigated through close
                           monitoring and supervision and through construction management reflected in the contractors’
                           contracts. Temporary adverse environmental and social impacts will be addressed in accordance to
                           the principles specified in the ESMF. In the case of CDD slum upgrading in targeted slum areas,
                           environmental and social impacts will be managed with the community as part of the community
                           proposals.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project has prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), which is
                           an adaptation and update tothe PNPM-Urban/ND’s ESMF to manage potential environmental and
                           social safeguards issues and impacts. It is part of the project structure and will be adopted by the
                           project regardless of source of financing. The ESMF includes Environmental Management amd


                                                                     Page 15 of 19
                           Social Management Measures including ECOPs and a PCR Management Plan), LARPF which
                           includes a Protocol for VLD and a Protocol for Voluntary Land Consolidation, and an IPPF. As
                           has been the case with PNPM-Urban/ND, safeguards will be continuously mainstreamed in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project cycle, including during the preparation of SIAP, CSPs and DEDs and during construction.

                           The ESMF includes screening, impact assessment and mitigation measures as part of the SIAPs,
                           CSPs and Community proposals. Site specific mitigation measures and associated costs during
                           construction will be part of the civil works contracts, and/or in the approved community's cost
                           proposals. The ESMF will be elaborated into an Operational Manual (Safeguards Technical
                           Guidelines -STG), to be adopted by city governments, LKMs/Kelurahans, project management
                           staff, consultants and facilitators. The Operational Manual (STG) will be reviewed and approved
                           by the Bank and distributed and socialized to project management staff, PMUs at city level,
                           consultants, facilitators and LKMs.

                           The ESMF includes a Safeguards Capacity Strengthening Plan which spells out the proposed
                           actions to ensure adequate technical and institutional capacity to support the project. The
                           Executing Agency of this project, the DGHS under the MPWH, has an extensive experience in
                           managing safeguards under the PNPM-Urban/ND project, REKOMPAK, in addition to
                           PAMSIMAS, Integrated Urban Infrastructure Development Projects (IUIDPs), DAK project, etc.
                           The current PMU of PNPM-Urban/ND will be strengthened and safeguards experts under the
                           PMU’s Advisory Consultant Team will be maintained and its capacity will continuously be
                           strengthened. The provincial PMU will be assisted by an environmental specialist and social
                           development specialist to support, oversee and guide the city governments, consultants and
                           facilitators. Safeguards will be part of the regular training program for consultants and facilitators
                           of the PNPM-Urban/ND who mostly would continue to work on the National Slum Upgrading
                           Project. In this project, there will be safeguards training specifically dedicated to city governments
                           as part of the overall training program.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders for this project are project management staff, consists of PMU, National and
                           Provincial Project Managers, City Governments Project Managers, Community Board of Trustees
                           (BKMs/LKMs) and community self-help group (KSMs) at the kelurahan level. In addition, there
                           are Consultant Management Team at the national level, Regional Management Consultant at the
                           provincial level, City Coordinator Team and facilitators at the kelurahan level. A stakeholders
                           consultation for the draft ESMF was carried out on January 18, 2016. Participants were
                           representatives of participating City Governments, NGOs, Board of Trustees of Community
                           Groups, universities, as well as practitioners, PNPM-Urban consultants, facilitators, and PMU
                           staff. Participants supported the project for adopting the ESMF, however, were concerned and
                           requested the project to ensure that ESMF will be implemented consistently through adoption of
                           Safeguards Technical Manuals that outlines clear roles of each parties involved in the project,
                           adequate training for community and related stakeholders, and include livelihoods should the
                           project deals with land isues. The draft ESMF was disclosed in the project’s website www.p2kp.
                           org on February 9, 2016 and in the Infoshop on February 3, 2016.

                           The ESMF will be elaborated into an Operational Manual (Safeguards Technical Guidelines –
                           STG), which will be reviewed and approved by the Bank then socialized and distributed to project
                           management staff, city governments, consultants, facilitators, and BKMs/LKMs. The ESMF (in
                           English and Bahasa versions) will be uploaded in the project website www.p2kp.org and the


                                                                     Page 16 of 19
                           ESMF (English version) will be disclosed in the Infoshop. Implementation of the ESMF and its
                           Operational Guidelines Safegua will be mainstreamed during the preparation of SIAPs and CSPs,
                           including during the consultations with the involved stakeholders and potentially affected peoples.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguards instruments (drafts RAP, LCIP, IPP, as applicable) are part of the SIAPs and
                           Voluntary Land Donation (VLD) statements are part of the community proposals. UKL/UPL will
                           be prepared after the DED is completed. Both SIAPs and CSPs will be disclosed at the city
                           government level and kelurahan level, respectively. The summary of SIAPs will be made available
                           in the project’s website.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        19-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                          09-Feb-2016
                           Comments: Draft ESMF has been uploaded in the project website (www.p2kp.org). The Draft
                                         ESMF will be replaced with the final one after obtain clearance from RSS.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        19-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     03-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                          09-Feb-2016
                           Comments: Draft ESMF has been uploaded in the project website (www.p2kp.org). The Draft
                                         ESMF will be replaced with the final one after obtain clearance from RSS.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        19-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     09-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Indonesia                                                          09-Feb-2016
                           Comments: Draft ESMF has been uploaded in the project website (www.p2kp.org). The Draft
                                         ESMF will be replaced with the final one after obtain clearance from RSS.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?



                                                                    Page 17 of 19
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?


                                                                     Page 18 of 19
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
Public Disclosure Copy




                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: George Soraya,Evi Hermirasari
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 24-Feb-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                      Date: 24-Feb-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 19 of 19
