                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA12625
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Feb-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Feb-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tajikistan                          Project ID:    P150816
                            Project Name:      Nurek Hydropower Rehabilitation Project Phase I (P150816)
                            Task Team          Artur Kochnakyan,Takhmina Mukhamedova
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          06-Feb-2017              Estimated     28-Apr-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE03                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       350.00           Total Bank Financing:    210.00
                            Financing Gap:            140.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  210.00
                              Total                                                                                        210.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to restore the generating capacity of the rehabilitated units of
                           Nurek HPP, improve their efficiency, and strengthen the safety of the Nurek dam.
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1: Rehabilitation of the three generating units, the key infrastructural components of the
                           plant, and replacement of auto-transformers (US$310 million). This component will consist of two
                           sub-components.

                           Sub-component 1.1: Replacement and refurbishment of mechanical, electrical, and electromechanical


                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                         equipment and civil works (US$270 million). This sub-component will finance: (a) rehabilitation of
                         three power generating units (generators, turbines, main inlet valves, transformers), auxiliary systems
                         and key balance of plant; and (b) providing spare parts, and operations and maintenance equipment.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sub-component 1.2: Replacement of six autotransformers (US$40 million). This sub-component will
                         finance supply and installation of six auto-transformers, replacing the existing autotransformers that
                         are beyond their economic life and are in poor technical condition.

                         Component 2: Enhancement of dam safety (US$30 million). This component will finance activities
                         to improve the safety of the operation of the Nurek HPP. This component will finance:

                         (a)    Rehabilitation of spillway tunnels, refurbishment of spillway gates/hoisting system,
                         improvement of protection on permeable zone of the embankment dam above the core zone crest,
                         etc.

                         (b)      Measures to enhance safety against seismic hazards. Those scope of those measures will be
                         finalized after completion of the ongoing seismic hazard assessment and stability analyses of the
                         Nurek dam; and completion of the drilling of five boreholes on the downstream part of the left bank
                         to check the slope stability.

                         (c)     Introduction of an advanced flood forecasting/warning system and preparing optimized
                         reservoir operating rules to enhance the flood-handling capacity of the dam.

                         (d)      Refurbishment and upgrade of monitoring instruments and management system to improve
                         the collection and analysis of the safety monitoring data.

                         (e)   Update of the Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP), Operation and Maintenance Plan
                         (O&M), and the Instrumentation Plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3: Technical assistance (US$10 million). This component will support implementation of
                         the project and strengthen the institutional capacity of BT by supporting the following:

                         (a)     Project management consultant (PMC) to assist with the review of designs, bidding, quality
                         control and construction supervision of the project. BT has already signed the US$5.2 million
                         equivalent contract with PMC.

                         (b)      Panel of Experts (PoE) on matters related to dam safety and other critical aspects of the
                         Project.

                         (c)   Technical and other engineering studies, which may be required during project
                         implementation.

                         (d)     Consultant services to support BT with citizen engagement and gender-informed consultative
                         processes during project implementation.

                         (e)      Capacity building for Nurek HPP and BT staff, including in project management, dam
                         safety, operation and management of hydro facilities, fiduciary and safeguards aspects of the project.




                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Nurek HPP is located 80 km (by road) from Dushanbe, the capital of Tajikistan, in the Danghara
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and Nurek districts of Southern Tajikistan, in the Khatlon Province. Its reservoir is located both in
                         the regions of Khatlon and Region of Republican Subordination.Khatlon has an area of 24,800 km2
                         (around 17% of the country➢❨ s area). The region is informally split into Western Khatlon
                         (comprising Kurgan-Tube and the Kofarnihon and Vakhsh river valleys) and Eastern Khatlon
                         (Kulyob and the Kyzylsu and Yakhsu river valleys). Kurgan-Tube is located only 100 km from
                         Dushanbe.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSU03)
                         Javaid Afzal (GEN03)
                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The project provides significant environmental benefits in
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     the long run by rehabilitating low-carbon renewable
                                                                    energy based generation plant. The proposed
                                                                    rehabilitation works will also help restore the power
                                                                    generation capacity of Nurek due to use of modern
                                                                    turbines and generators with improved designs. The
                                                                    project is not expected to have any adverse or irreversible
                                                                    environmental impacts. The project impacts are only site-
                                                                    specific, generally limited to construction stage, and are to
                                                                    be mitigated through a well-designed environmental and
                                                                    social management plan (ESMP). The project has
                                                                    therefore been classified as Environmental Category
                                                                    ➢❨ B➢❨ . The Borrower has prepared an environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    and social impact assessment for the project.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No             The proposed rehabilitation works under the project are
                          4.04                                      limited to the area, which is owned and operated by the
                                                                    Borrower's implementing entity, Barqi Tojik. There are
                                                                    no natural habitats present within the project area as
                                                                    defined in the Bank policy.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No             The proposed rehabilitation works under the project are
                                                                    limited to the site, which is owned and operated by the
                                                                    Borrower's implementing entity - Barqi Tojik. No forests
                                                                    are present within the project area as defined in the Bank
                                                                    Policy.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No                The proposed project does not promote or increase the use
                                                                    of pesticides as defined in the Bank Policy. The
                                                                    rehabilitation works envisaged under the project do not
                                                                    result in increased irrigation supply for the downstream
                                                                    water users.
                          Physical Cultural          No             The proposed project is confined within the existing area
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11                      owned and operated by the Borrower. No physical and
                                                                    cultural resources are present in this area as defined in the


                                                                     Page 3 of 8
                                                                       Bank Policy.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No                There are no indigenous peoples as defined in OP 4.12 in
                            BP 4.10                                    the project area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Involuntary Resettlement No                The project activities will not result in involuntary
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 resettlement as defined in OP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP     Yes               Activities proposed under the project include civil works
                            4.37                                       which will improve dam safety. Therefore this Bank
                                                                       Policy has been triggered. As required by the policy, the
                                                                       project: (a) has engaged a PoE to provide independent
                                                                       review and expert advice on dam safety issues and other
                                                                       aspects during both preparation and implementation; (b)
                                                                       will ensure that the works under the project will be
                                                                       designed and supervised by competent professionals. This
                                                                       will be done by the international Project Management
                                                                       Consultants, which is financed by the project; and (c)
                                                                       prepare and implement the following detailed plans: (i) a
                                                                       plan for construction supervision and quality assurance;
                                                                       (ii) an instrumentation plan; (iii) an O&M plan; and (iv)
                                                                       an EPP. POE in its first meeting held in October 2016
                                                                       provided valuable comments and recommendation on
                                                                       ongoing additional dam safety related investigations and
                                                                       analysis conducted by BT➢❨ s consultant, which will be
                                                                       reflected in the final design of dam safety works.
                            Projects on International   Yes            The project is located on Vakhsh river, which is a
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       tributary of the Amu darya an international river, which
                                                                       flows between Tajikistan, Uzbekistan and Turkmenistan.
                                                                       This Policy has been triggered and per requirements of the
                                                                       Policy, a notification to the riparian countries was sent out
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       by the Bank on December 8th, 2016 as per the request
                                                                       received from the Government of Tajikistan.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The project is not located in disputed areas as defined in
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           the Bank Policy.
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The proposed rehabilitation of Nurek Hydropower project (HPP) has three major components; (i)
                              Rehabilitation of the power plant and auto-transformers, (ii) Dam safety and (iii) Technical
                              Assistance. The rehabilitation of the Nurek HPP will be carried out in two phases. The first phase
                              includes rehabilitation of three generating units and some of the balance of plant, and critical dam
                              safety works. The remaining six units and the remaining balance of plant will be rehabilitated in
                              the second phase of the project. The Borrower has prepared an Environmental and Social Impact
                              Assessment (ESIA) that covers the full rehabilitation project. Considering that the project
                              activities are limited to rehabilitation works, the project does not impose any large scale and
                              irreversible impacts. Nurek HPP was commissioned in 1972, and its construction has already
                              impacted river hydrology, aquatic life including fish and water quality. The proposed


                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                          rehabilitation project will have little incremental impacts in the Vakhsh basin.

                          The ESIA report identifies major environmental concerns around: (i) potential pollution due to
Public Disclosure Copy




                          refurbishment wastes (hazardous and non-hazardous), (ii) health and safety risks that may affect
                          workers but also local communities and (iii) regular operation of the power plant. The report
                          forecasts no impact on downstream hydrology, upstream reservoir level and downstream water
                          demand/uses.

                          The ESIA report identifies following three as high negative impacts:
                          (i) Asbestos is present in equipment that is to be refurbished. Removal of and working in closed
                          environment where Asbestos is present represents a major health risk for the workers and other
                          people in the area.
                          (ii) The dismantling, installation and testing of large scale equipment (turbines and auto-
                          transformers) in a limited work space poses health and safety risks (electrocution) for the workers
                          and personnel;
                          (iii) During the refurbishment of electrical components/devices, accidental stoppage of one or
                          several units might happen leading to a reduction in power generation and fluctuation of tension
                          in the electricity grid. This may lead to temporary disruption in the power supply for the public.

                           Bank has reviewed and cleared the ESIA report prepared by the borrower for the project. It is to be
                           disclosed in-country and at the InfoShop.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Upstream of Nurek hydropower, construction of another large-scale Rogun hydropower project
                           has begun. This project will generate 3,600 MW power upon its completion. A cascade of
                           hydropower projects (already operational) on Vakhsh River has negatively impacted the river
                           hydrology and the ecological system. Flows in Vakhsh River are seasonal and there is a large
                           seasonal variation between winter and summer flows. After the construction of hydropower
Public Disclosure Copy




                           projects on Vakhsh River, flows in the river are now regulated and controlled. Ecological systems
                           present in the basin, which benefited from the seasonal variations in flows like Tugai ecosystem at
                           Tigrovaya Balka State National Reserve have negatively been impacted. Cumulative impact
                           assessment done for the Nurek Hydropower project, on the other hand, has indicated no
                           incremental impact on the ecological resources of the basin.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Analysis of Alternatives in the ESIA report has been presented for refurbishment options,
                           rehabilitation sequencing and the ➢❨ no project➢❨ option.

                          i) Refurbishment Alternatives:- Nurek Hydropower consists of 9 units and all of them are
                          currently under-producing due to vibration and temperature issues. Unit 8 has been out of
                          operation for the last 4 years. The efficiency issues with the other eight units cumulatively
                          translate into equivalent of one unit out of operation.

                          Currently, the refurbishment alternatives are the following:
                          ➢❨¢ Recovering the full installed capacity only, or increasing the power generation capacity
                          (by 4%, 8% or 12%): There is no negative impact for either alternative. There is rather a clear
                          positive impact with the capacity increase as the project could generate more power especially
                          during peaking.

                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                          ➢❨¢ Sequencing refurbishment of 2 units simultaneously as against one unit after other: Barqi
                          Tojik (BT) has rejected the alternative of refurbishing two units simultaneously mainly due to
                          major reduction in power generation. The positive impact of this alternative is that it reduces the
Public Disclosure Copy




                          total construction time from 10 years to 7 years and 7 months therefore speeds up recovery of the
                          full power generation capacity.

                          ii) No Refurbishment Alternative:- Considering that the proposed rehabilitation project has very
                          limited environmental impacts, the no refurbishment alternative does not result in major
                          environmental gains. No refurbishment alternative, on the other hand, poses serious dam safety
                          risks. The aging equipment if not rehabilitated together with dam safety issues will result in
                          reduced power generation and reduced flood management.
                          ➢❨❫
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           BT is the national integrated power company in Tajikistan and responsible for the implementation
                           of Nurek Hydropower project. A dedicated unit 'Nurek Operation Unit' (NOU) within BT is
                           responsible for the operation of Nurek HPP. Currently, safeguards planning and implementation
                           capacity both at BT and NOU is limited. BT had hired project specific consultants to meet with the
                           safeguards preparation and implementation requirements. The ESIA report for the project
                           recommends hiring individual environment and social consultant to liaise with PMC.
                           Implementation of ESMP will be the responsibility of the Project Management Consultant (PMC),
                           who has already been hired by BT. PMC will also be responsible for putting up of reporting
                           system leading to preparation of quarterly and yearly reports, coordination and communication
                           with stakeholders on social and environmental management and carrying out EHS compliance
                           inspection of the contractors' works. The ESMP has earmarked funds to support BT on hiring of
                           environment and social consultant as well as to purchase equipment and to undertake select
                           environmental monitoring.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The ESIA report also recommends contractor having its own dedicated team comprised of an EHS
                           expert and an environmental engineer for the implementation of ESMP. The contractor will be
                           responsible for the preparation of EHS plan, Pedestrian and Traffic Safety Plan, Emergency
                           Preparedness and Response Plan, Hazardous Waste Management Plan etc. PMC will approve
                           contractors' required plans.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders at the national level include, but are not limited to: the Ministry of Energy and
                           Water Resources, OJSHC BT , Committee on Environment Protection (CEP), and State
                           Investment and State Property Management Committee. At the regional level, the Khatlon Region
                           Authorities, civil society groups such as regional women groups, farmers associations, the
                           administration of the natural reserve ➢❨ Tigrovaya Balka➢❨ . In addition, citizens and authorities
                           in Nurek City, Dukoni jamoat, and Puli Sangin jamoat.

                          The draft ESIA was disclosed and subject to consultations at the national, regional and local level
                          during the project preparation process.

                          The final ESIA includes a Stakeholder Engagement Plan (SEP), which provides a roadmap for
                          consultations (national, regional, and local level) during the implementation period. The SEP also
                          outlines the disclosure requirements for the ESIA.

                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        10-Jan-2017
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     30-Jan-2017
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Tajikistan                                                         25-Jan-2017
                           Comments: The ESIA report in English, executive summary of the report both in Russian and
                                         Tajik can be viewed at http://www.barqitojik.tj/en/activity/projects/327/
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

                                                                    Page 7 of 8
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Artur Kochnakyan,Takhmina Mukhamedova
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Brandon Enrique Carter (SA)        Date: 09-Feb-2017
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Jasneet Singh (PMGR)              Date: 09-Feb-2017
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
