INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA16260
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jan-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Burkina Faso              Project ID:  P153104
Parent       P 119917
Project ID:
Project Name: Reproductive Health Project - Additional Financing (P153104)
Parent Project BF-Reproductive Health Project (FY12) (P 119917)
Name:
Task Team       Haidara Ousmane Diadie,Paul Jacob Robyn
Leader(s):
Estimated       21-Jan-2016               Estimated    15-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNO7                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (100%)
Theme(s):       Child health (20%), Health system performance (20%), Population and
reproductive health (40%), HIV/AIDS (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     35.00            Total Bank Financing:   35.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                       Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                              35.00
Total                                                                    35.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
Page 1 of 7


﻿A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
To improve the utilization and quality of reproductive health services in the Recipient's territory,
with a particular focus on selected regions of Burkina Faso.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
To improve the utilization and quality of maternal and child health, reproductive health and HIV/
AIDS services in the Recipient's territory, with a particular focus on the poor and vulnerable
3. Project Description
The proposed Additional Financing will: (i) improve the delivery and quality of a Maternal, Child
and Reproductive Health Service Package through Performance-Based Financing; and (ii) support
critical inputs for reproductive health and HIV/AIDS services. It includes the following components:
Component 1: Improving the delivery and quality of a maternal, child and reproductive health
services through Performance-Based Financing (US$22.0 million equivalent IDA Additional
Financing): This component will have three subcomponents: (i) delivery of basic health care
package; (ii) support to the implementation and supervision of performance-based financing (PBF);
and (iii) strengthen financial access to health services for poor and vulnerable populations.
This component will continue implementation of PBF in the six selected regions where the rollout
began in early 2014. PBF is being implemented to address critical impediments confronting the
delivery of services at the district level. These challenges include the: (i) scarcity of funds to meet
operating expenses; (ii) lack of focus on achievement of results and lack of accountability
mechanisms of the district health system; and (iii) modest managerial capacity at the district level. In
addition to the three pre-pilot districts (Boulsa, Leo and Titao), within each region, two districts were
chosen which had the lowest of a combination of four indicators: (i) contraceptive prevalence rate:
(ii) assisted deliveries; (iii) antenatal consultations; and (iv) post-natal consultations.
In the 6 selected regions, the MOH will support the provision of health services to be delivered and
paid through the PBF system in selected health care facilities and continue to cover the provision of
packages of basic health services (PBHS). The package of services will have a large focus on
maternal and neonatal health, but will also continue to include non-maternal services (i.e. child visits,
immunizations etc.), adolescent services, HIV/AIDS, tuberculosis, and malaria, to ensure that health
care facilities do not neglect other services.
As such, the Additional Financing would support the provision of the package of services under the
PBHS, which will also now include the list of services provided free of charge to beneficiaries of the
community targeting and insurance interventions currently being piloted, as well as new HIV/AIDS-
related indicators. This component will also continue to support activities related to contracting,
verification and training for PBF.
Component 2: Supporting critical inputs for reproductive health and HIV/AIDS services (US$13.0
million equivalent IDA Additional Financing): This component will support reproductive health
interventions related to the fight against HIV/AIDS and reproductive health services. It will be
implemented at national level and will have three subcomponents: (i) training of health personnel,
strengthening the capacities of teachers and training of trainers for pre- and in-service training of
health professionals providing reproductive health services; (ii) provision of drugs and equipment to
improve obstetric and neo-natal services in 10 health centers; (iii) strengthen demand for family
planning and reproductive health services; (iv) demand creation for HIV prevention activities and
Page 2 of 7


﻿RH services for key target population groups; and (v) provision of health insurance and waste
management equipment.
Key populations and vulnerable groups (in particular Sex Workers, MSM, prisoners, miners and
truckers) account for a disproportionate share of the epidemic and act as vector of transmission in the
general population. Targeting those groups in concentrated and mixed epidemic settings has proven
to be the most efficient way of investing in the HIV response. The project will support interventions
designed to create demand for treatment and prevention services from those populations and
facilitate access to services and strengthen prevention and treatment services for key target
populations provided by the Ministry of Health. Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) will be asked to
submit proposals responding to the following priorities: i) geographic mapping activities to
determine the location, volume and typology of sex workers; ii) demand creation for HIV prevention
activities for key target population groups, in particular sex workers (SWs); iii) demand creation for
HIV testing, with linkages to the care cascade and access to treatment for key populations. Through
the implementation of demand-side proposals facilitated by CSOs, the following results are
envisaged (i) an increased yield of members of key populations tested, in particular SWs; (ii)
increased referrals of HIV-positive members of key populations to treatment facilities and retention
in the care cascade; (iii) reduction of stigma and discrimination of key populations in particular
through Sex Workers friendly clinics; and (iv) improved linkages with reproductive services for key
populations.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
National Project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Leandre Yameogo (GEN07)
Yacouba Konate (GSU01)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Under the proposed Additional Financing, the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                environmental category of the project will remain B - due
to the potential for increased medical waste generation
from health facilitate and the need for proper management
and disposal of this waste. The main safeguard
instrument under this policy will be the Medical Waste
Management Plan (MWMP). The plan, which covers the
entire country, was developed and disseminated (Infoshop
in the World Bank and in country newspapers in February
2011, is being implemented by the Ministry of Health and
Population and it is agreed that the same plan will be
applied in the context of the Additional Financing as the
components and the targeted areas of the AF remain the
same. The MWMP has been supervised regularly and
deemed to be implemented in a satisfactory manner. The
MWMP will be evaluated in 2016 along with the Mid-
term review of the PNDS (and renewed together with it in
2016 based on lessons learned, new technical insights and
Page 3 of 7


﻿possible institutional changes that may be identified
during the MTR). The TORs for the update for the Sahel
Women's Empowerment & Demographics Project
(P150080) and Sahel Malaria/NTD Project (P149526)
were developed and published on Friday 3rd, April, 2015.
The safeguard specialist reviewed and cleared the TORs.
The ToRs and publication were approved by the managers
of HNP and environment in April -May 2015 prior to
appraisals of the SWEDD and Malaria/MTN projects and
the update is expected to be completed in the coming
months. That being said, the current MWMP is still
appropriate for the AF as the components and the targeted
areas of the AF remain the same, and the relevant content
for this operation will remain in the updated MWMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The project is not expected to impact on natural habitats.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project is not expected to impact on forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project is not expected to impact on pests.
Physical Cultural       No           The project is not expected to impact on physical cultural
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no indigenous peoples expected in the project
BP 4.10                              areas.
Involuntary Resettlement No          The project will not include any involuntary resettlement.
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not include construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                 of dams, nor rely on dams.
Projects on International  No        The project is not expected to impact on any international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterway.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project will not be located in a disputed area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
As with the original project, OP/BP4.01 is triggered for the Additional Financing due to the
potential for increased medical waste generation from health facilitate and the need for proper
management and disposal of this waste. The main safeguard instrument under this policy will be
the Medical Waste Management Plan (MWMP). The plan, developed and disseminated (Infoshop
in the World Bank and in country newspapers in February 2011, is being implemented by the
Ministry of Health and Population and it is agreed that the same plan will be applied in the context
of the Additional Financing as the components and the targeted areas of the AF remain the same.
The MWMP will be evaluated in 2016 along with the Mid-term review of the PNDS (and renewed
Page 4 of 7


﻿together with it in 2016). The TORs for the update for the Sahel Women's Empowerment &
Demographics Project (P150080) and Sahel Malaria/NTD (P149526) projects were developed and
published on Friday 3rd, April, 2015. The ToRs and publication were approved by the managers
of HNP and environment in April -May 2015 prior to appraisals of the SWEDD and Malaria/
MTN projects and the update is expected to be completed in the coming months. That being said,
the current MWMP is still appropriate for the AF as the components and the targeted areas of the
AF remain the same, and the relevant content for this operation will remain in the updated
MWMP.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no long term impacts due to the anticipated activities in the project areas covered under
the Additional Financing.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A Medical Waste Management Plan described earlier is being implemented by the Department of
Public Hygiene at the Ministry of Health. Supervision is being done by the PADS, the
Department of Public Hygiene and the World Bank. To date, the following activities have been
implemented:
1.    two meeting and training of all staff implementing waste management;
2.     Purchase through ongoing procurement of 2 incinerators for hospitals; 4 incinerators for
"Blood transfusing" department,
3.     Funding each year of heath district/hospitals during the planning of their annual activities
to purchase consumable (colored boxes for triage, gloves, gas oil...)
4.     Assessment of the health private sector (Clinics, Polyclinics and health cabinet). Followed
by distribution of six incinerators, 60 tricycles to collect the waste and bring to the incinerators.
5.     Training of health facility staff using incinerators, supervised by the WB, the Department
of Public Hygiene and the Burkina Faso Alliance of the Private Sector; including organization of
the private providers in a networks for the management of medical waste;
6.     Realization of a video (26mn, realized as a baseline) for the basic management of waste in
hospitals
The same plan will be applied in the context of the Additional Financing and when the revised
version is updated in 2016, it will include the content from the MWMP relevant to this operation
and the AF.
In addition, health centers will report on hazardous medical material waste management since that
action will be included as an indicator is and will continue to be evaluated and purchased in PBF.
The quantified quality checklist used by PBF to pay for performance on the quality measure,
measures this element. The weighing for this aspect will be increased, and the adherence to the
guidelines will be checked, and paid for, quarterly. Results from these quarterly evaluations show
improving scores for waste management since the initiation of the project.
The implementing agencies for the AF will be the same as the original project, namely the
Ministry of Health and the SP/CNLS (National AIDS/STI Council).
Page 5 of 7


﻿5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholder: Ministry of Health
Safeguard policies are disclosed in newspaper, internet and official MoH documents
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                28-Feb-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Feb-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Burkina Faso                                               28-Feb-20 11
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]     NA[
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Page 6 of 7


﻿Task Team Leader(s): Name: Haidara Ousmane Diadie,Paul Jacob Robyn
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)           Date: 28-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)              Date: 29-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


