                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA15245
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Angola                            Project ID:   P154447
                            Project Name:      Smallholder Agriculture Development and Commercialization Project (P154447)
                            Task Team          Aniceto Timoteo Bila
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          07-Mar-2016                       Estimated   05-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA07                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (60%), Public administration-
                                              Agriculture, fishing and forestry (14%), Irrigation a nd drainage (9%),
                                              Agricultural extension and research (9%), General water, sanitation and flood
                                              protection sector (8%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (45%), Rural markets (45%), Rural policies and
                                              institutions (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      95.00           Total Bank Financing:                70.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                 20.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    70.00
                              LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                                       5.00
                              Total                                                                                    95.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                                                      Page 1 of 16
                         The Project Development Objective is to increase smallholder agriculture productivity, production
                         and marketing for selected crops in the project areas.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The SADCP is designed to address two critical constraints to agricultural development in Angola.
                         First, it is designed to increase agriculture institutional capacity through training programs, both
                         nationally and in the project areas. Second, it is designed to address critical bottlenecks in the value
                         chain, including extension, irrigation, production and post-harvest value addition, and market
                         linkages of selected crops.

                         The project will be implemented over a period of five years, from July 2016 through June 2021. The
                         total project cost is estimated at US$95 million, of which US$20 million equivalent will be in-kind
                         and cash contributions from the Government of Angola and US$5 million equivalent will be in-kind
                         and/or cash contributions from project beneficiaries. A US$70 million IBRD loan will constitute the
                         remainder of the total project cost.

                         The SADCP builds on the experience gained under MOSAP, from which it differs in the following
                         important aspects: (i) it is larger in scope in terms of absolute funding and number of beneficiaries;
                         (ii) it includes a subcomponent to support development of small-scale irrigated agriculture; (iii) in
                         addition to food crops (maize, cassava, beans, and Irish potatoes), it emphasizes the production of
                         high-value crops, particularly vegetables; and (iv) it further strengthens commercialization of
                         agriculture, including market linkages and contract farming. The proposed project has three
                         components: Component 1- Capacity Building and Institutional Development; Component 2-
                         Support for Increased Production and Commercialization; and Component 3- Project Management,
                         Monitoring, and Evaluation. Details are provided in Annex 2 of the PAD.

                         A.     Project Components
                         Component 1. Capacity Building and Institutional Development- US$43 million
                         (US$23 million IBRD and US$20 million equivalent Government of Angola)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The objective of this component is to improve the technical, institutional, managerial, and marketing
                         skills of 150,000 farmer beneficiaries and to strengthen the capacity of government agricultural
                         extension specialists, agricultural research institutions, private agricultural service providers, and
                         NGOs related to different aspects of agriculture, including value chains. The expected results are: (i)
                         smallholder farmers’ organizations established and strengthened; (ii) technical and managerial
                         competence of smallholder farmers improved; and (iii) government capacity to support smallholder
                         agricultural production and commercialization enhanced.

                         This component consists of three subcomponents: (i) Strengthening Capacity of Smallholder Farmers
                         and Farmers’ Organizations through Farmers’ Field Schools; (ii) Institutional Strengthening of Local,
                         Provincial, and National Units of the MINAGRI; and (iii) Strengthening Capacity and Global
                         Knowledge to Address Emerging Research Problems.

                         1.1    Strengthening Capacity of Smallholder Farmers and Farmers’ Organizations through
                         Farmers’ Field Schools (US$10 million IBRD and US$15 million equivalent Government of Angola)

                         The first subcomponent deals with training of smallholder farmers through FFS and building the
                         capacity of relevant government staff at the local ADI offices. The main focus of the training of
                         smallholder farmers will be on: (a) supporting the establishment of smallholder farmers’

                                                                       Page 2 of 16
                         organizations; (b) strengthening the knowledge of farmers on agricultural practices, technology,
                         inputs and marketing; (c) strengthening the functional literacy and numeracy of farmers; (d)
                         improving household nutrition; (e) improving soil fertility and integrated nutrient management; (f)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         promoting conservation agriculture; and (g) building the capacity of relevant government staff at the
                         municipal level to implement a farmer field schools program.

                         The capacity of smallholder farmers and farmers’ organizations will be strengthened in all critical
                         aspects related to agriculture by scaling up the FFS initiative. The FFS training is expected to benefit
                         150,000 smallholder farmers. The FFS methodology empowers smallholder farmers to set their own
                         agenda and take steps to improve their agricultural knowledge and economic situation.

                         For effective implementation of the FFS approach, the government will ensure that each commune
                         has at least three agricultural extension specialists at each EDA. The project expects to cover all 80
                         communes in 26 municipalities by the end of the third year, with at least 30 communes covered in
                         the first year and 60 in the second year. This will ensure that all farmers in the target group benefit
                         from at least one full FFS training cycle during the project.

                         1.2     Institutional Strengthening of Local, Provincial, and National Units of the Ministry of
                         Agriculture (MINAGRI) (US$9 million IBRD)

                         The second subcomponent aims to: (i) strengthening the institutional capacity of local, provincial,
                         and national units of the Ministry of Agriculture in the areas of irrigation, extension, market
                         information, statistics and policy analysis to improve provision of services to smallholder farmers at
                         the farm level investments; and (ii) rehabilitating and constructing agricultural extension facilities at
                         the local level of the Ministry of Agriculture, including offices and residential complexes for
                         agricultural extension staff. In particular, project financing will be provided for:
                         •        Data and statistics: Targeted support: to expand data collection for crop production
                         (including forecasts) and post-harvest surveys through funding for enumerator training and data
                         collection in the project areas; to produce regular production statistics and reports at the national
Public Disclosure Copy




                         level; and for the planned national agricultural census in 2016, as needed.
                         •        Policy analysis: Targeted support for agricultural policy training and annual sector review
                         processes, possibly with a link to Angola’s commitment under CAADP to institute two reviews of
                         the agriculture sector per year.
                         •        Market information systems: Support for the development of market information systems;
                         exploration of possible systems to be developed for farmers’ or traders’ groups; and linkages to
                         Ministry of Commerce initiatives around market information systems within the context of
                         PAPAGRO (Programa de Adquisição de Productos Agropecuarios).
                         •        Small-scale irrigation: The rehabilitation and development of small-scale irrigation is part of
                         ADI’s mandate to support smallholder agriculture development in the country, while development of
                         larger irrigation schemes is within the mandate of MINAGRI’s Department of Hydraulics. The
                         project will provide technical training on gravity-fed irrigation systems at provincial and municipal
                         levels to enable technical backstopping for small-scale irrigation systems to ADI staff and policy
                         support such as preparation of water users’ association (WUA) regulations to the GEPE
                         (MINAGRI’s Division of Statistics under the Department of Planning and Studies).
                         •        Provision of infrastructures for extension officers: Critical agricultural extension facilities
                         need to be rehabilitated and/or built at local level. This will require construction and rehabilitation of
                         office–residential complexes for agricultural extension services in selected communes. An estimated
                         40 new houses and 10 new offices will be required in the 80 beneficiary communes. This activity
                         will be implemented by the PIU/PPIUs (Project Implementation Unit/Provincial Project

                                                                       Page 3 of 16
                         Implementation Units) in collaboration with local beneficiary organizations. The government will
                         allocate specific resources for operations and maintenance (O&M) as part of its contribution.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.3   Strengthening Capacity and Global Knowledge to Address Emerging Research Problems-
                         US$9 million (US$4 million IBRD and US$5 million equivalent Government of Angola)

                         The main activities to be financed under this subcomponent include: (i) improving soil diagnostic
                         services, (ii) supporting the multiplication of seeds and planting material; (iii) building the technical
                         capacity of the national research and extension system; (iv) developing technology packages for
                         selected crops and (v) increased field testing and demonstration of improved technologies received
                         from international and regional research institutes.

                         The third subcomponent aims to strengthen the institutional capacity of Angola’s national and
                         provincial-level agricultural research system to enhance access to modern agricultural innovations
                         and technologies that increase agriculture productivity and production. The objective is to strengthen
                         the research systems to address emerging issues in the productivity, production, and value chains of
                         priority food and horticulture (vegetable) crops. This will include scaling up the availability of
                         improved technologies for farmers, thereby filling technical knowledge gaps around cropping
                         systems within the project areas and introducing new knowledge and technologies that may be
                         available within the region or globally, where appropriate.

                         The Project financing will be provided to develop proposals for addressing specific R&D initiatives
                         linked to project objectives and building on relevant global or regional sources of knowledge and
                         technology. Implementation of these activities will be executed by IIA (Institute of Agricultural
                         Research) and the partner(s) selected for the specific R&D activity, and the PIU will retain the
                         fiduciary responsibility.

                         ADI and IIA will prepare a detailed work plan for the R&D activities to be financed with the time
                         frame, and budget. They will also prepare a Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) setting the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         responsibility of each party in the implementation of the work plan including the supervision
                         mechanisms during implementation. The MOU should be prepared no later than six months after
                         effectiveness.

                         In particular, financing under the SADCP will be provided for:
                         •        Multiplication of seeds and planting material: Scaling up breeder or foundation seed
                         production within the Institute of Agricultural Research (IIA), developing partnerships with seed
                         producers to increase production of certified or quality declared seed, and scaling up production and
                         dissemination of virus-free cassava cuttings through available tissue culture laboratories (in Malanje
                         and Luanda).
                         •        Development of recommended technology packages for project crops (cartas tecnologicas
                         por culturas): Packaging and disseminating recommendations for priority crops for use by farmers,
                         delivered by extension system/technical service providers.
                         •        Improvement of soil diagnostic services (soil analysis and fertilizer recommendations):
                         Provision of equipment, training, and operational costs within Huambo and Malanje to improve soil
                         testing facilities and development of comprehensive fertilizer recommendations.
                         •        Training of national research and extension system on specific technical topics by
                         international experts: Support to partnerships to bring in outside knowledge for the benefit of the
                         national research and extension system from partners such as EMBRAPA (Brazilian Agricultural
                         Research Corporation), CGIAR (Consultative Group for International Agricultural Research)

                                                                       Page 4 of 16
                         institutes, or within the SADC (Southern African Development Community) region.
                         •        Scaling up the testing/demonstration of new technologies based on CGIAR research system
                         or others: Support for R&D activities within IIA to test new technologies brought in from the CGIAR
Public Disclosure Copy




                         system, EMBRAPA, or countries within the region and targeting priority crops.


                         Component 2. Support for Increased Production and Commercialization -US$42 million
                         (US$37 million IBRD and US$5 million equivalent beneficiaries)

                         The objective of this component is to support value chain development of selected crops through
                         demand-based matching investment grants to smallholder farmers’ groups and organizations to
                         improve agricultural productivity, production, and market access for 50,000 eligible beneficiaries.
                         The beneficiaries for investment support will be selected from those trained through FFS under
                         MOSAP, the SADCP, or any other training program. This component will support three kinds of
                         investments in the value chain, including: (i) rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation schemes; (ii)
                         agricultural production and productivity improvements; and (iii) post-harvest management for value
                         addition, including storage, processing, and marketing facilities.

                         The project will hire an experienced and competent service provider to provide necessary support
                         during implementation of this component. The service provider will work within ADI’s structures
                         and will only hire internationally qualified experts to integrate in the team and to support ADI to
                         address technical issues along the selected crops’ value chains.

                         A Project Implementation Manual (PIM) will be compiled for the SADCP and will include eligibility
                         criteria and the selection process for investment subprojects. These may vary according to the type of
                         support required, as described in Annex 2 of the PAD, but eligibility for each subsequent investment
                         will be contingent on satisfactory performance in the previous investment support phase, if any. A
                         detailed process for identification, appraisal, and approval of subproject proposals is described in the
                         implementation arrangement in Annex 4 of the PAD and details will also be provided in the PIM.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Smallholder farmer beneficiaries will be required to make a 10-30 percent contribution (in-kind or
                         cash) to the matching grants funded by the project, depending on the type of investment. The project
                         will cover up to 90 percent of the subproject cost. The approval process for the subproject proposals
                         seeking matching grant investment support will be as follows:

                         (i)     The Project Implementation Sub Committee (PISC) at the national level will approve
                         subprojects above US$50,000 and up to US$100,000. The first two proposals in each category will
                         require prior review and clearance by the Bank; and

                         (ii)   The Provincial Project Implementation Sub Committee (PPISC) will approve subprojects up
                         to US$50,000, with the first two proposals in each category to be cleared by the Bank.

                         The PISC and PPISC will include NGO and private sector representatives to ensure full transparency
                         in the selection process. Subproject proposals from farmers’ organizations will be evaluated by a
                         special Project Committee against competitive selection criteria, as outlined in Annex 2. A full set of
                         criteria and procedures will be outlined in the PIM. Farmers’ organizations with a poor performance
                         record under MOSAP will not be eligible for any new investment support under the SADCP, but
                         every effort will be made to reach a diverse and large number of qualified farmers’ organizations. In
                         other words, selection of farmers’ organization for investment support will focus on both equity and

                                                                      Page 5 of 16
                         efficiency criteria. Strategically, the activities planned under this component will support
                         implementation of Objective 2 of ADP 2013-17 by promoting value chains, agribusiness,
                         development of irrigation, and construction of infrastructure to support agricultural production.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This component will be divided into two subcomponents: subcomponent 2.1 will provide technical
                         support whereas subcomponent 2.2 will provide investment support to qualified farmers’
                         organizations and enterprises.

                         2.1 Provision of Technical Support (US$7 million IBRD)

                         The activities to be implemented under this sub-component, aim to provide support in preparing
                         proposals for subprojects and in implementing selected subprojects under investment support
                         subcomponent.

                         The implementation modalities for providing technical support include contracting an experienced
                         and competent service provider to: (i) support farmers’ organizations to prepare subproject proposals
                         for competitive funding under sub-component 2.2; (ii) provide specialized technical assistance to
                         smallholder beneficiaries of irrigation schemes to create Water Users Associations (WUA), (iii)
                         provide implementation support to smallholder beneficiaries of subprojects to ensure that the
                         objectives of each subproject funded under the Project are achieved ; and (iii) strengthen the capacity
                         of NGOs and agricultural input providers to respond to the smallholder demands.

                         To increase the local level capacity and sustainability of the project interventions over time, the
                         service provider will also strengthen the capacity of NGOs and agricultural input providers to be able
                         to respond timely to the smallholder needs. Selected NGOs’ capacity will be strengthened to help
                         disseminate knowledge and identify appropriate farmers’ organizations to prepare subproject
                         proposals for seeking competitive funding under subcomponent 2.2; private agricultural input
                         suppliers will be strengthened in developing systems to supply critical agricultural inputs and
                         services to smallholder farmers; and private enterprises’ capacity will be strengthened in agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         marketing, post-harvest management, specific value chains, and processing as well as in
                         strengthening market linkages so that smallholders can easily access markets to sell their produce.

                         In coordination with the PIU, PPIUs, and ADI, the service provider will organize at least three
                         seminars per province per year for the following target audiences: NGOs, private sector input
                         suppliers, and private sector value chain actors. These seminars will: raise awareness; provide
                         training for NGOs interested in helping farmers’ organizations prepare investment proposals; and
                         strengthen small, medium, and micro agribusiness enterprises’ managerial and business capacities
                         related to agricultural input supply, provision of agricultural services, and value chain activities,
                         including storage, transport, packaging, processing, and value chains for different food and vegetable
                         crops.

                         The provision of technical support by the service provider is divided into three broad categories: (i)
                         irrigation subprojects; (ii) production subprojects; and (iii) post-harvest management subprojects. All
                         provision of technical support will be in coordination with the Provincial and Local ADI offices.


                         2.1.1 Technical Support to Irrigation Subprojects

                         Rehabilitation of small-scale irrigation schemes will be at pilot scale and will only cover 1,000 ha of

                                                                      Page 6 of 16
                         the potential 5,500 ha available in the country. The design of irrigation schemes and construction
                         supervision will be done under subcomponent 2.1 whereas actual construction and its funding will be
                         done under subcomponent 2.2.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Initial data indicate that about 279 irrigation schemes, covering about 5,500 ha in the three
                         beneficiary provinces, require rehabilitation, but the level of rehabilitation required varies. Given
                         capacity constraints and the costs of rehabilitation, the project will only support rehabilitation of
                         about 1,000 ha of small-scale irrigation systems as a pilot program, benefiting about 2,000 farmers
                         (with an average of 0.5 ha each). Assuming an average of 32 ha per irrigation scheme, the project
                         will cover approximately 32 irrigation schemes. The investment in irrigation schemes will adopt an
                         integrated participatory planning and development process (details of this process as well the
                         eligibility criteria are given in Annex 2). The project will support the establishment of Water User
                         Association (WUAs) to all beneficiaries of irrigation schemes to ensure the investment’s
                         sustainability and to avoid possible future conflicts.

                         2.1.2 Technical Support to Production and Post-harvest Management Subprojects

                         The objective of this subcomponent is to increase crop production and marketing by smallholder
                         farmers, thereby accelerating the transition from subsistence agriculture to commercial agriculture.
                         The service provider will have the responsibility to: (i) identify the demand-driven but potentially
                         critical subprojects for increasing crop productivity and production as well as post-harvest value
                         addition and marketing; (ii) support preparation of subproject proposals that meet the eligibility
                         criteria for investment support and have a good chance for competitive selection for support under
                         Component 2; and (iii) supervise the implementation of subproject proposals selected for funding
                         under Component 2. In addition, the service provider will train selected MINAGRI staff in project
                         implementation, thus strengthening Angola’s agricultural institutional capacity. It is extremely
                         important that this subcomponent supports subprojects that are viable, sustainable, and likely to make
                         a major contribution to increased productivity, production, and marketing, including value addition.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.2 Investment Support (US$30 million IBRD and US$5 million equivalent by beneficiaries).

                         This subcomponent aims at carrying out Subprojects in Participating Provinces, and providing
                         Matching Grants to Beneficiaries for carrying out said Subprojects, in the following areas: (i)
                         rehabilitation and construction of small scale irrigation and drainage schemes; (ii) agricultural
                         production and productivity improvements and (iii) post-harvest management and value addition.

                         The investment support will be provided for those competitively selected innovative subprojects that
                         deal with irrigation, production, or value chains individually or in a fully justified package of
                         investments in a combination of irrigation, production, and value chains. Further details, eligibility
                         criteria, and eligible expenditures in each category are provided in Annex 2. While the menu of
                         investment options will be flexible, the eligibility criteria will be strictly followed. Recipients of
                         matching grants will be required to contribute 10-30 percent of the subproject’s cost in-kind and/or
                         cash.

                         2.2.1 Investments in Irrigation Systems and Support Infrastructure

                         The objective of this pilot activity is to finance the irrigation infrastructure required to increase the
                         productivity and profitability of smallholder irrigated agriculture while taking into account the
                         environmental and social safeguards associated with the civil works. On the basis of participatory

                                                                        Page 7 of 16
                         designs and the eligibility criteria, the SADCP will finance the costs of the schemes’ rehabilitation/
                         construction. Irrigation infrastructure development will be based on clearly articulated investment
                         proposals and commitment from beneficiaries in scheme development and O&M. No infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         investments will be made before the local authorities confirm the beneficiaries land user rights and
                         water rights. Regarding land and water user rights, the site or scheme specific environment and social
                         assessment supported by ESMP (to be prepared after the site/design details are known) should
                         consider ability of downstream users to use water, as well as, any environmental/ecology flow
                         required to maintain the integrity of ecosystem, as an important element. Therefore, it is essential that
                         an environment assessment be taken for all rehabilitation schemes that would quantify the negative
                         and positive impacts due to construction and operation, and provide recommendation to sustain
                         ecological flow to other users.


                         In general, the rehabilitation and construction works will consist of: (i) upgrading of the area around
                         the intake and the main canal; (ii) construction of water collecting structures and/or rehabilitation of
                         damaged embankments; (iii) installation of control structures like water gates; (iv) upgrading of the
                         main canals and, where necessary, lining critical stretches of the distribution system; and (v) use of
                         local plants/grass to control canal erosion. In places where the installation of buried pipes is feasible,
                         hand-dug earthen canals may be substituted by pipes if water losses warrant this. Taking into account
                         the higher unit cost of installing gravity-buried pipe systems, the costs and benefits of this option will
                         be evaluated and discussed with the community prior to installation of any such system.

                         The SADCP will endorse a mix of construction methods, including both plant-based and labor-
                         intensive construction methods that are designed to: (i) build local capacity in irrigation construction
                         and maintenance; (ii) create local entrepreneurship for sustainable delivery of irrigation services; and
                         (iii) deliver planned irrigation construction investments on time, of high quality, and at potentially
                         significantly lower cost than contractor and equipment-based constructions experienced in past
                         irrigation projects in Angola. The choice of construction method will be made on a case-by-case
                         basis at feasibility stage, as this will determine subsequent stages of design/supervision and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         tendering. After field visits to some of the irrigated areas, the cost for small-scale gravity-fed
                         irrigation scheme rehabilitation or development was estimated to be between US$1,000-2,000/ha.

                         2.2.2 Investments in Agricultural Production

                         The main objective of this subcomponent is to support a sustainable increase in smallholder
                         agricultural productivity and production. To achieve this objective, the subcomponent will provide
                         matching grants to smallholder farmers’ groups and organizations for investments in farm assets.
                         Specific activities likely to be considered for investment support are demand-based agricultural
                         technology packages and improved inputs designed to increase agricultural productivity and
                         production (see the menu of investment options in Annex 2 of the PAD). The main focus will be on
                         crops identified as a priority for the project areas (i.e., maize, beans, cassava, Irish potatoes, and
                         vegetable crops).

                         To access matching grants for investment subprojects, eligible farmers’ organizations will need to
                         submit subproject proposals. Subcomponent 2.1 will assist eligible participants in the preparation of
                         detailed subproject proposals that will allow an informed decision about their feasibility from
                         technical, economic, financial, social and environmental perspectives. Subproject proposals can be
                         submitted for any investment that will contribute to increasing crop production and productivity.



                                                                       Page 8 of 16
                         Proposals will be identified, appraised, and approved based on the criteria summarized in Annex 4 of
                         the PAD. A full set of criteria and procedures will also be defined in the PIM. Proposals will be
                         evaluated and selected by an independent technical committee based on the defined criteria.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Although the disbursement mechanisms and advances may vary, taking into consideration the type of
                         grant, the eligible expenditures are for Goods, Works, and Services.

                         2.2.3 Investments in Post-harvest Management and Value Addition

                         The main objective of this activity is to promote investments aimed at increasing value addition,
                         reducing post-harvest losses, and strengthening market linkages for key priority food and vegetable
                         crops in the project area.

                         The ultimate goal is to improve the performance and efficiency of the targeted value chains. This
                         activity will support investments related to market linkages and commercialization of key crops and
                         horticulture (see the menu of investment options in Annex 2 of the PAD). Any subproject requesting
                         financing under this subcomponent will prepare a project proposal and a business plan that will go
                         through a complete appraisal process to determine its economic feasibility and sustainability as well
                         as its environmental and social impacts.

                         Financial support for farmers’ organizations and rural enterprises’ value addition activities is crucial
                         for the sustainability of public investment in small-scale irrigation development as well as for
                         investments in agricultural production. Eligible beneficiaries of value chain investment support will
                         therefore include smallholder farmers’ organizations that have proven capacities for market-oriented
                         production and/or value chain activities. A key distinguishing feature of this activity will be more
                         complex subprojects that may require multiple stages of support or greater focus on business
                         development services.

                         Component 3. Project Management, Monitoring, and Evaluation -US$10 million IBRD
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The third project component will finance management, coordination, and monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E) of the project. It consists of two subcomponents.

                         3.1     Project Management

                         The purpose of this subcomponent is to strengthening the capacity of the PIU for Project
                         management, coordination, monitoring and evaluation, including fiduciary (i.e. financial and
                         procurement management), environmental, and social safeguard compliance, audits and reporting
                         support; and strengthening the capacity of the PPIUs to assist in Project management, coordination,
                         monitoring and evaluation at the provincial level, including fiduciary (i.e. financial and procurement
                         management), environmental, and social safeguard compliance, and reporting.

                         Overall this subcomponent is designed to ensure that the project is implemented correctly, on time,
                         and in accordance with the Loan Agreement. This will be the responsibility of a Project Coordinator
                         (PC) and a team of experts located at the national and provincial levels. Financing will be provided to
                         support project coordination activities, including planning and budgeting, management and
                         administration, procurement, financial management (FM), M&E, safeguards compliance, audits, and
                         national and provincial engagement. Government counterpart resources will be used to pay staff-
                         related costs that are not eligible for IBRD funding. The final arrangements for project management
                         incorporate the lessons learned under MOSAP in terms of organization, staffing, and timing. Eligible

                                                                       Page 9 of 16
                         expenditures under this component may include funding activities in connection with the preparation
                         of the new agricultural subprojects aimed at supporting the development of commercial agriculture.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         3.2     Project Monitoring and Evaluation

                         This subcomponent is to support the establishing and implementing a monitoring and evaluation
                         system for the Project, including establishing a management information system within the project
                         implementation unit. An M&E system will be established to collect and process appropriate
                         information to monitor project performance and measure the output, the effects, and eventually the
                         impacts of project activities over time. Baseline information will also be collected at the beginning of
                         project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Though the project will have a national resonance because of its impacts (i.e. component 1 and 2), it
                         is expected to be implemented in three Provinces of Bié, Huambo and Malanje, covering an area of
                         80 communes from 26 municipalities (i.e. component 2).
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
                         Nuno Maria Brilha Vilela (GENDR)
                         Paulo Jorge Temba Sithoe (GEN01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            Under Component 1 of the project will finance
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      construction of buildings, and under Component 2will
                                                                     finance agricultural production and post-harvesting sub-
                                                                     projects, rehabilitation of gravity fed irrigation schemes,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     storage facilities and land delimitation. Some of the
                                                                     foreseen activities may have adverse environmental
                                                                     impacts which could include soil erosion and water
                                                                     logging, water contamination, alteration of water flows
                                                                     due to irrigation schemes, including risks to the human
                                                                     health by those handling pesticides. Details and precise
                                                                     location of these activities are not known and will be
                                                                     known during project implementation. Social impacts
                                                                     could include loss of land during delimitation, resource
                                                                     use such as water, including possible health and safety
                                                                     issues during construction activities. Consequently the
                                                                     OB/BP4.01 is triggered to set forth the basic principles
                                                                     and prerogatives to be followed to comply with the
                                                                     safeguard requirements. Detailed description of the
                                                                     activities with their footprints will be known by the
                                                                     Recipient during implementation. Hence, the Recipient
                                                                     has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                     Framework (ESMF) that will guide preparation of ESIA
                                                                     and EMPs. The ESMF include an environmental and
                                                                     social screening form (ESSF) for sub-projects to


                                                                      Page 10 of 16
                                                       determine and guide the preparation of ESIAs and ESMP
                                                       when needed. The ESMF include a model ESMP and a set
                                                       of Environmental and Social Clauses (ESC) for project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       implementers that can be adjusted to the specifics of
                                                       subproject activities. The ESMF has been prepared and
                                                       disclosed in-country on December 11, 2015 and at the
                                                       Bank InfoShop on December 16, 2015.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   The project will not open new areas as it is largely aimed
                         4.04                          at intensification of agriculture on already cultivated areas
                                                       to increase production and productivity. As far as
                                                       irrigation is concerned, activities will be limited to
                                                       rehabilitation of small scale gravity infrastructure. The
                                                       project has also developed a negative list and activities
                                                       adversely affecting protected areas are included on this
                                                       list.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   The project is not expected to have any direct or indirect
                                                       impacts on health and quality of forests. The project will
                                                       not finance any change in management, protection or
                                                       utilization of forests. The ESMF will incorporate
                                                       screening tools for risks and impacts on forests and
                                                       provisions to exclude activities that would have adverse
                                                       impacts on forest and protected areas from financing
                                                       through a negative list.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   Provision of improved agricultural inputs under
                                                       Component 2 may include the use of pesticides (though
                                                       expected only at a low scale) and the Recipient has
                                                       prepared an Integrated Pest Management Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       (IPMF) which has been disclosed in-country on December
                                                       11, 2015 and at the Bank InfoShop on December 16,
                                                       2015. Pest Management Frameworks (IPMFs) includes a
                                                       detailed and practical guideline and concise steps needed
                                                       to apply Integrated Pest Management approaches tailored
                                                       for eligible sub-projects. The IPMF which contains also
                                                       contain provisions to monitor and mitigate possible
                                                       negative impact of any increase in the use of
                                                       agrochemicals, particularly chemical pesticides by
                                                       promoting ecological and biological control of pest
                                                       management within beneficiary groups. The IPMF will be
                                                       also vital in the support to the establishment of national
                                                       data banks, monitoring system of pesticides poisoning.
                         Physical Cultural        No   The policy is not triggered as no major civil works or
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11          large movements of earth are expected to be supported by
                                                       the Project. Nevertheless, the ESMF will include a
                                                       Chance Finds mechanism to adequately mitigate any
                                                       potential risks.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No   There are no Indigenous Peoples expected to be present in



                                                       Page 11 of 16
                            BP 4.10                                the project area. The SADCP Project is a scale up of the
                                                                   ongoing Market Oriented Smallholder Agriculture Project
                                                                   (MOSAP). It will be implemented in the same
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   geographical areas as its predecessor which did not trigger
                                                                   this policy.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes           The project will finance activities that could possibly
                            OP/BP 4.12                             require land acquisition which could results in involuntary
                                                                   resettlement of people and/or loss of (or access to) assets,
                                                                   means of livelihoods or resources. Details of activities
                                                                   will not be known until project implementation and the
                                                                   Government has prepared a Resettlement Policy
                                                                   Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of site specific
                                                                   Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) as needed. The RPF has
                                                                   been reviewed, and disclosed in-country on December 16,
                                                                   2015 and at the InfoShop on December 21, 2015.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes        The project will involve rehabilitation of dikes and
                            4.37                                   drainage systems, small water storage and water canals.
                                                                   Nonetheless, it is not expected that the project will be
                                                                   involved in any new investments in large dams of 15 m or
                                                                   higher nor in any major water storage or water control
                                                                   beyond the 3 million m3 reservoir capacity. The irrigation
                                                                   systems that will be rehabilitated will be very small
                                                                   gravity systems. Most of those are currently earth canals
                                                                   with some losses of water due to infiltration and other
                                                                   losses. The project aims at rehabilitating about 1,000 ha in
                                                                   the three beneficiary provinces, covering about 32
                                                                   systems; i.e. on average 31 ha each. The Project will not
                                                                   fund any large dams, as defined in the OP4.37. However
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   as part of the rehabilitation of small scale gravity fed
                                                                   irrigation schemes may fund simple diversion weirs and
                                                                   other small-scale water control structures. For this reason,
                                                                   OP 4.37 is triggered as precautionary measure. A detailed
                                                                   ESMP will be undertaken for new site, and any dam-
                                                                   related activity will be undertaken following the
                                                                   guidelines of the FAO manual Small Earth: A guide to
                                                                   Siting, Design and Construction (2010).
                            Projects on International   No         Project activities will rehabilitate existing small scale
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   gravity irrigation systems on pilot scale. The project will
                                                                   not affect international waterways
                            Projects in Disputed        No         There are no disputed areas in the targeted project area.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                    Page 12 of 16
                          The potential social and environmental concerns are those associated with the proposed project-
                          financed investments under Component 2. The project will finance rehabilitation and expansion
                          of small-scale gravity fed irrigation schemes (earthen made and/or gravity-driven), agricultural
Public Disclosure Copy




                          inputs (equipment, fertilizers and/or pesticides), storages, cold storage, grinding mills and
                          packaging infrastructure which triggers Bank’s Safeguard Policies OP 4.01, OP 4.09, OP 4.12 and
                          OP4.37. However, given their type, size and nature, as well as footprint, they are expected to cause
                          very limited environmental and/or social impacts and risks, mostly site specific and therefore
                          easily manageable.

                          The environmental and social classification of the proposed project is Category B and given that
                          both the footprint and clearer details (type, nature and magnitude) of the proposed activities will
                          not be known prior to appraisal, the borrower has prepared, an Environmental and Social
                          Management Framework (ESMF), an Integrated Pest Management Framework (IPMF) and a
                          Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) respectively, mainly updated from those produced under
                          the ongoing MOSAP. These have been reviewed internally and cleared by the World Bank Group,
                          each of these three standalone safeguards instruments were publicly disclosed in the country on
                          December 11 (ESMF and IPMF), December 16 (RPF) and at the InfoShop on December 16, 2015
                          (ESMF and IPMF) and on December 21, 2015 (RPF).

                           These documents are designed to: (i) assess the environmental and social impacts of expected sub-
                           projects; (ii) outline environmental management procedures and provide requisites tools, including
                           a screening process with a sub-project assessment forms and guidelines for mitigating impacts;
                           (iii) integrate environmental considerations into each phase of the sub-projects cycle; (iv) develop
                           and implement the Integrated Pest Management Plan; (v) provide guidelines for the preparation of
                           Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs); and (vi) determine the capacity building needs of the PIU, key
                           stakeholders (CSO, Service Providers, etc.) and beneficiary communities inclusive of women and
                           vulnerable groups. Apart from formal disclosure, the content of these documents (i.e. executive
                           summaries) will be disseminated in Angola through a series of stakeholder workshops, particularly
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on the project targeted areas. The ESMF, the RPF and the IPMF, along with their screening
                           processes, social and environmental clauses for contractors including an annex, on social and
                           environmental check list will be adequately integrated into the Project Implementation Manual
                           (PIM).
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The project activities are small in size, spread in the selected provinces (communes &
                           municipalities) and the project does not anticipate any long term or irreversible damage caused by
                           the proposed activities to the natural and/or physical environment. In any case, easily
                           implementable preventive measures are being taken through the preparation of the framework
                           documents, namely the ESMF/ESIA or ESMP, RPF/RAP as well as the IPMP which will screen
                           each sub-project on their social and environmental merits (risks and/or impacts) to ascertain that
                           any indirect risk and/or impact will be appropriately captured and addressed in time.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not Applicable
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Although the client has gathered considerable experience in implementing the ongoing MOSAP


                                                                    Page 13 of 16
                           the institutional capacity to handle operational environmental and social safeguards requirements
                           as well as national environmental regulations is still weak, especially at the local level. Substantial
                           training and capacity building will be required. Under the ongoing, MOSAP (P093699) there was
Public Disclosure Copy




                           no dedicated Environmental and Social Safeguards Focal Point (ESFP), but the training was
                           provided for all monitoring and evaluation specialists, and provincial project coordinators. Regular
                           supervision was also provided by consultants and Bank staff based in Maputo and South Africa
                           Country Offices. Bulk of the work consisted in screening sub-project proposals under Component
                           2 before they were considered for funding including monitoring during implementation. This was
                           based on check list prepared for the project by the safeguard consultant and cleared with the Bank.
                           The environmental and social safeguards under MOSAP is rated Satisfactory. During the
                           implementation of the proposed operation, further steps are already being considered to strengthen
                           the Government’s capacity, particularly through the hiring of four (4) ESFP, one at national level
                           with an overall safeguards coordination role and three for each of the provinces covered by
                           SADCP. The aforementioned ESFP will ensure compliance of the proposed project activities with
                           relevant Angola environmental laws and regulations and the World Bank Safeguards Policies
                           triggered. They will be responsible for the screening, monitoring and reporting on safeguards
                           requirements including providing needful and timely support for the preparation of ESIA/ESMP
                           and RAP as required. This initiative will be coupled with a series of regional training workshops to
                           be organized for all actors involved, such as project coordination team at all levels, beneficiary
                           groups, contractors and other relevant project partners in the implementation of social and
                           environmental safeguards policy upon project effectiveness. The WBG Environmental and Social
                           Safeguards specialists will train the team at national and provincial/municipal level in close issues
                           related to protected areas, forestry. Additionally, relevant authorities such as the Ministry of
                           Environment and its affiliates and will be systematically involved throughout the project
                           implementation process.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           During the preparation by the Government of ESMF, RPF and IPMF public consultations and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           participation were extensively undertaken at both central (Luanda/Ministry of Agriculture and
                           sectoral partners), provincial and district levels, and a larger dissemination program is been
                           scheduled during implementation with a total budget of US$900,000.

                           A communication strategy stressing awareness raising activities about the program and possible
                           compensation procedures and entitlements will be carried out through preparation and
                           implementation of site-specific RAPs and/or ESIA/ESMPs in order to promote dialogue and
                           reduce misunderstandings and grievances. Communities will be involved in awareness raising and
                           training concerning community rights and obligations; how to obtain legal advice and
                           representation, and how to seek redress against what they could regard as unfair process. Training
                           of technical staff and the Ministry of Agriculture, municipality and comunas is also planned,
                           budgeted against by the project and will minimize negative risks and impacts of conflicts.
                           Under the communication strategy, awareness will also be raised regarding nutrition, gender,
                           youth, climate-smart agriculture and other environmental issues.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                           04-Dec-2015
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                        16-Dec-2015



                                                                      Page 14 of 16
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Angola                                                           11-Dec-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      14-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Oct-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Angola                                                           16-Dec-2015
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      04-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   16-Dec-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Angola                                                           11-Dec-2015
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?


                                                                   Page 15 of 16
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                            Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Aniceto Timoteo Bila
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                        Date: 21-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)                    Date: 31-Mar-2016
                            Manager:


                                                                      Page 16 of 16
