INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14148
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Myanmar                    Project ID:  P154389
Project Name: Myanmar Financial Sector Development Project (P154389)
Task Team Alexandra L. Drees-Gross,Jose De Luna-Martinez
Leader(s):
Estimated       13-Oct-2015                Estimated    23-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFM02                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Microfinance (40%), Banking (40%), General finance sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Other Financial Sector Development (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    200.00             Total Bank Financing:  200.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                               200.00
Total                                                                     200.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To increase access to finance in Myanmar.
3. Project Description
The existence of well-developed and diversified financial markets is a critical development priority
for Myanmar and necessary to help the Government meet its medium term economic development
and poverty reduction goals.
Page 1 of 5


﻿The project focuses on assisting the Government to implement a set of highest priority reforms
identified both in the Myanmar Financial Inclusion Roadmap 2015-2020 and the Myanmar Financial
Sector Development Strategy. Specifically, the Project will provide financing for critical investments
O
U         and technical assistance to the Ministry of Finance and Revenue and the CBM, the two key public
sector institutions driving the financial inclusion agenda. It will also emphasize improving the
enabling environment for financial sector development by eliminating some of the key barriers that
prevent investment and limit sound and stable development.
Complementary technical assistance to support the Government to achieve the goals set forth in the
program will also be provided by the WBG to Myanmar with trust fund assistance.
Project Components and Key Results Areas
The project has five components outlined below. Components 1-3 focus on achievement of results in
three strategic reform areas. Component 4provides resources for the Project Coordination Unit, and
Component 5 allow for emergency funding only.
*      Component 1: Improving the competitiveness of the banking sector through the restructuring
of state-owned banks. The expected result is to build a more competitive financial sector by reducing
distortions created by state-owned banks.
*      Component 2: Ensuring a safe and sound financial system through upgrading the financial
sector legal, regulatory, and supervisory framework. The expected result is to enhance legal certainty
that improves soundness and stability of the financial sector and upgraded supervisory capacity.
*      Component 3: Modernizing the CBM and financial infrastructure. The expected result is to
support the restructuring and modernization of the central bank and the modernization of the
financial infrastructure, with a focus on payment systems and the framework for secured transactions.
*      Component 4: Project coordination and monitoring. The expected result is to support the
institutional capacity of the MOF and CBM to coordinate program implementation and monitoring of
key outcomes and results.
*      Component 5: Contingent emergency response. This component has a provisional allocation
of US$0 and is designed to allow for rapid reallocation of credit proceeds in the event of an eligible
crisis or emergency under streamlined procurement and disbursement procedures.
o        Project financing mechanism
The project will finance the achievement of results through the use of two types of financing
mechanisms: (a) results-based financing in the form of disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) which
are defined as results that trigger payments against Eligible Expenditure Programs ("EEPs"), and (b)
traditional input-based financing in the form of goods and services.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Most project activities will take place at the Central Bank of Myanmar and the Ministry of Finance.
Their headquarters are located in Naypitaw and Yangon. Financial institutions that will benefit from
the project are also located in these two cities.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Pamornrat Tansanguanwong (GSURR)
Ruxandra Maria Floroiu (GENDR)
Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
Page 2 of 5


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No          The CBM Training Center under Component 2 will
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               involve minor refurbishment of existing office space
(such as repair to flooring, lighting, wall repair, etc),
owned by the Central Bank. Therefore, the risk of
environmental impact is low and as such this safeguard
policy is not triggered.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          The proposed components and activities aim to strengthen
BP 4.10                             primary building blocks for sound and stable financial
sector development and supervision, thus improving the
enabling environment for the poor to get access to
finance. Since these components and activities focus
mainly on technical assistance and capacity building for
the initial reform stage of financial sector, the project does
not expect to directly affect ethnic communities.
Involuntary Resettlement No         The project will not finance any civil works. The
OP/BP 4.12                          Financial Sector Training Center which will be
established under the project may include some minor
refurbishments of existing buildings, however, no land
acquisition or access restriction will not occur. OP
4.12will thus not be triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The risk of environmental impact associated with the project is low. No safeguards policy has
been triggered and the category is C. Given that most of the interventions focus on capacity
building and financial sector reforms, there is unlikely to be any environmental impact. The
establishment of the Financial Sector Training Center will include only minor refurbishment of
existing buildings, as mentioned above.
Page 3 of 5


﻿Most project activities will take place at the Central Bank of Myanmar and the Ministry of
Finance. Their headquarters are located in Naypitaw and Yangon.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
none
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
None
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Not applicable
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
NA
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ]  No [X]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
O
o          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [  ] No [   ]  NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alexandra L. Drees-Gross,Jose De Luna-Martinez
Page 4 of 5


﻿Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                 Date: 24-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: James Seward (PMGR)                Date: 02-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


