                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                        Report No.:ISDSA17619
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 02-Aug-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               03-Aug-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          China                       Project ID:              P147009
    Project Name:                     Jiangxi Farm Produce Distribution System Development (P147009)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Xiaolan Wang
    Estimated Appraisal               03-Jan-2017                 Estimated Board          14-Dec-2017
    Date:                                                         Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GFA02                       Financing                Investment Project
                                                                  Instrument:              Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                  Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           198.28                        Total Bank Financing: 150.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                     Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                    48.28
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                    150.00
    Total                                                                                                    198.28
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the distribution system of selected farm products in
    participating counties of Jiangxi.
    3. Project Description
    The proposed project comprises four components, which are summarized below. A detailed project description
    is provided in Annex 2 of the PAD.

    Component 1: Strengthening Production Logistics (US$38.46 million. IBRD: US$38.46 million)

    This component aims to increase efficiency and productivity of production logistics and farm systems, including
    the integration of systems to collect, sort, package, and store agricultural products. It aims to enhance farmer
    coordination through supporting farmer cooperatives and help expanding the scale of operation to better

                                                    Page 1 of 9
coordinate the flow of goods. It will also improve post-harvest handling of farm products to improve efficiency,
add value and minimize handling exposure of products to avoid damage and loss. Activities to be financed
under this component include (a) small sub-grants to farmer cooperatives for purchase of trading booth
equipment/tools (i.e. computers, printers, office furniture) to do business in the newly constructed/rehabilitated
markets/distribution centers; technical assistance to address emerging issues constraining farmer cooperatives
access to markets; supporting farm produce certification, trademark registrations and geographic identification
producing marks; supporting E-commerce development and Village Farmer Information Hub (VFIH)
establishment; and training to improve the business competency of farmer cooperatives; and (b) sub-loans to
farmer cooperatives for improved post-harvest handling facilities at producer level (product collection,
sorting/grading, storage, washing, labeling, and packing/packaging) to improve efficiency and reduce post
harvesting loss.

Component 2: Improving Distribution Logistics (US$140.25 million. IBRD: US$96.06 million)

This component will improve the physical structures, services and management systems of the farm produce
markets/distribution centers to increase their efficiency, provide value added benefits and reduce waste of farm
produce. Activities to be financed under this component include (a) development of market infrastructure to
rehabilitate existing market infrastructure and build new market/distribution infrastructure including trading
stores, halls, and sheds; processing workshops and warehouses; cold/cool chain storage; service and trading
buildings; logistics and office equipment; equipment for processing, sorting, packaging, testing product quality
and safety; weighbridges, forklifts and vehicles to transport farm produce; electronic settlement devices and a
farm product traceability system; and (b) setting up a market information system consisting of
market/distribution center monitoring, operating and management; information collection and disclosure; food
safety tracing; and transaction management. The market information system would also include a County
Operations and Service Center (COSC) for E-commerce at each market/distribution center. This COSC will be
the connecting point of the e-commerce households, VFIHs, the e-trading/electronic settlement system, and the
provincial information platform.

Component 3: Support Services for the Whole Distribution System (US$0.45 million. IBRD: US$0.45 million)

This component will provide support services to the whole distribution system. Activities to be financed under
this component include technical assistance for (a) supporting special research on provincial farm product
distribution system and development of a provincial strategic planning for provincial farm product distribution
system; and (b) providing market management training for traders, vendors, processors, e-commerce operators,
staff and management of the markets/distribution centers.

Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (US$5.18 million. IBRD: US$1.08 million)

The purpose of this component is to provide support for Project implementing agencies at both provincial and
county levels to manage, implement, supervise and monitor Project activities and progress. Activities to be
financed under this component include (a) Project management and capacity building (training and study tours)
for Project Management Office (PMO) staff, and support for consultant services; and (b) monitoring and
evaluation (M&E) of Project physical and financial progress, Project impacts, and environmental and social
safeguards compliance. The on-going Project monitoring will be conducted by the PMOs for Project physical
and financial progress. Independent M&E institution(s) will be recruited to conduct the other monitoring at
Project start-up, Project mid-term and Project completion.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The proposed project will be located in up to 8 counties/cities in Jinagxi Province, i.e. Taihe County, Huichang


                                                 Page 2 of 9
County, Longnan County, Economic Development District of Jiujiang Municipality, Pengze County, Anyuan
District, Jingan County, and Yushan County. The proposed physical investments mainly include the
improvement or construction of eight farm produce markets/distribution centers in Jiangxi Province. These
markets/centers are located in peri-urban areas close to roads which have been heavily influenced by human
activities. The sites will be in the construction land which has been leveled (See more detail in EMP).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Feng Ji, Social Safeguards Specialist
 Meixiang Zhou, Social Safeguards Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01         Yes              The proposed physical investments mainly include
                                                             the improvement or construction of 8 farm produce
                                                             markets/distribution centers in Jiangxi Province
                                                             (under Component II). The markets will include
                                                             trading buildings, processing workshops (e.g.
                                                             classification and packaging), and service buildings
                                                             etc. There will be adverse impacts associated with
                                                             the markets: (i) general construction-related impacts
                                                             such as disposal of spoil, nuisance of dust, noise,
                                                             wastewater, and disturbance to traffic etc.; and (ii)
                                                             adverse impacts during operation including disposal
                                                             of waste and wastewater generated at the markets,
                                                             increased traffic, and fire safety issues etc. As such,
                                                             Environmental Assessment (OP4.01) is triggered.
                                                             An EMP has been prepared for these produce
                                                             markets/distribution centers. In addition, the project
                                                             may include some small investments (such as post-
                                                             harvest handling through provisions of investments
                                                             for farmer cooperatives to collect, sort, store,
                                                             package, label farm produce, and for farm produce
                                                             processing) which are not known during project
                                                             preparation. There activities may involve small
                                                             scale civil work. As such, an EMF and RPF have
                                                             been prepared for these activities to be identified
                                                             during implementation. in addition, a social
                                                             assessment report has been prepared for the project
                                                             (see Section II.A (4) for detail).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                 No               The project is mainly in the urban and peri-urban
                                                             areas which have been disturbed by intensive
                                                             human activities. The project will not convert,
                                                             degrade or restore any natural habitats or critical
                                                             natural habitats. This policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                          No               The project will not have impacts on the health and
                                                             quality of forests, nor affect the rights and welfare
                                                             of people and their level of dependence upon or
                                                             interaction with forests, nor aim to bring about
                                                             changes in the management, protection, or

                                               Page 3 of 9
                                                        utilization of natural forest or plantations. This
                                                        policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes            The proposed project will not support any
                                                        production activity other than the cost of obtaining
                                                        certification for the pollution free, green, and
                                                        organic produces (i.e. approximately RMB15,000
                                                        for green certification, and RMB20,000 for organic
                                                        produce certification), which would lead to
                                                        reduction of pesticide use in the project area. As
                                                        such this policy is triggered. Given that absence of
                                                        significant pest management issues under the
                                                        project, a stand-alone PMP is not required. EMP
                                                        includes training for cooperatives to improve
                                                        agricultural produce quality which likely leads to
                                                        the reduction of pesticide use.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No             The project will not likely affect sites with
                                                        archeological, paleontological, historical, religious,
                                                        or unique natural values. Chance finds during
                                                        construction might occur and relevant clauses will
                                                        be included in all construction contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No             Social screening has been done and found that only
                                                        1698 of She and Hui minorities live scattered in
                                                        villages of Anyuan, Huichang, and Taihe counties,
                                                        accounting for 0.15% of the local total population.
                                                        These ethnic minorities all speak mandarin Chinese.
                                                        They live in a similar way as local majority Han
                                                        people do. Socially and economically they are well
                                                        integrated with the majority people. And these
                                                        minorities do not have significant cultural
                                                        characteristics of their minority. The task team
                                                        comes to a conclusion that the Bank OP 4.10 IP
                                                        policy is not triggered in this project.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes            The Bank involuntary resettlement policy is
                                                        triggered although all the confirmed civil works of
                                                        the project will be constructed on existing public
                                                        land. There may be changes to locations and scopes
                                                        during project implementation. The project will
                                                        construct a number of civil works in each project
                                                        county under component 2. Main civil works are
                                                        rehabilitation and expansion of existing wholesale
                                                        markets and establishing new logistic distribution
                                                        centers/markets for selected farm products, trading
                                                        space; processing and storage facilities; food safety
                                                        testing labs; and other complementary facilities.
                                                        The markets/centers will consist of wholesale
                                                        market, storage warehouse, logistical hub, sample
                                                        testing lab facilities for agricultural products,
                                                        information sharing platform for product
                                                        distribution and marketing, affiliated service center

                                          Page 4 of 9
                                                                   such as catering and parking. The PMOs have
                                                                   confirmed that the currently identified pieces of
                                                                   land to be used by the project are existing public
                                                                   land since July 2011. Nevertheless a RPF has been
                                                                   prepared in order to address additional land
                                                                   acquisition emerging during project
                                                                   implementation. Other measures to address social
                                                                   impacts and risks are included in the action plan of
                                                                   the social assessment.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No              The project will not finance construction or
                                                                   rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                   policy.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                   The project will not involve international
    7.50                                                           waterways as defined under this policy.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No              The proposed project will not be in a disputed area.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    Environmental Assessment (OP4.01): The principal negative environmental impacts are mainly associated with
    Component 2 which finances the rehabilitation and expanding existing wholesale markets and establishing new
    logistic distribution centers. The project will support 8 wholesale markets and logistical distribution centers in
    Jiangxi Province. The centers/whole sale markets will include trading buildings, processing workshops (e.g.
    produce classification and packaging) and produce storage facilities, and service buildings etc. The
    market/center would have an average area of about 50,000m2. All the center and markets are located in peri-
    urban areas next to major roads which have been heavily influenced by human activities. The project will cause
    general construction nuisance (e.g. disposal of spoil, nuisance of dust, noise, wastewater, and disturbance to
    traffic etc.) during construction phase. During operation the markets will have adverse impacts including
    disposal of waste and wastewater generated at the markets, increased traffic, and fire safety issues etc.. But none
    of these impacts is expected to be significant. Adverse impact would be site specific, and limited in nature, and
    mitigation measures can be designed readily. As such, the project is classified as Category B project.

    Pest Management (OP4.09): The proposed project would not support any production activity other than the cost
    of obtaining the certification for the pollution free, green and organic produce (i.e. approximately RMB15,000
    for green certification, and RMB20,000 for organic certification), which would lead to reduction of pesticide use
    in the project area. As such OP4.09 is triggered. The project will not include any procurement of pesticides or
    pesticide application equipment; nor introduce any new pest management practices, or expand/alter existing pest
    management practices; nor lead to substantially increased pesticide use and subsequent environmental and
    health risks. The construction and operation of the proposed warehouses will not lead to increase usage of
    pesticides to treat post-harvest pest and diseases. Given that absence of significant pest management issues
    under the project, a stand-alone PMP is not required. EMP includes training for cooperatives to improve
    agricultural produce quality which likely leads to the reduction of pesticide use.

    Social:

    A social assessment has been done for all the Project localities with a comprehensive report. The assessment
    was done with public consultation in all the confirmed project counties by a professional consulting team. The

                                                     Page 5 of 9
social assessment findings have confirmed that there is no presence of ethnic minorities meeting the definition
of the World Bank IP term and the Bank OP 4.10 is therefore not triggered. The SA suggests that by Project
appraisal stage, all project civil works will be built on existing public land. Thus the Bank involuntary
resettlement policy is triggered. Although the currently identified land to be used by the project has been
existing public land since July 2011, there may be additional emerging land demands for the civil works during
project implementation. Mainly the civil works will include rehabilitation and expansion of existing wholesale
markets and establishing new logistic distribution centers for select farm products, trading space; processing and
storage facilities; food safety testing labs; and other complementary facilities. The trading markets will consist
of a comprehensive wholesale market, storage warehouse, logistical hub, quality test lab facilities for
agricultural products, information sharing center for product distribution and marketing, affiliated service center
such as catering and parking.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
n/a
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The alternatives for markets/logistic centers’ scope and sites have been evaluated in the feasibility study.
Project sites for civil works have been carefully selected in terms of avoiding and minimizing land acquisition
and resettlement and other adverse impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An EMP has been prepared for the project in accordance with Environmental Assessment Policy OP4.01.
Mitigation measures consist of (i) Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) to address general construction
related impacts; and (ii) specific mitigation measures during design, construction and operation phase, including:
(i) provision of treatment facilities for wastewater, and waste generated from the markets; (ii) provision of
adequate traffic management facilities and safety measures; (iii) treatment and disposal of wastewater and waste
collected from the markets; (iv) maintenance of safety facilities and emergency plan for accidents, Measures for
construction phase will be entered into bidding documents and civil works contracts. The EMP also specified
monitoring plan, institutional arrangement and capacity building activities.

Environmental Management Framework: The project may include some small investments (such as post-harvest
handling through provisions of investments for farmer cooperatives to collect, sort, store, package, label farm
produce, and for farm produce processing) which are not known during project preparation. As such, an EMF
has been prepared. The EMF includes, among others: (i) safeguards policies and guidelines and procedures to
address environmental issues caused by physical activities financed by the project. Each of the proposed
demonstration investments will be screened to identify/define its potential social and environmental impacts;
safeguards policies triggered; EA category; safeguards instruments to be prepared; and consultation and
disclosure requirements; and (ii) institutional arrangements, and the requirements for capacity building activities
and budget.


Social:

A resettlement policy framework is prepared to guide future project land acquisition and resettlement. The SA
also shows that future possible land acquisition may arise if the currently identified locations or scope of Project
civil work change, some land may be needed for Project temporary use which will be only clear during
construction of project implementation. Based on the SA, to address social risks and impacts, two main social
documents have been prepared. They are SA report and a resettlement policy framework.


                                                  Page 6 of 9
   Borrower’s Capacity: Project leading groups comprising key line bureaus (e.g. Environment Protection,
   Agriculture, Finance and Commerce) have been formed at all government levels. A Provincial Project
   Management Office (PPMO) has been established under the Jiangxi Agricultural Bureau with designated
   safeguards staff. At city/county level. County/city PMO has been established at county/city Agricultural Bureau
   under the guidance of PPMO. The provincial PMO and local PMO have received safeguards training during
   project preparation. Each city/county PMO will designate safeguards staff for safeguards management. During
   project implementation, safeguards consultants will be engaged to monitor the implementation of safeguards
   documents. The capacity of borrower is deemed to be satisfactory.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   In accordance with OP4.01 and OP 4.12, public consultations have been conducted during the safeguards
   preparation process, including meetings with project affected people and local Environmental Protection
   Bureau. The consultation on the draft safeguards documents was undertaken from 2014 to 2016. Feedback and
   concerns from the consultation have been addressed in the project design and in the safeguards documents. The
   safeguards documents were locally disclosed at the governmental website on 24 Nov. 2016 and disclosed on the
   Bank InfoShop on December 1, 2016. The updated EA safeguards document was re-disclosed locally on January
   10, 2017 and on the Bank Infoshop on July 14, 2017.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            24-Nov-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         14-Jul-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    China                                                                        24-Nov-2016
 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-Nov-2016
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   01-Dec-2016
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 China                                                                      11-Nov-2016
 Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   A
 Date of receipt by the Bank
 Date of submission to InfoShop
 "In country" Disclosure
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [X]               No []         NA           []

                                                   Page 7 of 9
          report?
          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP               Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




          OP 4.09 - Pest Management
          Does the EA adequately address the pest management              Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          issues?
          Is a separate PMP required?                                     Yes []      No [X]      NA    []
          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a             Yes []      No []       NA    [X]
          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
          included in project design?If yes, does the project team
          include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                 Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards   Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes []      No []       TBD   [X]
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []      No []       TBD   [X]
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                  Name:Xiaolan Wang
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                   Name: Surhid P. Gautam (SA)          Date: 02-Aug-2017
         Practice Manager/Manager:             Name: William R. Sutton (PMGR)       Date: 03-Aug-2017


                                                         Page 8 of 9
Page 9 of 9
