                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA20341
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 06-Dec-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Tanzania                          Project ID:    P150361
                            Project Name:      Second Tanzania Water Sector Support Project (P150361)
                            Task Team          Yitbarek Tessema
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          05-Dec-2016              Estimated     23-Jan-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GWA01                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       230.00           Total Bank Financing:    225.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               225.00
                              Total                                                                                     230.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to: (a) strengthen capacity for integrated water resources
                           planning and management in Tanzania, and (b) improve access to water supply and sanitation
                           services in an operationally efficient manner in Dar es Salaam.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will finance the following four components. Component 1: Integrated Water Resources
                           Management (IWRM); Component 2: Dar es Salaam Water Supply and Sanitation services
                           improvement; and, Component 3: Project Management and Implementation Support.


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         I. Component 1: Integrated WRM (US$ 50 million). The three sub-components described below will
                         address these areas and as such the project addresses the interlinked challenges of poverty and a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         deteriorating natural resource base in critical basins in Tanzania to reduce the process of
                         environmental degradation and improve the productive potential of natural resources. The
                         Component is designed to support the GoT➢❨ s IWRMD plans for the basins and provide for
                         consultation with stakeholders engaged in water dependent sectors.
                         1. Sub-Component 1.1: Institutional strengthening for improved WRM performance (US$ 13.3
                         million). This Sub-Components aims at strengthening the institutions for IWRMD (BWBs, NWB,
                         WUAs and MOWII) and partners to more adequately deliver on their mandate (support financial
                         sustainability, capacity enhancement, performance management, and importantly cross-sectoral
                         collaboration). Focus will need to shift from single-sector institutional strengthening to intersectoral
                         collaboration, following from high level dialogue and supporting implementation of joint
                         investments. Therefore support will include consultancies, works, equipment, non-consultant
                         services and incremental operating costs.
                         2. Sub-Component 1.2: Strengthening Hydromet Services (US$ 15.5 million). Improve the
                         knowledge base on water resources in Tanzania, collect, store, analyze and disseminate to the general
                         public more credible data and information in order to make better use of hydromet and other data for
                         critical water management and sector decisions, such as flood early warning, improving licensing
                         and infrastructure operations, and information/awareness raising to other sectors on water issues.
                         3. Sub-Component 1.3: Investments in Water Security and Conservation Strengthening (US$ 21.2
                         million).
                              a) Support core functions of BWBs and WUAs on their conservation work program and
                         priority investments in the Wami Ruvu basin, particularly in the field of sustainable watershed
                         management interventions, and carry out preparatory work and due diligence for larger category "B"
                         works.
                             b) Rehabilitation of targeted catchments and water security improvements. Within the Wami-
                         Ruvu basin, this activity will finance interventions identified in micro-catchment plans including: (i)
                         soil and water conservation for more sustainable and productive agriculture; (ii) forestry and rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                         energy interventions to restore forest cover and reduce firewood consumption within the sub-
                         catchments; (iii) stream and water control, including check dams to support improved water
                         management through smaller-scale structures built by community members. The activity would
                         support the activities through service providers (contracted) and works (contractors) and goods
                         (equipment) for catchment management interventions. In other basins, the support will extend to core
                         activities in conservation, protection, awareness raising, and conflict resolution nationwide.

                         II. Component 2: Dar es Salaam WSS Improvement (US$ 86 million). The Dar es Salaam
                         component of WSSP-II comprises: investment toward expansion of water supply (WS) services
                         (Subcomponent 2.1); Performance-Based NRW Reduction in Dar es Salaam (Subcomponent 2.2);
                         and support to the ongoing institutional restructuring/reform of the Dar es Salaam WSS services and
                         improve operational efficiency and modernization of the utilities (Subcomponent 2.3).

                         1.        Sub Component 2.1: Investments in expansion of the water supply distribution system, and
                         off grid WSS systems for areas that are not yet covered by the water supply network (US$56
                         million). The expansion of the Lower Ruvu raw water treatment plant and transmission line has been
                         completed and Upper Ruvu raw water treatment plant and transmission line is in the final stage of
                         completion. When fully operational these plants will bring in an additional 204,000 m3/day of water
                         for supply to the Dar es Salaam service area. Kimbijji / Mpera ground water well field is under
                         development with estimated yield of 260,000 m3/day. It is, therefore timely that the expansion of the

                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         distribution system be under taken. Preparatory activities are underway for expansion of water supply
                         and sewerage coverage in Dar es Salaam. The feasibil ity studies a nd updating of design for
                         expansion of water distribution in selected service areas of Dar es Salaam and packages of contracts
Public Disclosure Copy




                         to be financed under WSSP-II are being finalized. The following sub components have been
                         identified for financing under this sub component:
                         i.       Water supply distribution systems rehabilitation and expansion (US$ 50 million): Designated
                         works Part one (packages 2B and 2F) (Tegeta - Mpiji and (Mpiji - Bagamoyo). This package will
                         install 1.4 km Kms of pipes; 42 kiosks, and 214 stand posts; and, benefit 453,000 people by the end
                         of the project.
                         ii.      WS services in unserved priority areas (US$ 6 million): This activity provides water supply
                         services to about 100,000 people of Dar es Salaam, who are not connected to the formal network.
                         The proposed solutions for this population include decentralized interventions, which may be an
                         interim measure to be integrated to the grid network as it expands in the future. In areas where the
                         grid network is not available, independent stand-alone small piped water supply (SPS) systems
                         would be implemented.

                         2.        Sub-Component 2.2: Performance Based NRW reduction in Dar es Salaam (US$ 20
                         million). This sub component will support the effort DAWASCO wants to make on NRW
                         management. Although NRW management is often seen as integral part of good utility management,
                         outsourcing of certain water loss reduction activities can help to speed up operational improvement.
                         Through a Performance Based NRW contract a specific area of Dar es Salaam (approximately 1
                         million people) will improve service and reduce sufficient losses to serve more people in adjacent
                         areas.

                         3.         Sub-Component 2.3: Institutional Restructuring/Reform and Utility Modernization (US$
                         10 million). This subcomponent will ensure that Dar es Salaam WSS institutions have the capacity
                         and institutional and legal mandate to deliver services effectively. Activities will: (i) support the
                         ongoing restructuring of the two institutions responsible for service provision in Dar es Salaam,
                         DAWASA and DAWASCO, and (ii) strengthen the operational performance of both DAWASA and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         DAWASCO, following the adoption of their new roles as bulk supplier and distribution companies,
                         respectively. This will focus on: (a) legal and organizational set up for bulk supply contract
                         arrangement, (b) business planning, (c) operations and maintenance of water treatment plants, (d)
                         improved network management, (e) NRW management, and (f) improved customer metering and
                         billing and collection.

                         III. Component 3: Investments in Waste Water Treatment, Sewer Network and Off-Grid Sanitation
                         in Unserved Priority Areas of Dar es Salaam city (US$80million): The subcomponents will support
                         expansion of sa nitation services through construction of new waste water treatment plant and sewer
                         lines at Mbezy beach area and mix of decentralized sanitation solutions for the unserved part of the
                         city.
                         1. Sub-component 3.1: Wastewater treatment and sewerage investment (US$65 million). This
                         activity will finance construction of a modern wastewater treatment plant at the Mbezi catchment
                         with of 16,000 m3/day capacity; and the associated trunk sewer and network with 26,000 household
                         connections to serve 130,000 people. A design, build, and operate approach will be used for the new
                         wastewater treatment plant to fill the capacity gap and ensure that the system is managed and
                         operated efficiently.
                         2. Sub-component 3.2: Off-grid sanitation (US$15 million). The activity supports a shift away from
                         unimproved toilets to improved ones, safe emptying and transportation of the waste to a treatment
                         facility, and treatment and safe disposal of the waste into the environment.

                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                         IV. Component 4: Project management and Implementation Support (US$ 9 million): This
                         component will provide capacity building and technical assistance to strengthen the ability of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Project Coordination Unit (PCU), the Procurement Management Unit (PMU) and departments in the
                         MOWI and implementation agencies (DAWASA, DAWASCO, WBOs) to carry out and manage the
                         project. Overall coordination of the project will be carried out by the Program Coordination Unit
                         (PCU), which will be responsible for overall coordination of project planning, reporting, and
                         supervision. The PCU will also oversee across divisions and implementing agencies. A Project
                         Management firm will be hired to support implementation and build program implementation
                         capacity in MOWI and implementing agencies (reporting, M&E, procurement, financial
                         management). Energy and Water Utilities Regulatory Authority (EWURA) and The Regional
                         Secretariat will also be provided capacity building support to enable them effectively contribute to
                         project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project scope and description has evolved from the concept stage from being a continuation of
                         the larger Water Sector Development Program assigned Category A, to a focused and specific project
                         in terms of the geographic areas where infrastructure will be financed. The project supports
                         investment activities in Dar es Salaam and small water security and catchment protection
                         infrastructure in the Wami Ruvu Basin.Taking into account the very moderate size of the waste water
                         treatment plant, and the low site sensitivity of the "direct influence area", the sub-project is now
                         assigned an Environmental Category "B". In addition, the project will provide support to construction
                         and refurbishment of office buildings and software support such as capacity building to all the basin
                         offices including provision for operational equipment and facility, improvement in water resources
                         data gathering, water quality monitoring and human capacity building. In Dar es Salaam, the project
                         will support a variety of activities including expansion of water supply distribution network, and
                         construction of waste water treatment plant. An Environmental and Social Management Framework
                         (ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared to guide environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         social management of all project activities. In addition, an Environmental and Social Impact
                         Assessment (ESIA) has been prepared for the proposed water supply distribution system, which has a
                         design in place. No RAPs have been prepared because the water pipe network follows existing road
                         network right of way and beyond the road network, specific sites for the water kiosks are not
                         determined at this point. Further for the investment activities in the Wami Ruvu Basin, the scope and
                         details of the works is not yet known. The RPF will guide the preparation and implementation of the
                         site specific RAPs during project implementation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GEN01)
                         Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)
                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes           The projects supports a range of infrastructure
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    investments aimed at improving integrated water
                                                                   resources management and expanding access to water
                                                                   supply and sanitation services. Such investments will
                                                                   require environmental due diligence. Since location and
                                                                   designs of most of the proposed investment have not been
                                                                   concluded, an ESMF has been prepared to guide


                                                                     Page 4 of 9
                                                                   preparations of appropriate environmental safeguard
                                                                   instruments for the project activities. For the water
                                                                   supply distribution system an ESIA has been prepared.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes        Water supply and sewerage investments could potentially
                            4.04                                   have impacts on natural habitats.
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No         The proposed project will not have potential impacts on
                                                                   the health and quality of forests or the rights and welfare
                                                                   of people and their level of dependence upon or
                                                                   interaction with forests.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The project does not have connection with the
                                                                   procurement of pesticides or pesticide application
                                                                   equipment; neither will it have connections with pesticide
                                                                   use that might increase in health and environmental risks.
                            Physical Cultural           Yes        This policy is triggered due to the possibility of chance
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                   finding of physical cultural resources during construction.
                                                                   Any potential chance finds will be addressed by
                                                                   incorporating reporting and handling procedures as part of
                                                                   the site specific ESIA and dealt with in the context of the
                                                                   ESMF.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No         The project is implemented in Dar es Salaam and
                            BP 4.10                                surrounding areas where the groups of people who meet
                                                                   the policy criteria are not present in the project area.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes           The projects supports a range of infrastructure
                            OP/BP 4.12                             investments aimed at improving integrated water
                                                                   resources management and expanding access to water
                                                                   supply and sanitation services which may have land
                                                                   acquisition implications. Due to the unavailability of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   details and scope of construction for the water supply
                                                                   network and waste water treatment plant, a Resettlement
                                                                   Management Framework (RMF/RPF) has been prepared
                                                                   to guide the preparation of site specific resettlement
                                                                   action plans where necessary.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes        While the project is not financing large water reservoirs
                            4.37                                   and dams, it will involve the financing of small dams (less
                                                                   than 15 m). The Project will apply the Ministry of
                                                                   Water➢❨ s Guidelines for Dam Safety dated 2012 in
                                                                   those situations.
                            Projects on International   No         The project is largely aiming at improvement of
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   operational efficiency and expansion and rehabilitation of
                                                                   existing water supply and sanitation schemes.
                            Projects in Disputed        No         There are no known disputed areas in the project area of
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                       Dar es salaam and its surrounding basin.
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify


                                                                     Page 5 of 9
                           and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                           The project will finance investments in water supply, distribution, sewerage network expansion
                           and treatment, and sanitation in unserved priority areas. Further sustainable watershed
Public Disclosure Copy




                           management and water security improvements are expected to be supported by the project.
                           Depending on magnitude and location, water supply and sewerage investments under the proposed
                           project can have significant impacts biophysical environment and communities within project
                           areas, particularly during construction. Impacts could potentially range from loss of vegetation and
                           host species, pollution of water sources, reduction of water volume due to abstraction, reduced
                           water quality due to disposal of sewage, odor from waste water treatment; erosion and
                           sedimentation downstream of the construction site; disruption of traffic flow during construction,
                           noise and air pollution during construction, and accidents to workers at construction sites, etc.

                           In addition, even though the main water distribution network will follow the right of way for
                           roads, other proposed investments like the waste water treatment plant may have land acquisition
                           implications. However the impacts are not expected to include displacement of people.

                           No large scale significant and/or irreversible impact is anticipated.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Long-term socio-economic and environmental impacts are likely to be greater of accessibility by
                           beneficiary population to clean and reliable water supply. It is also anticipated that enhanced water
                           supply and waste water treatment will contributed to health improvement by reducing diseases
                           related to poor sanitation.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Four project alternatives (including the no project alternative) have been considered. In the water
                           supply distribution network expansion sub-project, the final pipe network alignment will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                           determined to follow the existing road network and minimize potential social impact taking into
                           account specific local conditions (including the proximity of schools, hospitals, medical facilities,
                           religious sites, residential properties, trees, shrubs, water features and other environmental and
                           social receptors) and to best reach the households within the project coverage area.
                           Environmentally and socially friendly construction methods such as horizontal direction drilling is
                           proposed where pipe line crosses the road to minimize impact on traffic. Similar approach will be
                           utilized during the design and implementation of the waste water treatment plant (WWTP) and
                           sewer network. In addition to efficiency, environment and social considerations will be taken in
                           the selection of the location and technology for the waste water treatment plant (WWTP).
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The project has prepared the ESIA, ESMF and RMF/RPF as safeguards instruments to guide the
                           environment and social safeguards risk management. The frameworks provide guidance required
                           for the preparation of site specific plans (ESMPs and RAPs). The lead implementing agency
                           Ministry of Water and Irrigation has a safeguards unit with staff experienced in Bank safeguards
                           requirements under an earlier engagement with Bank financed projects. The utility responsible for
                           implementation of the water supply distribution systems, DAWASCO will hire additional
                           environment and social safeguards officers to strengthen its capacity. An international safeguards
                           expert will be engaged by the MOWI to support the capacity building to the implementing
                           agencies.


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Stakeholders consultations were conducted during the preparation of the ESMF, RMF, and ESIA.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Consultation involved meetings, focused group discussions. The main stakeholders identified and
                           consulted include the following: Government official from Ministry of Water and Irrigation,
                           DAWASCO, DAWASA Municipal Councils of Kinondoni, Bagamoyo, and Coast Region;
                           utilities TANROADS and TANESCO; and Street / Village leaders and community members who
                           are directly affected by the project were consulted. Invitations of the community members to the
                           consultation meetings were made through their local leaders. Areas of consultation for directly
                           affected community members from the proposed water distribution system included Kimahewa,
                           Mabwepande, Mivumoni, Salasala, Tegeta A, in Kinondoni and Bagamoyo District Councils.
                           Apart from introducing the project, consultations were aimed at obtaining stakeholders
                           environmental and socioeconomic views and concerns and perceptions regarding the proposed
                           project. The summary of views and responses are included in the instruments and revolve around
                           impacts on land and the properties on it however small, clear and transparent GRM, contractor
                           blocking community paths and work opportunities at the sites. The Ministry of Water and
                           Irrigation disclosed the ESMF and RMF.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Nov-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   30-Nov-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Nov-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Nov-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?




                                                                    Page 7 of 9
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies



                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yitbarek Tessema
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                      Date: 06-Dec-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Jonathan S. Kamkwalala (PMGR)                 Date: 07-Dec-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
