                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                  Report No.:ISDSC20990
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-May-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Indonesia         Project ID:                P162965
    Project Name:                      Peatland Partnership Project
    Team Leader(s):                    Dinesh Aryal,George Henry Stirrett Wood
    Estimated Date                     22-Sep-2017
    of Approval:
    Managing Unit:                     GEN2A                    Lending                   IPF
    PHGlbPracLbl                                                Instrument:
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:       4.5                        Total Bank Financing: 0
    Financing Gap:            0
      Financing Source                                                                               Amount
      Sustainable Landscapes MDTF                                                                            4.5
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment

    B. Project Development Objective(s)
    This is intended to be the second in a Series of Projects aimed at supporting the Government’s efforts
    toward the restoration of two million hectares of peatland and promoting a framework the sustainable
    development, restoration and conservation of lowland areas in Indonesia.

    The Program Development Objective is to improve the integration and coordination among multi-sector
    stakeholders to promote the sustainable development, restoration and conservation of targeted lowland
    areas in Indonesia. This is a common objective for all projects within the Lowlands Program.
    i. Integrated multi-sectoral planning for lowland development, restoration and conservation;
    ii. Improved policy instruments for lowland development, restoration and conservation; and,
    iii. Multi-sectoral coordination mechanisms for development, restoration and conservation of lowland
    areas.

    The Project Development Objective is to improve local capacity for implementation of measures for the
    development, restoration, and conservation of targeted lowland areas.
    C. Project Description


    D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
    (if known)

                                               Page 1 of 8
The project will target seven priority provinces for peat restorations, including Riau, Jambi, South
Sumatra, South Kalimantan, Central Kalimantan, West Kalimantan and Papua. The project will select a
non-governmental agency (NGO) as a National Executing Agency that will be responsible for the day-
to-day administration of the project. The National Executing Agency will partner with local NGOs and
community organizations with experience and expertise in environmental conservation and livelihood
development through an on-granting mechanism. Accordingly, specific jurisdictions, target communities
and activities will only be determined once sub-grant proposals have been selected. Prior-selection of
priority jurisdictions and/or communities may also be possible depending on the needs and urgency.
Screening processes, applicable criteria, and the sizes and allocation of small grants will be determined
jointly by the National Executing Agency and BRG during project preparation.

Potential risks are anticipated to be of low significance, however, the risk level could increase
exponentially due to limited capacity and poor implementation. Learning from similar initiatives
financed by the WB under the Kalimantan Forests and Climate Partnership (KFCP) highlights one of the
main risk factors as the weak capacity of implementing entities to ensure proper management and
oversight. Since the project activities will be implemented across seven provinces by local NGOs/CSOs
and communities with a varying degree of capacity and experience in managing social and
environmental aspects, risks stemming from poor implementation issues need to be anticipated,
particularly in terms of distribution of benefits, outreach, grievance handling, compliance with ESMPs
(Environmental and Social Management Plans), etc.

The overall impacts are expected to be positive since the project is designed to promote the creation of
sustainable, climate-resilient livelihood alternatives and at the same time, raise community awareness of
the urgency of peat restoration for the sustenance of their environment and livelihoods over the long-
term. As an initial step, the project aims to serve as a catalytic platform to enhance the capacity of
lowland communities to engage in sustainable productive activities, invest in scalable peatland
conservation and management initiatives, and improve multi-stakeholder collaboration for restoration of
critical peatland areas. Capacity building initiatives e.g. training, workshops, and other efforts to
strengthen the communities generally as well as their institutions and norms at the village/community
level are generally expected to bring about positive changes in nature. The livelihoods programs (e.g.
seedling, reforestation, infrastructure works, agriculture and farming) are expected to enable target
communities to diversify their livelihood streams and become more resilient to economic shocks.

Specific adverse impacts remain largely unknown until project activities and sub-activities have been
identified in sub-grant proposals. In the development of safeguard instruments, preliminary impact
analyses will draw upon experiences from previous community-driven peatland restoration initiatives,
by taking stock lessons-learnt of the key challenges confronting such initiatives. Under the two main
categories of livelihoods and peat restoration, the project may finance the following activities: (a)
alternative livelihoods around sustainable forest management and agriculture, (b) rewetting particularly
in developed or drained peatland areas e.g. canal blocking, establishment of small water reservoirs, (c)
revegetation, and revitalization, and (d) community infrastructure. Depending on the scale of activities to
be financed, which are most likely small-scale, the following impacts may have to be considered:
- The project may have an influence on the nature of conflicts in target areas due to misunderstanding
and misperceptions of the objectives of the project. In areas with overlapping claims and conflicting
interests with regards to land categorization and use, changes introduced by the project may create
uncertainty, confusion and tension between people and groups and therefore potentially contribute to
conflicts that already exist given the uncertainties over land rights and economic pressures amongst
peatland communities, who are predominantly indigenous peoples in many areas, but also mixed
populations with recent and longer-term migrants;
- Prohibiting and sanctioning against the clearing of fields in peatland forests through felling and


                                            Page 2 of 8
burning may have some level of livelihood impacts since alternative methods may likely require an
increase in capital expenditures for agricultural inputs (e.g. labor, pesticide, time, etc.);
- Rewetting initiatives e.g. canal and/or drainage blocking could have both potential positive and
negative impacts, depending on the scale and community use of the areas to be rewetted. Voluntary
canal and/or drainage blocking, based on consensus and agreement, presents less risks and could help
ensure community acceptance of the initiatives introduced;
- Land-based livelihoods initiatives may disadvantage individuals who are landless. These individuals
may benefit from short-term employment created by the project but may not benefit from livelihoods
support programs focused on agriculture.
- Establishment of community infrastructure in peatland areas may also have some level of
environmental impacts due to improper design and/or siting. These are expected to be community
infrastructure related to livelihood activities. Depending on the type of livelihood activities, the impacts
will vary. Eg if nurseries, negligible (some land clearing perhaps but usually in a degraded area); if
sawmills or plywood, more implications (may need some investigating, or on a negative list?); if
swallow nests, then negligible impacts; if alternative enterprises (cattle? Mechanical repairs?) then
diverse but usually minor)
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The implementing agency will be selected from a pool of NGOs with good track records in the
management of environmental and social aspects. The selection screening criteria will include proven
experience in implementing WB’s safeguard policies for livelihoods and environmental conservation
activities. Further assessments will be carried out once the implementing NGO has been selected. Field
implementation will be spearheaded by local NGOs and/or communities who will be selected on a
competitive basis through an on-granting mechanism managed by the implementing NGO at the national
level.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Fajar Argo Djati (GSUID)
Lucy Madeline Mitchell (GSUID)
Virza S. Sasmitawidjaja (GEN2A)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                          Triggered ?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes                      Since specific locations and more detailed
                                                             activities remain unknown until community
                                                             proposals have been identified, safeguard
                                                             measures developed for this project will use a
                                                             framework approach. An integrated
                                                             Environmental and Social Management
                                                             Framework (ESMF) will be developed based
                                                             on a risk and impact assessment, by taking
                                                             stock of previous experiences from similar
                                                             initiatives and potentially strengthened by
                                                             further assessments particularly in
                                                             understudied areas targeted by this project.

                                                             Sub-grant proposals for activities under
                                                             livelihoods and peat restoration components
                                                             (C1 and C2) will have to go through

                                             Page 3 of 8
                                            preliminary screening to identify potential
                                            impacts and safeguard requirements:
                                            a. Screening against the project’s Negative
                                            List to ensure that any proposals not aligned
                                            with GoI’s regulations or deemed to generate
                                            major impacts will not be financed;
                                            b. Preliminary risk and impact assessment
                                            developed in a participatory manner with
                                            target communities;
                                            c. Development of an Environmental and
                                            Social Management Plan (ESMP), containing
                                            mitigation measures and resources
                                            commensurate to the level of risks and
                                            impacts.

                                            Under C1, activities would be to support
                                            community livelihoods in a more sustainable
                                            fashion, primarily through small-scale
                                            agriculture support (e.g. alternative crops,
                                            seedlings), smallholder forestry management,
                                            and small community infrastructure. C2
                                            activities would provide support specifically
                                            to restoring peatlands, using community
                                            labour whenever possible. This would likely
                                            be focused on rewetting particularly through
                                            small canal blocks, the establishment of small
                                            water reservoirs, and revegetation /
                                            reforestation. Those are initially identified
                                            activities, further identification will be done in
                                            the appraisal.

                                            Prior to the project effectiveness, the
                                            implementing NGO will develop a Project
                                            Operational Manual (POM) and relevant
                                            Standard Operating Procedures (SOPs) to
                                            operationalize the ESMF, including
                                            procedures for oversight, complaint handling
                                            and community participation during proposal
                                            development and activity implementation.

                                            This proposed project is considered a
                                            Category B because potential livelihood and
                                            restoration activities are considered to have
                                            site-specific, largely reversible, and low
                                            environmental impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes           The project location covers a wide potential
                                            area with many globally significant natural
                                            habitats both terrestrial and aquatic (including
                                            national parks). Some targeted communities
                                            could be in close proximity to these natural

                              Page 4 of 8
                                                     areas and there is a risk that agricultural or
                                                     forestry support could lead to further
                                                     conversion or degradation of natural habitat
                                                     (even though this support is intended to
                                                     improve the sustainability of current poor
                                                     practices). The Environmental and Social
                                                     Management Framework (ESMF) will be
                                                     developed to identify potential impacts and
                                                     appropriate mitigate measures for any habitat
                                                     conversion and degradation risks.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                    Yes            The project is intended to positively impact
                                                     the health of lowland forests, but risks of
                                                     further degradation or conversion remain
                                                     given improved agricultural inputs or small
                                                     community infrastructure. Furthermore, the
                                                     project seeks to support communities in
                                                     improving the management and utilization of
                                                     their forests. Hence, an integrated
                                                     Environmental and Social Management
                                                     Framework (ESMF) will be developed to
                                                     identify potential impacts and appropriate
                                                     mitigate measures for these issues.
Pest Management OP 4.09               TBD            The project is not expected to finance any
                                                     pesticides (which will be included in negative
                                                     screening list), but this will be reassessed
                                                     during preparation when the nature of
                                                     agricultural activities are more precise.
                                                     Pesticides are currently widely used in
                                                     lowland areas and it will be important to
                                                     assess if project investments alter pest
                                                     management practices and increase the
                                                     application of pesticides for improved crop
                                                     yields. If project investments are determined
                                                     to likely increase the application of pesticides,
                                                     then the Environmental and Social
                                                     Management Framework (ESMF) will include
                                                     measures to identify potential pesticide risks
                                                     and appropriate mitigate measures and
                                                     promotion of integrated pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 Yes           The Physical Cultural Resources policy is
                                                     triggered since sub-grant activities may have
                                                     impacts on the use of and access to sites with
                                                     potential cultural significance. No project
                                                     activities are expected to affect Physical
                                                     Cultural Resources. However, in the event that
                                                     such impacts occur due to the implementation
                                                     of sub-project activities (e.g. small-scale
                                                     construction works, land demarcation,
                                                     rewetting, etc.), the ESMF will incorporate

                                       Page 5 of 8
                                                    procedures to address chance finds of physical
                                                    and cultural resources in consultation with
                                                    affected communities.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10         Yes           The project will be implemented in lowland
                                                    areas where there are IPs (Adat communities)
                                                    and/or co-existence between Adat and local
                                                    communities. Site-specific social analysis,
                                                    which is integral to the IPs screening process,
                                                    will be carried out by project proponents to
                                                    identify specific risks and impacts that may
                                                    affect IPs and vulnerable groups with regards
                                                    to the proposed activities. Each proposal
                                                    developed by project proponents (local NGOs
                                                    and/or community representatives) will have
                                                    to obtain evidence of broad community
                                                    support through free, prior and informed
                                                    consultations within the community concerned
                                                    and neighboring communities. This process of
                                                    free, prior and informed consultations shall be
                                                    revisited over the course of the project.

                                                    A risk assessment will be carried out as part of
                                                    the ESMF development. The risk assessment
                                                    will include a social assessment involving a
                                                    broad range of stakeholders, including IPs and
                                                    local communities and representatives from
                                                    the government, national and regional IPs
                                                    organizations and academics to capture
                                                    diverse views of potential risks that may arise
                                                    from the project activities. The ESMF will
                                                    incorporate Indigenous Peoples Planning
                                                    Framework (IPPF) and procedures of free,
                                                    prior and informed consultations as well as
                                                    requirements for capacity building and
                                                    Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM) to
                                                    ensure that the project is implemented in a
                                                    socially and culturally appropriate manner and
                                                    that Adat communities can participate and
                                                    benefit from the project. In many cases it is
                                                    expected that the proponents or grantees will
                                                    be indigenous peoples’ organizations.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12   Yes           The project will not finance activities that will
                                                    result in involuntary resettlement i.e.
                                                    involuntary taking of land and/or the exercise
                                                    of eminent domain. The project anticipates
                                                    that there will be no access restrictions in
                                                    relation to parks and protected areas as per OP
                                                    4.12. However, in the event that activities
                                                    proposed may cause restriction of access (e.g.


                                      Page 6 of 8
                                                                             rewetting, canal blocking, etc.) and/or impacts
                                                                             on livelihoods (e.g. no-burning method), such
                                                                             activities will be implemented subject to
                                                                             mutual agreement and consensus by
                                                                             communities affected and such agreement
                                                                             must be duly documented and monitored by
                                                                             project proponents. A Process Framework to
                                                                             mitigate impacts with regards to access
                                                                             restrictions and livelihoods displacement will
                                                                             be incorporated in the ESMF. If Voluntary
                                                                             Land Donation (VLD) is required, the ESMF
                                                                             will provide a guideline for the handling of
                                                                             VLD, including the processes needed for
                                                                             conducting consultations and obtaining
                                                                             consent from landowners and heirs, legal
                                                                             documentation and processing.
      Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                          No
      Projects on International Waterways                No
      OP/BP 7.50
      Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60              No
.




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




    PHAPPRNO




               A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?:        Yes
               i. Explanation
               N/A

               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
               28-Jul-2017

               A. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                  The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.



IV. Approval
      Task Team Leader(s):                      Name: Dinesh Aryal,George Henry Stirrett Wood
      Approved By:
      Safeguards Advisor:                       Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                            Date: 25-May-2017
      Practice Manager/Manager:                 Name: Iain G. Shuker (PMGR)                         Date: 02-Jun-2017


        1 Reminder:The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
      InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
      affected persons.


                                                          Page 7 of 8
Page 8 of 8
