INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12633
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Feb-2015, 06-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Vietnam                    Project ID:  P126507
Project Name: Ho Chi Minh City Green Transport Development (P126507)
Task Team       Arturo Ardila Gomez
Leader(s):
Estimated       02-Mar-2015                Estimated    29-May-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General transportation sector (80%), Public administration- Transportation
(20%)
Theme(s):       Other urban development (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     137.45            Total Bank Financing:  124.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         13.45
International Development Association (IDA)                               124.00
Total                                                                     137.45
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The project development objective is to improve the performance and efficiency of public transport
along a high priority corridor in HCMC.
3. Project Description
1.    COMPONENT 1: Bus Rapid Transit Corridor Development. Total cost: US$ 132.45 million;
Page 1 of 11


﻿IDA: US$ 119 million; Borrower: US$ 13.45 million. This component will finance goods, works,
and services for development of a BRT corridor between An Lac in the southwest and Rach Chiec in
the northeast, following the Vo Van Kiet and Mai Chi Tho Boulevards (approximately 23 km and 28
stations). The investments will include:
0
S(a) Construction and supervision of BRT infrastructure and facilities. This includes:
(i)       A dedicated and segregated bus transitway between An Lac and Rach Chiec including
the upgrading and expansion of a road section from Lo Gom Bridge to Thu Thiem tunnel.
(ii)   Median "signature" stations between An Lac and Rach Chiec, designed for the needs of the
local users and fully accessible by people with disabilities. The design of the stations will consider
the surrounding urban environment, will be tailored to the conditions of the corridor, and will take
into account the need to interchange with other modes as needed.
(iii)  A terminal at Rach Chiec and a turnaround area at An Lac.
(iv)   A technical facility at Thu Thiem including a control center building, bus depot, office space
for UCCI and MOCPT, rest facilities for crews, a daycare, parking areas for buses to accommodate
the forecasted BRT vehicle fleet, and places for CNG re-fuelling and fuel storage.
(v)    Reconstructed sidewalks around stations (which will remove the majority of current
obstacles) combined with walkways to interchange points, thus contributing to a more accessible
environment for pedestrians in Ho Chi Minh City.
(vi)   New pedestrian-over bridges connecting stations to surrounding areas, including connections
to the other side of the canal that runs parallel to the BRT corridor.
(vii)  Parking for motorcycles at selected stations, and
(viii)  Landscaping and open-space improvements along the corridor.
(b)    Traffic management improvements, intersection control, and Intelligent Transport Systems
(ITS). This includes:
(i)    Reconfigured and revised intersection design and control between An Lac and Rach Chiec,
including traffic signals giving priority to BRT vehicles and pedestrians.
(ii)   Implementation of a broad range of ITS, including advanced traffic management systems
(such as smart traffic signals, cameras, and e-police), advanced bus operation management systems
(including global positioning systems, communication equipment, and dispatching), and a passenger
o        information system.
(c)    Fare collection system and smart cards. This includes fare collection facilities (e.g.,
electronic turnstiles) at each station, as well as sufficient smart cards and servers.
(d)    BRT Vehicles. The project will finance at least 28 CNG buses.
(e)    Planning integration and urban development. The objectives of this subcomponent would be
to improve the environment surrounding the BRT stations; improve accessibility and amenities to
maximize BRT effectiveness; provide universal accessibility; and promote transit oriented
development and greening of the corridor. Specific measures include:
(i)       Sidewalk improvements along the BRT route.
(ii)   Improvements within a 400 meter access radius around the stations, along roads penetrating
surrounding residential and commercial areas.
(iii)  Greening of the corridor through urban design, street and landscaping.
Page 2 of 11


﻿(iv)   Safety enhancement measures, including signage and barriers.
(v)    Pedestrian facilities, including rest areas, information centers, and rest rooms.
(f)    Marketing and public communication. This includes the design and implementation of a
comprehensive communications and outreach program (covering also grievance and redress
U         mechanisms) for providing information to all stakeholders throughout the construction phases. These
studies will include gender considerations.
(g)    Project management. This subcomponent will finance goods (office equipment, and vehicles)
and services to support project management, annual audits, and supervision/monitoring support for
environmental and resettlement activities.
(h)    Land acquisition and resettlement. The total cost of land acquisition and resettlement will be
financed by the government.
2. COMPONENT 2: Institutional Strengthening. Total cost: US$ 5.0 million; IDA: US$ 5.0 million.
Implementation of the BRT introduces a new mode of transport to Ho Chi Minh City; it marks the
beginning of a new era of multi-modal urban passenger transport in which a number of MRT lines
will commence operation and more BRT lines are expected. This change will require institutional
strengthening: first of the existing institutions and later of an overall passenger transport authority. It
will also require the knowledge and capacity to restructure and integrate the network, transport
services, and customer services when BRT and MRT lines are introduced. Component 2 will finance
the goods and services to support:
(a)    Equipment, vehicles, office facilities upgrading, and other operational support for managing
the implementation of the BRT and related measures by the PMU throughout the design,
construction, and implementation phases;
(b)    Monitoring and evaluation. This subcomponent intends to assess whether the BRT has been
successfully implemented as designed, whether it is really achieving the desired impacts, what post-
implementation adjustments are required (if any), and what policy and design lessons might be
derived from the project. Annual monitoring surveys and analysis will be conducted during project
implementation covering transport system supply, demand, and performance. Ongoing monitoring
activities will include household interviews, assessment of real estate prices, and assessment of
building permit applications, visual surveys, mystery traveler surveys, car journey time surveys,
focus groups, satisfaction surveys, air/noise and emissions surveys, traffic counts, and accident data
o        analysis. Particular attention will be paid to the attitudes and willingness of current motorcycle users
to use BRT, to identify their potential for mode shift, factors of resistance, and critical features for
the (re)design of BRT lines to achieve higher levels of mode shift.
(c)    Feasibility and design studies for: a) maximizing connectivity and ridership of BRT line 1,
and b) continued development of the BRT Network. These studies will be in line with the Master
Plan for Public Transport, including integration considerations with the bus network and the overall
multimodal passenger transport network;
(d)    Study to develop the optimal fare structure and fare product range for the public
transportation system (for implementation through the new ticketing system).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The BRT line proposed for financing will be located on the existing Vo Van Kiet - Mai Chi Tho
Boulevard and in parallel to the Tau Hu-Ben Nghe canal cutting across HCMC. The project will be
Page 3 of 11


﻿implemented in an urban setting of HCMC which is located on the banks of the Saigon River, 60 km
away from the coast of the East Sea and 1,760 km south of Hanoi. HCMC is the most populous city
in Vietnam, with over 7.3 million inhabitants in the city proper, and over 9 million habitants in the
metropolitan area. HCMC is also the largest economic development pole in the country, generating
O
U        roughly 20% of the national gross domestic product.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Son Van Nguyen (GENDR)
Tuan Anh Le (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project will have some potential negative
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               environmental and social impacts associated with the
construction of the physical structures to support BRT
operations and other non-motorized transport
infrastructure to facilitate access to the BRT services
under Component 1 of the project. This requires the
identification, mitigation, and monitoring of potential
adverse environmental and social impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project is located in an existing urban area, and along
4.04                                an existing road. It will not cause degradation or
conversion of any known natural habitats or impact any
watersheds.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project area is in a highly developed urban area, and
will not affect any forests of forested areas. Therefore,
this policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project will not involve any investment that would
result in procurement of pesticides or any increase in the
Q)                                            use of pesticides as a result of project activities.
Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural       No          Neither the existing road and along which this project is
Resources OP/BP 4.11                being considered, nor the location of the proposed
Technical Facility is located in the vicinity of physical
cultural resources such as monuments, temples, churches,
religious/ spiritual, and cultural sites. A "chance finds"
clause will be included in contracts, Operational Manual,
and included as part of the EMP and/or ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no ethnic minority peoples (as defined by OP
BP 4.10                             4.10) present in the project area. Thus, this policy is not
triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The project will require land acquisition, both
OP/BP 4.12                          permanently and temporarily, to construct the Technical
Facility (1.8ha), End of BRT Route Terminal (0.6ha), and
bus stops/access road across the BRT route. A
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared,
on the basis of the Feasibility Study, and the social
Page 4 of 11


﻿assessment (SA). A gender consultation was done, as part
of the SA, to inform gender action and gender monitoring
and evaluation plan. A social due diligence (DD) - done
for Vo Van Kiet highway, was also done. An abbreviated
Resettlement Action Plan (prepared for the land
acquisition for the Technical Facility in Thu Thiem area
of district 2) was also prepared given the site was
identified during project preparation. Key social
safeguards policy requirements have been addressed in
the RPF and RAP to ensure the resettlement works under
the project is implemented as per Bank's OP 4.12,
including compensation payment, monitoring of the
resettlement process (both internal and independent),
consultation, and grievance redress mechanism, and
implementation of livelihood restoration measures. Minor
pending issues from the due diligence exercises are
included in the RAP to ensure Client's actions, and
Bank's monitoring. All the above four social documents,
including SA, RPF, abbreviated RAP, and DD were
disclosed in Vietnamese at VDIC on 18 December 2014,
and in English at Infoshop on 17 December 2014. The
disclosure of the Vietnamese documents were also
disclosed locally on 23 January 2015. The revised RPF,
done by HCMC PC, which the Bank has accepted, was re-
disclosed on the Bank's Infoshop on 5 March 2015, and in
Vietnamese at VDIC in Hanoi on 9 March 2015. The
revised RPF was also re-disclosed in Vietnamese at
project level on 24 March 2015.
Safety of Dams OP/B P   No          The project activities will not affect the safety of any dam,
4.37                                or depend on the safety of any existing dam.
Projects on International  No       The project will not affect any international waterway.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                While the existing road cuts across the Saigon River (an
international waterway), there is an existing tunnel (Thu
Thiem tunnel) that is already in place. The project
activities will not impact the Saigon River in any manner.
Projects in Disputed    No          The project is not located in any disputed area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Overall, the proposed project will bring about long-term
environmental benefits and positive impacts to the lives of the people in Ho Chi Minh City, reduce
traffic safety risks and emissions from private vehicles. The city's urban landscape will also be
improved by "greening" investments provided by the project. The project will have some potential
Page 5 of 11


﻿negative socio-environmental impacts associated with the rehabilitation and improvement of
existing road infrastructure to support BRT operations, the construction of BRT infrastructure and
other non-motorized transport infrastructure to facilitate access to the BRT services under
Component 1 of the proposed project.
o
The Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) prepared by the client confirmed that the adverse
environmental impacts are expected to result mainly from the construction activities. Potential
adverse impacts of the project during site preparation and construction include: those related to
land acquisition and resettlement for construction of the depot and terminal; noise, dust, vibration,
fumes from asphalting and transportation of materials; disruption to traffic, and access to roadside
activities; interruption of local household businesses and utility services; potential contamination
of soil and water from disposal of waste materials and fueling equipment; and worker safety.
Direct impacts from operation potentially include increased noise and vibration level, domestic
waste generation at bus stop and depot, traffic safety risks, air pollution from vehicle exhaust, and
fuel and lubricants spills. No physical cultural resources are impacted by the project. However,
these environment impacts are likely to be small to moderate, short term, site-specific, non-
sensitive or irreversible, and in every case, mitigation measures can be designed to reduce the
negative impacts. Therefore, the project is categorized as an Environmental Category B project.
OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. To establish the planned BRT, the project will build various
infrastructure, including the Technical Facility (about 12.77ha5ha) in Thu Thiem ward (District 2)
for the bus routine maintenance/repair, and the End of the BRT Route Terminal (about 0.6ha) in
Rach Chiec area (District 2). Most land permanently affected at these two locations is agricultural
land. A total of 15 households are potentially affected at these two locations, of which eight
households are expected to resettle, twelve to lose more than 20% of their total productive land,
and six will have their businesses affected. Two companies who own agricultural land at the
Technical Facility in Thu Thiem area would also be affected. The construction of the bus stops,
and their access ways would not require the permanent acquisition of land, since these stations
would be located within the right of the way, and most would be located at the road median. Some
temporary land impact may result, primarily during the construction, and which would be
minimized through appropriate construction measures. Where temporary land impact is not
avoidable and this affects local households, compensation payments will be paid to the affected
households as per the project's Resettlement Policy Framework. There are no potential large-scale,
significant, and/or irreversible impacts envisaged at this stage.
A social assessment (SA) was done to assess the overall project social impact. As an integral part
of the SA, gender consultation was conducted with people potentially affected peoples (as a result
of land acquisition), and potential BRT users, to inform the design of the gender mainstreaming
action and gender monitoring and evaluation plan. This project is gender- informed on three
dimensions - as per East Asia and Pacific (EAP) gender target for FY15.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential impacts related to operation of the subproject infrastructure are described in previous
section. No other negative potential indirect and/or long term environmental and social impacts
due to future activities are anticipated in the project areas.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
During preparation of the project, screening has was been carried out to exclude activities that
Page 6 of 11


﻿would go against the project's development objective. The BRT has been chosen to go along the
existing road, and the Technical Facility (in Thu Thiem ward) and Terminal (in Rach Chiec area)
have been intended to be located in less populated areas to minimize the magnitude of social
impact due to land acquisition/ resettlement. Bus stops/access roads located along the BRT route
O
(across six districts) are also planned to be located within the right of the way of the BRT route's
right of the way, so as to avoid the need for permanent land acquisition from local residents.
Options for fuel use were considered, and a cleaner fuel, CNG, has been selected for BRT bus
operation to reduce greenhouse gas (GHG) emission.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To address the project's negative social and environmental impacts, the following safeguard
documents have been prepared by the PMU, reviewed by the Bank's environmental and social
specialists, and found to be satisfactory.
Environment:
The Government's regulations on EIA require the preparation of an Environmental Impact
Assessment for this investment project. Accordingly, an EIA was prepared and approved by the
HCMC Department of Natural Resources and Environment (DONRE) in December 2014. An
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) was also prepared, reviewed by the Bank, and found
satisfactory. The EMP details: a) all anticipated adverse environmental impacts; b) the mitigation
measures to be taken during the project implementation and operation, of a project to eliminate or
offset adverse environmental impacts, or to reduce them to acceptable levels; c) monitoring
objectives and type of monitoring with linkages to the impacts assessed in the EIA report and the
mitigation measures described in the EMP; d) the actions needed, including institutional
arrangements to implement these measures; e) capacity development and training to support the
timely and effective implementation of environmental project components and mitigation
measures; f) implementation schedule and cost estimates for implementing the EMP; and g)
integration of the EMP with the project.
The EMP also includes an environmental codes of practice (ECOP) for addressing generic
construction- related impacts and a set of appropriate and site-specific mitigation measures, and as
well as a chance finds procedure. The EMP will be included in the bidding and contractual
*           documents. They will be implemented through civil works for component 1. Implementation of
the EMP will be monitored and supervised by the Project Management Unit, the construction
supervision consultant, the independent environmental monitoring consultant, and will be
supported by capacity building for PMU, supervision consultants, contactors, and local authorities
and communities.
Since the project will be implemented on the existing Vo Van Kiet - Mai chi Tho Boulevard, a
project financed by the Japanese International Cooperation Agency (JICA) and completed in 2011,
an environmental due diligence has also been conducted. The EIA for the Vo Van Kiet - Mai chi
Tho Boulevard project was developed and approved by the Ministry of Science, Technology and
Environment on 25 October 1999. The EIA report was developed to meet all the requirements of
Vietnamese laws and JICA's social and environmental policies of JICA. Proper stakeholder
consultations were conducted during EIA preparation, and the EIA was disclosed as required by
the government regulation. Review of this project's environmental documentation indicates that
the project owner fully complied with all environmental protection requirements of Vietnam's
government and JICA during the project's preparation, construction, and operation phases. There
Page 7 of 11


﻿are no outstanding environmental issues.
Component 1 of the project involves technical assistance (TA) for the preparation of prefeasibility
analysis analyses of additional BRT lines and/or other follow-up investments. Although the TA
O
activities themselves do not have direct adverse environmental or social impacts, the outcomes of
TA support may have significant environmental and social implications going forward, entailing
risks and potentially inducing adverse impacts. Therefore, implementation of these TA activities
must comply with applicable Bank safeguards policies. The PMU will follow the Interim
Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in
Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank, and seek guidance from the
Bank's safeguards specialists early in the process.
Social:
To address the land acquisition issue (as mentioned above), a Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF) has been prepared to guide the preparation of subproject Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
that will be identified during project implementation. For civil works, such as construction of the
Technical Facility in Thu Thiem area of which the location has been determined, an abbreviated
RAP has been prepared in accordance with the RPF. This abbreviated RAP will be updated on the
basis of the detailed measurement survey, consultation with affected households, replacement
costs survey, and will be disclosed to the affected community prior to implementation. The
abbreviated RAP also includes actions that need to be taken by UCCI (project owner) with the 19
pending cases as a result of the due diligence review of the land acquisition/resettlement for Vo
Van Kiet Highway (which is used as the BRT route). Once the location for the End of the BRT
Terminal (about 0.58ha, Rach Chiec area) was determined by HCMC People's Committee, the
compensation/support/resettlement package for the this Terminal will be developed into a RAP in
accordance with the project' RPF. This RAP will be reviewed by the Bank prior to
implementation.
Safeguard implementation and capacity building:
The project will be implemented by a Project Management Unit (PMU) under of the UCCI as the
Implementing Agency, which has whose staff have very limited experienced staff and experiences
a          in implementation of several projects funded by the Bank and other donors. PMU staff attended
training on the WB safeguards policies in on December 4-5, 2014. With additional training and
capacity building activities on environmental monitoring and supervision to be implemented
during project implementation, the PMU will be in a good position to take the responsibility for
this project.
Environment:
PMU will be responsible for monitoring the overall project implementation, including
environmental compliance of the project. It will have the final responsibility for environmental
performance of the project. The construction supervision consultant will take the lead in ensuring
contractor compliance with the EMP. Furthermore, PMU will also be responsible for overall
supervising the implementation of the EMP, reviewing project monitoring reports, and
implementing regular/ad hoc monitoring, and requesting further mitigation measures based on
their own environmental management jurisdiction. A safeguard unit under PMU will be
established with at least one environmental management staff member to help with environmental
Page 8 of 11


﻿management of the project. PMU will contract experienced independent environmental monitoring
services for external monitoring of compliance with the EMP. The independent environmental
monitoring consultant will carry out the environmental monitoring program as designed in the
EMP, and advise on additional monitoring of mitigation measures to be implemented by the
O
contractors. The consultant will submit bi-annually monitoring reports bi-annually to the PMU and
to the Bank.
Social:
PMU (established under UCCI) will directly implement the abbreviated RAP, as well as prepare
new subproject RAP(s) that will be determined during project implementation. Since PMU staff
members are still quite new to the requirements of the World Bank's OP 4.12 (Involuntary
Resettlement), a training will be provided to the PMU's social staff, including counterpart staff
who are directly involved in RAP updating and implementation. Technical support will be
regularly provided by the Bank's project task team, to ensure that the approved RAP is
implemented properly and in accordance with the planned construction schedule.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Environment:
In addition to the UCCI and project PMU responsible for the implementation of the project, other
key stakeholders are district people's committees, the city DOT, Saigon Bus Company, the city
Transportation Policy, local communities, mass organizations, and general public. Public
consultations on the project EIA and EMP were carried during project preparation with the DOT,
the Transport Policy, the affected people, local authorities, and mass organizations. Feedbacks
from all the consultations were taken into account in the preparation of the final documents and for
project's design.
Prior to project appraisal, all the draft environmental safeguard documents (EIA, EMP) were
disclosed in Vietnamese at the Vietnam Development Information Center, the PMU office,
DONRE, and the project sites on October 27, 2014. They were also been disclosed at the Bank's
InfoShop in Washington DC on October 22, 2014. The final EIA and EMP were disclosed at the
project sites on January 16, 2015, and at the InfoShop on February 3, 2015.
Social:
During project preparation, consultation has was been conducted with various stakeholders,
including potentially affected households, potential BRT users, local people along the BRT route
(particularly at bus stop locations), staff members from UCCI, PMU, HCMC DOT, environmental
and Feasibility Study Consultant. Gender perspective was integrated into the consultation process
to ensure that are both men and women participating in the consultation, and their feedback were
sought. Feedback from people consulted have been reflected in the Social Assessment,
Resettlement Policy Framework, abbreviated RAP, and the Feasibility Study. Affected households
under the Vo Van Kiet highway project (formerly referred to as Dong Tay highway) were also
consulted on a representative basis as part of the social due diligence. Pending cases under the Vo
Van Kiet highway project have been reflected in the abbreviated RAP of the project (for the Thu
Thiem Technical Facility) for UCCI and PMUs' follow-up action to solve these cases to the
satisfaction of the affected households.
Page 9 of 11


﻿All the agreed social safeguard documents, including SA, RPF, abbreviated RAP (for the
Technical Facility in Thu Thiem area), and Due Diligence were disclosed in Vietnamese at the
Vietnam Development Information Center in Hanoi on 18 December 2014, and locally at the
O
offices of project districts' People's Committees, and on the website of the UCCI on 23 January
2015. The English version of the above documents were disclosed at Bank's InfoShop in
Washington DC on 17 December 2014 before the Bank commences the project appraisal. The
revised RPF, done by HCMC PC, which the Bank has accepted, was re-disclosed on the Bank's
Infoshop on 5 March 2015, and in Vietnamese at VDIC in Hanoi on 9 March 2015. The revised
RPF is also in the process of being disclosed in Vietnamese at project level.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Oct-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           22-Oct-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                  27-Oct-2014
Comments: The Environmental Safeguards documents have been disclosed at Infoshop and in
country prior to appraisal.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              12-Dec-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           17-Dec-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                  18-Dec-2014
Comments: The Social Safeguards documents have been disclosed at Infoshop and in country
prior to appraisal.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Page 10 of I1


﻿Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Arturo Ardila Gomez
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Paul Vallely (PMGR)                  Date: 06-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


