INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13850
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:   P153892
Project Name:   Guangxi Rural Poverty Alleviation Pilot Project (P153892)
Task Team       Paavo Eliste
Leader(s):
Estimated       22-Jun-2016                Estimated     15-Dec-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFAO2                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Other rural development (20%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Rural
markets (40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     182.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                        82.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
0         Total                                                          182.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed PDO is to increase income opportunities for rural households in selected poverty
counties of Guangxi.
C. Project Description
Proposed Project Components: The proposed project would consist of the following four components
with a preliminary cost estimate of US$182 million including a Bank loan of US$100 million and


﻿counterpart funding of about US$82 million equivalent implemented over five years:
a)     Component 1: Improvement of Pro-Poor Value Chains. This component aims to address
market failures in the development of agricultural and non-agricultural rural value chains and key
O
industries with a particular focus on linking poor rural households with higher value markets. The
component would include two subcomponents:
i.     Cooperative Development Fund (CDF), which would provide grant financing to newly or
existing cooperatives (maximum 10 per county). The CDF would be managed by the selected farmer
and non-farmer cooperatives who will implement their investment plans for value chain
development. These investment plans would be initiated by cooperatives and formulated jointly with
the help of technical experts, agro-enterprises, and county governments. Cooperatives would need to
provide a beneficiary contribution at levels to be determined during the project preparation.
Investment proposals would be subject to appraisal and approval by the county and provincial PMOs.
Funds could be used by the cooperatives to invest in the fixed production and processing equipment
and facilities, nurseries, advanced breeding stations, equipment for improved seed production,
storage facilities for agricultural produce, and other small-scale cooperative level infrastructure,
goods, and related technical assistance services. The allocation of a proportion of the CDF fund for
investments in capacity building and training of cooperatives would be mandatory.
ii.    Competitive Grant for Enterprises (CG) would provide matching grants to finance enterprise
investments, which demonstrate linkages and benefit sharing with poor farmers/households. It is
expected that some 20-30 grants could be awarded to eligible enterprises individually or in
partnership with farmer cooperatives. Numbers of poor farmers linked in the targeted value chains,
farmer income generation and fair benefit sharing arrangements would be key selection criteria for
such matching grants. The grants would be provided based on application process which includes
transparent evaluation and competitive selection process (the details to be worked out during
preparation). The interest from the enterprises would be solicited through several rounds of public
advertisement (at least at the regional level). To ensure ownership and to demonstrate commitment,
the enterprise applicants would need to match the grant amount with their own funds at a cost-
sharing requirement of some 70-80% (to be determined during the preparation), which would need to
come from the enterprises own resources and/or from commercial lending. Grants would focus on
the investments which improve product quality, processing and marketing, production of value added
agricultural products, food safety promotion and improvement, income-generating activities for poor
farmers, new product development, and provision of services in the selected project areas. The
a       management and implementation of this subcomponent would be done at the Regional level.
b)     Component 2: Improving Public Infrastructure and Services; this component would support
the establishment and strengthening of public infrastructure and service systems in support of value
chain/key industry development under Component 1 and would include two subcomponents:
i.     Rural Infrastructure, which would provide support for (i) rehabilitation and construction of
production road infrastructure, such as off-grade access roads to village production areas or
processing and marketing facilities, and rehabilitation and construction of tractor roads, field tracks,
and foot paths; (ii) rehabilitation and construction of small-scale irrigation and drainage
infrastructure, construction of small water storage facilities, land levelling, and terracing; (iii)
establishment of IT and telecommunication infrastructure and procurement of information
infrastructure and equipment; and (iv) rehabilitation or construction of public market facilities,
electricity supply and other infrastructure and procurement of related equipment.
ii.    Public Services, which would support such activities as product certification, developing and
registration of local/regional brands, branding and protection of ethnic minority product features,
market and production risk management (e.g. food safety testing and control, and piloting crop- and


﻿livestock insurance schemes, etc.) as well as strategic product marketing and promotion.
c)     Component 3: Enhancing Investments in Poor Areas. This component would improve and
facilitate investments in poor areas by existing and new entrepreneurs and business entities such as
O
U       Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), migrant returnees, or cooperatives and would include two
activities:
i.     Business Incubation Centers, which would be set up in each county and provide support for
existing and start-up businesses and include training and facilitation for registration, business
management, business planning, access to financing, linking with processors and markets, market
analysis, etc.
ii.    Risk Management, which would help to mitigate risks related to production and financing.
The project would finance crop and livestock insurance premiums and credit guarantee facility,
which will be set up following national requirements, to facilitate access to commercial lending for
enterprises under Component 1.2. This component will be funded exclusively through counterpart
funds.
d)     Component 4: Project Management and M&E; this component would aim to strengthen and
develop the administrative and technical capacity of staff of the Project Management Offices at the
county, prefecture and regional level to manage the project effectively. The component would in
particular aim to establish a rigorous monitoring and evaluation and impact evaluation system in
order to enable the learning from the pilot nature of the project with an external professional
monitoring agency to be engaged under the project. The component would also support regular
supervision, progress monitoring, acceptance checks, and safeguards implementation supervision and
monitoring.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is located in the Hechi and Baise cities of the northwestern Guangxi Autonomous
Region. The project will cover 10 counties (6 in Hechi and 4 in Baise). These include: Tiandong,
Tianlin, Leye, Donglan, Bama, Fengshan, Dahua, Du'an, and Pingguo County, and Yizhou City. All
of the selected counties/cities are characterized by a particular high level of poverty combined with
poor natural resource conditions, difficulties in water management, limited availability of farm land,
low levels of technology and a high percentage of ethnic minorities.
The environmental and ecological settings of the project area are similar to the other rural poverty
reduction projects that have been recently approved by the Bank (Guizhou and Poverty VI projects).
Hechi is at the edge of Yunnan-Guizhou Plateau; about 66% of its area is of karst topography, while
about 33% of Baise is of karst topography. Soil erosion and rock desertification is considered a key
environmental and ecological issue in the karst area.
Hechi City has an area of 33,508 km2 and a population of 4.5 million (2014). Annual average
temperature is 16.9~21.5 degrees Celsius. Annual average precipitation is 1,200-1,600mm. Base
City has an area of 32,652 km2 and a population of 3.8 million.Annual average temperature is
19~22.1 degrees Celsius. Annual average precipitation is 1,113-1,713mm.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The project would be implemented by the Guangxi Foreign Capital Poverty Reduction Project
Management Center (Center). The Centre has experience with two previous World Bank supported
projects (Poverty I and Poverty IV). Most project components and activities would be managed at the


﻿county level. The Competitive Grant (CG) sub-component under Component 1.2 would be managed
at the regional level. While staff at the Center have previous experience with the World Bank
projects, most of them have been promoted to more senior level. Project staff at county levels have
limited experience in implementing World Bank projects. Training will be needed to improve
O
U       capacity at both provincial and county levels to implement Bank??s Safeguards policies.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Aimin Hao (GSURR)
Ning Yang (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project will finance (i) the small-scale
OP/BP 4.01                              cooperative level sub-projects such as expansion or
upgrading of the production base, small-scale
processing equipment and facilities, nurseries,
breeding stations, equipment for improved seed
production, storage facilities for agricultural produce,
among others. It will also finance rehabilitation and
construction of production road infrastructure, such
as off-grade access roads, tractor roads, field tracks,
and foot paths; (ii) rehabilitation and construction of
small-scale irrigation and drainage infrastructure,
construction of small water storage facilities, land
levelling, and terracing; (iii) rehabilitation or
construction of public market facilities, electricity
supply and other infrastructure and procurement of
related equipment.
0
The project environmental and ecological settings
and envisaged investments are similar to the Guizhou
and other rural poverty reduction projects that have
been recently approved by the Bank (Guizhou and
Poverty VI projects).
The proposed project has been proposed as category
B project because of the relatively small-scale of the
proposed activities which are not expected to result
in significant negative environmental and social
impacts. The impacts of the proposed project on the
environment are expected to be overall positive as
the project, by design, puts strong emphasis on the
development of sustainable and climate resilient
agricultural production systems. Potential
environmental issues are mainly related to agro-
processing activities such as small scale construction
activities which are limited to the rehabilitation and


﻿improvement of small-scale rural infrastructure.
To address the environment and social impacts and
enhance positive impacts, the project will develop an
Environment and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) during the preparation because investments
under Components 1 and 2 will be identified during
the implementation through participatory and
competitive processes. As such, the specific
locations of project activities won't be known by
appraisal. The ESMF will guide the screening and
assessment of environment and social impacts of
various activities related to Components 1 and 2,
particularly the civil works (including public
consultation and information disclosure). The ESMF
will also provide the details on the type, level and
depth of environmental and social impact
assessments (ESIAs) required for each of the
investments and contains measures and plans to
avoid, mitigate and/or offset adverse impacts, based
upon the outcomes of the screening.
The ESMF will be prepared in parallel with the
social assessment of the project. Social and
environmental baselines will be included in the
safeguards instruments, which will to provide a
comprehensive and in-depth understanding of the
socio-economic structure, environmental and
ecological conditions of the project area. Considering
similar projects that have been prepared in the past in
China, there is adequate experience and models
available for the drafting of the ESMF. Previous
similar projects will provide guidance on how the
ESMF should be structured and what it should
include.
Specific to the project, the ESMF will include
procedures for subproject screening, environmental
document preparation, public participation, review
and approval. It will also include a PMO capacity
building plan, a generic Environmental Management
Plan (EMP), a generic Pest Management Plan (PMP)
and Ethnic Minority Development Plan (EMDP).
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          The project activities are small and dispersed in the
project area. The project implementation is not
anticipated to result in significant conversion or
degradation of natural habitats. In view of the nature


﻿of the project activities and the ecological settings of
the project area, it is prudent to trigger the policy,
because the improved agriculture practices and
livelihoods will lessen pressure on natural habitats in
the karst area, and an equal possibility that unless
well screened the project could lead to negative
implications for natural habitats. Some of the project
activities such as rural infrastructure may have
limited impacts on natural habitats if not well
planned or managed.
The project ESMF screening criteria will include
conditions that exclude any activities located within
ecologically sensitive area and critical natural
habitats such as nature reserves.The ESMF and
generic EMP will include procedures and measures
to avoid or mitigate impacts on natural habitats in the
project area.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           The project will not finance activities that will affect
forest, forest health and forest-dependent
communities.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes          While the project does not finance directly pesticides
and agrochemicals, increased level of agricultural
production activities may led for farmers to use
pesticides using their own funds. Hence, the policy is
triggered. A generic Pest Management Plan (PMP)
needs to be prepared as part of the ESMF. The PMP
will address farming and livelihood characteristics of
the different communities and ethnic groups within
the project area and also provide guidance in a
format which is accessible to all groups.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          There are no known important cultural resources in
OP/BP 4.11                                 the irrigated perimeters which could be affected by
the project. However, the occurrence of and
proximity of project investments to cultural,
historical, religious sites, sacred sites etc. will be
identified during EA process to confirm whether
OP4.11 is applicable or not. The assessment will be
linked to the assessment on ethnic minority groups.
The project ESMF and generic EMP will inlcude
procedures and measures to avoid mitigate impacts
on physical cultural resources in the project area.
Chance-find procedures will be included in the EMP
as well.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes          More than 90% of the population in the proposed
4.10


﻿project counties is from ethnic minorities, mostly
from the generally well-integrated Zhuang ethnic
group. This proportion is up to 99% in some project
townships. Three project counties are Yao
autonomous counties. The World Bank's safeguard
policy on ethnic minorities (Indigenous Peoples OP/
BP4. 10) is therefore triggered. Since the
overwhelming majority of project beneficiaries are
Ethnic Minorities covered by the Policy a separate
EMDP is not required and the borrower will include
all elements of the EMDP in the overall project
design and document this in the annex of the PAD. A
social assessment will be prepared to determine the
project potential benefits and impacts.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         No involuntary resettlement is foreseen and only
BP 4.12                                   very small-scale land acquisition might be required
under the project for small civil works. In order to
ensure that any impacts related to land acquisition
are minimized and fully compensated, the World
Bank's involuntary resettlement/land acquisition
safeguard policy (Involuntary Resettlement OP/
BP4.12) will be triggered. In case there might be any
involuntary taking of the land during project
implementation, a Land Acquisition and
Resettlement Policy Framework (LARF) will be
prepared which will provide guidance to the
preparation of site specific RAPs during
implementation, if necessary. The social assessment
consultant will produce the LARF to guide
implementation of OP/BP4.12. The format of these
documents will be confirmed after the World Bank's
safeguard review meeting for the project.
o       Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The project doesn't involve investments in types of
dams or draw water from reservoirs as defined in
OP/BP 4.37. As such, the policy is not triggered.
Projects on International    No           The project does not operate in international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project is not located in disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 16-May-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Launching in May 2016, and completing in June 2016 for the safeguard-related studies.
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paavo Eliste
Approved By:
O
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                    Date: 07-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)               Date: 16-Jul-2015
Manager:


