INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14718
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Uganda                     Project ID:   P133305
Project Name:    Uganda Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project (GERP) (P133305)
Task Team        Zayra Luz Gabriela Romo Mercado,Mbuso Gwafila
Leader(s):
Estimated        14-Dec-2015                Estimated      17-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE01                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (100%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     115.00             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               15.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     100.00
Total                                                           115.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase transmission capacity of Uganda
interconnected system.
C. Project Description
The proposed Grid Expansion and Reinforcement Project (GERP) will finance a strategic section of
Uganda Grid Investment Plan, focusing on the priority to extend the national transmission system
and to interconnect three isolated systems in Lira, Gulu, Nebbi and Arua, and will provide financing


﻿for rehabilitation of the existing transmission infrastructure to maintain is current performance.
The project will allow further expansion and strengthen the reliability of power supply in the
interconnected system. The project will support the most common economic activities in the areas of
O
agribusiness and small and medium enterprises, as well as to create the conditions for expanding
electricity services to new households. At the same time, the project will serve as a basis for
interconnecting the Uganda national power system to Democratic Republic of Congo.
The project's main components, to be discussed with the government, are the following:
Component 1. Construction of the transmission line. (Estimated cost $85 million)
The objective of this component is to increase transmission capacity of the system and to
interconnect isolated systems of Lira, Gulu, Nebbi and Arua to the national transmission system
through the construction of a 132kV transmission line with an approximate length of 350 km. The
project will also finance the extension of the existing Lira substation, and four new substations of
132/33kV at Gulu, Olwiyo, Nebbi and Arua. The line will enable the interconnection of future
renewable based power plants that are planned in the West Nile area to the integrated power system
and will facilitate the full utilization of existing generation plants in the isolated systems. Based on a
benchmarking analysis, the estimated cost is around $85 million, and this will be confirmed based on
the feasibility study that is currently under preparation (See Annex 2).
Component 2. Rehabilitation of existing transmission infrastructure. (Estimated cost $10 million)
The objective of this component is to rehabilitate and upgrade some of the key substations. It will
also provide automation, control and monitoring equipment required to enhance the controllability,
monitoring and operational flexibility of the transmission network. This component is being
complemented by other sources of funding currently under implementation.
Component 3. Technical assistance. (Estimated cost $5 million)
This component aims at supporting project implementation and review of the financial situation of
UETCL. Upon review of UETCL's requirements for technical assistance, this component will
a       support the implementing agency through consultancy contracts related to: (i) engineering/safeguard
supervision and monitoring consultant for implementation support for the proposed transmission line,
and (ii) review of the financial situation of the power sector through the UETCL. For the latter
activity, it is proposed to hire a Financial Advisor to perform a thorough financial analysis of the
UETCL. The Adviser will assess the company's ability to undertake its capital investment program,
the availability to undertake Power Purchase Agreement (PPA) commitments, and will develop a
financing plan intended to optimize the company's resources and financing options.
Project readiness.
Technical aspects. A feasibility study, financed under a Bank project ESDP, is being carried out in
order to define the technical specifications, cost estimates of the project, the synchronization
requirements with the existing grid, the preliminary line routing, and bidding documents.
Safeguards studies: A consultant has already been hired by UETCL under the ESDP project to carry
out the environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) and the resettlement action plan (RAP).


﻿These studies will identify potential environmental and social impacts of the project and devise
mitigation and monitoring measures and have commenced with the production and review of the
inception and scoping reports.
O
)       Based on field reconnaissance survey findings by the safeguards specialists, it was recommended that
the project be categorized as EA Category "B" given the likely low impact of the project on the
natural environment and low density settlement patterns within project route. Even though the
transmission line will in a limited manner traverse parts of swamps/wetlands, forests, river Nile and
Murchison Falls National Park, no major ecosystems and protected/conservation areas will be
adversely affected by the proposed T-line; the impacts are localized, reversible and easily mitigated.
The impact of the T-Line on sections of Murchison Falls National Park which overlap to the
northern-side of the road between Anaka - Karuma road Junction and River Nile crossing in
Pakwach, may be considered minor for reasons advanced below. The T-Line section from Anaka -
Karuma road junction going onwards to Pakwach - Nebbi has been restricted to the Northern side of
the road, with the assumption that the MFNP boundary stopped at the road. However, using the ibat-
ifc tool (Integrated Biodiversity Assessment Tool), some small strip of the park overlaps to the
northern side of the road. The section of the T-Line towards river Nile in which some wildlife
animals (elepha nts, hippos, antelopes, bush-pigs, etc.) were seen watering and grazing, is outside the
boundaries of MFNP. From the on ground observations and practical point of view, the northern side
of the road is inhabited by the locals (appearing to be community owned-land/ encroached).
Therefore likely impact of the T-Line on the small strip of MFNP may be considered minor.
However, UETCL has been asked to consult Uganda Wildlife Authority during the ESIA process to
ascertain and assess the likely impact, if any, of the proposed T-Line on the fringes of MFNP. The
line alignment has also avoided physical displacement of PAPs as much as possible. In conclusion,
the likely environmental and social aspects identified above are localized and can be readily
mitigated.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua 132 kV transmission line will transmit power from the existing
Lira substation via the proposed new 132/33kV substations in Gulu, Olwiyo and Nebbi and Arua.
The transmission line will cover a total distance of about 350km and is expected to improve power
supply in the project area which covers six districts namely; Lira, Oyam, Kole, Gulu, Nebbi and
Arua. In order to meet the set objectives, the proposed project activities will include the following:
Construction of a transmission line (approximately 350km) from Lira substation to the proposed new
substations in Gulu, Nebbi, Olwiyo and Arua respectively; Construction of four new substations in
Gulu, Olwiyo, Nebbi and Arua respectively and installation of accessories; expansion of Lira sub-
station; acquisition and clearing of right of way for the line; Acquisition of land for the construction
of access roads; and Construction of workers camps and storages facilities as necessary. The above
highlighted project aspects will most likely have adverse environmental and social impacts that need
to be further assessed and appropriate mitigation measures proposed. In addition, the current location
of the Lira substation does not have sufficient space for extension given this is surrounded by
households and community centers. This has implications on additional land acquisition and requires
innovative considerations in order to avoid a major displacement and relocation of households
already living in that area. The project may also traverse environmentally sensitive areas such as
wetlands, forests, national/game parks, and in addition affect an area broader than the sites subject to
physical works in terms of land acquisition and its likely impacts that include displacement and loss
of livelihoods. Further this project area ocation has significant variations in land tenure systems
amidst post conflict environment that will require detailed analysis.


﻿From the field reconnaissance survey undertaken by the project Safeguards Specialists, the following
summary observations is deemed useful information:
 *    Even though the transmission line will in a limited manner traverse parts of swamps/
O
U       wetlands,forests, river Nile and Murchison Falls National Park, no major ecosystems and protected/
conservation areas would be adversely affected by the proposed T-line. There are only four areas on
which minor impacts are expected but they could be mitigated at this early stage of the project
preparation. These include: i) Anaka - Karuma section with fringes of Murchison Falls National
Park, ii) Koch Awing Air-field, that will require clearance from Civil Aviation Authority, iii) Short
sections of about 6 Forest Reserves that will require conditional clearance by National Forest
Authority; and Crested Crane Birds at River Nile crossing that will require appropriate T-Line
alignment/design to mitigate bird-collision impact.
*      The project will involve establishment of new substations in Gulu, Olwiyo, Nebbi and Arua
towns, and the extension of the existing substation in Lira. The proposed sites for the new substations
were found to be open spaces without any structures and/or nearby settlements. The Lira substation
will be the only site requiring both land acquisition and possibly physical relocation of some people/
settlements in the neighborhood. At the other sites, the project may require only land acquisition
without affecting/displacing any settlements. The T-line alignment has therefore avoided physical
displacement of PAPs as much as possible. The entire right of way is 350km long for 30 meters
wide. However, the Uganda Electricity Transmission Company Limited (UETCL) will acquire 5
meters permanently within the centerline of the transmission line for the tower footprint and 12.5
meters easement corridor on either side of the T-line. This therefore leads to a reduction on the land
to be permanently acquired and budget for compensation.
In conclusion, the likely environmental and social aspects identified above are localized and can be
readily mitigated. Therefore, Environmental Assessment Category "B" is suggested for this project.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
It is worth noting that through implementation of Electricity Sector Development Project (ESDP),
UETCL has had substantial safeguards capacity developed over time. The ESDP project has a
safeguards specialist, UETCL has an established Environment section under the projects
implementation department. The section has six Environmental personnel and several Sociologists on
short and long term employment handling RAP implementation of different projects other social
issues. This will be assessed as part of the ESIA study. However, the implementation and supervision
of the safeguards by UETCL has also had some weaknesses that must be reviewed and addressed to
bridge the gaps that have been identified during the implementation of ESDP. Going forward, the
Bank will undertake a capacity assessment for both environmental and social safeguards of Uganda
Electricity Transmission (UETCL) to undertake implementation of the proposed project.
In addition, UETCL's collaborative function with other relevant Government Agencies shall be
assessed and recommendations made to improve coordination as appropriate, especially with the
National Environment Management Authority, the Chief Government Valuer's Office in the Ministry
of Lands Housing and Urban Development, National Forestry Authority, Uganda Wildlife Authority
and the respective District Local Governments of Lira, Gulu, Oyam, Kole, Nebbi and Arua.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSURR)
Herbert Oule (GENDR)


﻿Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Triggered because the project will likely have some
OP/BP 4.01                               environmental and social impacts. Even though the
transmission line will in a limited manner traverse
parts of swamps/wetlands, forests, river Nile and
Murchison Falls National Park, no major ecosystems
and protected/conservation areas would be adversely
affected by the proposed T-line. There are only four
areas on which minor impacts are expected but they
could be mitigated at this early stage of the project
preparation. These include: i) Anaka - Karuma
section with fringes of Murchison Falls National
Park, ii) Koch Awing Air-field, that will require
clearance from Civil Aviation Authority, iii) Short
sections of about 6 Forest Reserves that will require
conditional clearance by National Forest Authority;
and Crested Crane Birds at River Nile crossing that
will require appropriate T-Line alignment/design to
mitigate bird-collision impact. It may also have
environmental, health and safety impacts on the
surrounding communities and the general public
during construction and operation. In conclusion, the
likely environmental and social aspects identified
above are localized and can be readily mitigated.
Therefore, Environmental Assessment Category "B"
is suggested for this project. The Client will prepare
an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment
report, which will include analysis of alternatives and
the specific and broader environmental and social
impacts associated with construction of new T-Lines,
Substations as well as access roads and other
supporting facilities and expansion of existing
substations. Environmental and Social Management
Plans (ESMPs) for each sub-component, notably the
T-Line, Sub-stations shall be prepared as part of the
ESIA. The ESIA shall be prepared in a consultative
manner and disclosed both in-country and at
infoshop before Project Appraisal. Before
commencement of the Construction activities, the
Contractor shall be required to develop a
Contractor's ESMP to guide actual implementation
of the required mitigation measures and this shall
incorporate conditions of approval granted by the


﻿Environment Agency-NEMA and any other relevant
Regulatory Agency.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           This Policy is triggered because the project is most
likely to pass through and affect natural habitats such
as wetlands, forests, game parks/reserves, and rivers.
Assessment of the likely impacts on the various
natural habitats shall be included in the ESIA and
ESMPs of the Project.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes          This Policy is triggered because the project may pass
through and affect forest areas. Assessment of the
likely impacts on the various forests shall be
included in the ESIA and ESMPs of the Project.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           N/A. This is because the project does not envisage
procurement and/or use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes          Triggered because of the project associated civil and
OP/BP 4.11                                earth works that may encounter both known and
unknown PCRs. PCRs survey and assessment shall
be undertaken as part of the ESIA and a PCRs
Management Plan and Chance Finds Procedure shall
be prepared.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           The listed Project areas of Lira, Gulu, Oyam, Kole,
4.10                                      Nebbi and Arua are not inhabited by Indigenous
Peoples a as per OP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The proposed project will support development of a
BP 4.12                                   new T-Line and will involve acquisition of the
transmission corridor over a distance of 350km.
Similarly, the new substations and one that will have
an extension require land which may already be
occupied by people and their livelihoods' activities.
The need for land will likely lead to displacement of
people and disruption and loss of livelihoods. The
Client will prepare a Resettlement Action Plan in
consultation with the PAPs and responsible Lead
Agencies and disclose the report before project
appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The Project does not involve construction of dam
facilities nor relies on dams.
Projects on International    No           This is because the project will not involve
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     development of international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         There are no known areas under dispute in the
BP 7.60                                   project area.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 20-Nov-2015
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
ESIA and RAP studies were launched in November 2014 and willl be completed and disclosed by
November 20, 2015.
5   IV. APPROVALS
O
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Zayra Luz Gabriela Romo Mercado,Mbuso Gwafila
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:  Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)              Date: 04-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/    Name: Lucio Monari (PMGR)                   Date: 04-Nov-2015
Manager:


