INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR13721
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Nepal                      Project ID:   P125359
Project Name: Nepal: Community Action for Nutrition Project (Sunaula Hazar Din) (P125359)
Task Team       Manav Bhattarai
Leader(s):
Estimated       24-Apr-2012                Estimated     26-Jun-2012
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Health (29%), Other social services (29%), Sanitation (29%), Public
administration- Health (7%), Public administration- Other social services (6%)
Theme:          Child health (25%), Population and reproductive health (25%), Nutrition and
food security (25%), Rural services and infrastructure ( 25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
Emergencies)?
O
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      40.00            Total Bank Financing:    40.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     40.00
Total                                                           40.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The Development Objective for the proposed project is to enable Nepal to improve the nutritional
status of pregnant women and children under the age of 2.
Page 1 of 9


﻿Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The Development Objective for the proposed project is to enable Nepal to improve the nutritional
status of pregnant women and children under the age of 2.
0
3. Project Description
This Restructuring Paper proposes the following changes to the Sunaula Hazar Din - Community
Action for Nutrition Project (IDA Credit 5137-NP and IDA Grant H786-NP, P125359), under a
Level 1 restructuring: (i) revise the Project Development Objective (PDO); (ii) revise the Results
Framework; (iii) revise implementation arrangements; and (iv) revise disbursement estimates. These
proposed changes reflect agreements reached during the Mid-Term Review mission that took place
in February, 2015, as well as agreements reached during a series of meetings held following the
earthquake that struck Nepal on April 25, 2015. The rationale for the proposed restructuring is: (i) to
better reflect the intended project outcomes; (ii) to enable a more effective implementation of
Component 1 of the project through expedited fund release to communities and enhanced capacity of
coaches and supervisors to develop quality proposals; (iii) to enable more effective monitoring of the
project (under Component 2) through increased human resources both at the level of the Project
Management Team and at the level of the office of District Development Committee; and (iv) to
address emergency nutrition issues which have arisen from the devastating effects of the April 25th
earthquake and its aftershocks in critically affected districts (Dhading, Gorkha, Dolakha, Rasuwa,
Sindhupalchok, Kavre, Nuwakot, Ramechhap, Makwanpur, Sindhuli, Okhaldhunga and Lalitpur).
Component 1 (revised estimated US$22.36 million): Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives at the
ward level. This component supports the entire Rapid Results process in the original 15 project
districts. It starts at a Ward Citizen Forum where key nutrition challenges of the community are
discussed. Assisted by a coach at the ward level, the ward selects a nutrition relevant goal from a
menu of goals. A Rapid Results (RR) team is selected at the ward level that will set an appropriate
and realistic target for meeting the goal and pledge to achieve the goal within a 100-day period by
mobilizing the community and finding the best approach to achieving the target in their particular
context. The RR team prepares a Work Plan which will outline the needed inputs to achieve the goal.
Component 2 (estimated US$5.07 million): Project Management, Capacity Building, Monitoring and
Evaluation. This component provides support for the implementation of Component 1 by (i) building
the necessary capacity of staff involved at all levels of project implementation; (ii) providing
necessary inputs for effective project management; and (iii) ensuring monitoring and evaluation of
the Project, including the evaluation of the Rapid Results process as well as whether the expected
outcomes of the Rapid Results Initiatives were achieved. At the national level, support is provided by
a Project Management Team at the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development (MOFALD)
to ensure effective management of the project. At the regional level, support is provided to the Local
Governance and Community Development Program (LGCDP) cluster units responsible for districts
where the Project is implemented. At the district level, support is provided by the NFSSCs which is
responsible for reviewing RRNI work plans and coordinating the supply of necessary inputs for the
RRNIs. Similarly, NFSSCs at the level of VDCs received training and project management support
to ensure that they are able to review and process work plans and secure necessary supplies at the
village level. Support to NFSSCs at district and VDC levels goes beyond Project specific activities
and include support in coordinated planning and budgeting for nutrition relevant activities across
sectors to be incorporated in the district block grants.
Support for the Monitoring and Evaluation of the Project includes regular collection of data on the
Page 2 of 9


﻿implementation of the Rapid Results for Nutrition Initiatives, data on the behaviors and practices
which the RRNIs are expected to change, as well as data on the nutritional outcomes. The component
finances the costs of a mid-term evaluation focusing on the changes in attitudes and practices and an
end-of-Project impact evaluation focusing on outcomes. The component also includes a third-party
independent verification of results of the RRNIs.
Component 3 Earthquake Relief Component (estimated US$12.50 million)
This new component will address the emerging nutrition needs which have arisen in the critically
affected 12 districts (Dhading, Gorkha, Rasuwa, Sindhupalchowk, Kavre, Nuwakot, Dolakha,
Sindhuli, Makwanpur, Okhaldhunga, Ramechhap and Lalitpur) following the earthquake on April
25, 2015 and its aftershocks. Additional districts affected by the earthquake may also be identified at
a later stage during project implementation depending on the needs. The implementing agency
(MoFALD) will be supported by UNICEF Nepal, in providing emergency response in areas of
nutrition protection and water, sanitation and hygiene as UNICEF has the required technical
capacity, standard protocols and guidelines in place, and has an already established large local
networks for mobilizing and delivering rapid assistance in nutrition as well as water and sanitation
sector.
The objectives of this component are to protect the nutrition situation of children 6-59 months old
and avoid its potential deterioration due to the earthquake, aftershocks and the upcoming monsoon
rains; and to protect the nutrition situation of pregnant women and lactating mothers to avoid any
potential increase in the incidence of low birth weight and/or breastfeeding failure due to the
earthquake, aftershocks and the upcoming monsoon rains. This component will finance activities
aimed at preventing and treating acute malnutrition among children under five years and pregnant
and lactating women, including through: (i) the provision of therapeutic care and supplementary food
supplies and protection of breast feeding (ii) the provision of safe water and of appropriate sanitation
and hygiene kits, including promotion activities for their use and (iii) the provision of latrines.
o
Working side by side with the Ministry's team, UNICEF will take the technical lead to support the
delivery of essential evidence-based emergency nutrition interventions to protect the lives of
children, pregnant women and breastfeeding mothers. Six strategies will be used:
1.     Protect, promote, and support breastfeeding. Support mothers to breastfeed their children
0-23 months old to ensure that children grow healthy and don't fall sick with diarrhea or pneumonia.
Female Community Health Workers (FCHVs), volunteers and mobilizers will be trained to deliver
information, counseling and support services on breastfeeding, monitor and report unsolicited
distribution of breastmilk substitutes, assess the breastfeeding situation, orient mothers and
caregivers on breastfeeding during emergencies, and establish mother support group for
breastfeeding and lactation management. This will be delivered through FCHWs, counselors, and
volunteers in each of the affected areas together in coordination with District Public Health offices
and local community level institutions.
2.     Promote and support improved complementary feeding. Support families to feed their
children 6-23 months old nutritious foods so that children develop to their full potential and don't
become malnourished. FCHVs, volunteers and mobilizers will be trained to deliver information,
counseling and support services on infant and young child feeding, promote safe, age-appropriate
and acceptable complementary foods for children, assess the IYCF situation, orient mothers and
Page 3 of 9


﻿caregivers on IYCF during emergencies, and establish mothers support groups to promote improved
complementary foods and feeding, hygiene and sanitation practices in the post-earthquake/post/
monsoon environment (a critical time). UNICEF sill support the use of multiple micronutrient
powders (MNPs) to improve the quality of complementary foods and prevent deficiencies in
O
essential nutrients in infants and young children 6-23 months old. MNPs will be delivered through
community health workers, counselors, volunteers in each of the affected areas together with the
FCHVs in coordination with District Public Health offices, and local community level institutions.
3.     Support therapeutic feeding and care: Provide therapeutic feeding and care to children with
severe acute malnutrition (SAM) to protect their lives and bring them back to healthy growth and
development. Through community mobilization, situation assessment and active case finding using
mid-upper-arm circumference (MUAC) tapes, all children 6-59 in the 12 affected districts will be
screened for SAM. Out-patient Therapeutic Programs (OTP) will be established at the level of
VDCs, health facilities, and health centers. Stabilization Centers (SCs) will be established at the
district or the peripheral hospitals. The capacity of staffs/volunteers and health workers to manage
SAM for both inpatients and outpatients will be built. Children identified as SAM with medical
complications will be referred to the SCs whereas those without medical complications will be treate
d at the OTP as per standard protocol.
4.     Support supplementary feeding: Provide supplementary foods to a) children with moderate
acute malnutrition (MAM) so that children do not become severely malnourished and b) pregnant
women during the last trimester of gestation to reduce the risk of low birth weight and wasting/
stunting in infancy and early childhood. Children with Moderate Acute Malnutrition (MAM) will be
referred for supplementary feeding. Availability and adherence to protocols will be ensured and the
capacity of staffs/volunteers and health workers on management of MAM will be strengthened. All
pregnant women i will be provided supplementary food to reduce the risk of low birth weight.
Prepositioning of supplementary nutrition supplies will be ensured through efficient nutrition supply
chain management up to the end user. The existing public health institutions and the out-reach
services will be utilized in coordination with district public health office.
o
5.     Supplement children and women with micronutrients: Provide vitamin A and multiple
micronutrient powders to children 6-59 months old to strengthen children's immune system and
prevent them from micronutrient deficiency; and provide iron and folic acid supplements to pregnant
a        women and breastfeeding mothers to ensure that women have healthy pregnancies and healthy
children. All children 6-59 months in the affected districts will be provided vitamin A supplements
and deworming prophylaxis. In addition, all children 6-59 months will receive multiple
micronutrients powders for improving the nutrition quality of their diets. All pregnant women and
breastfeeding mothers will receive supplements of iron and folic acid. All these micronutrient
programs will be undertaken through regular public health mechanisms with additional support from
community mobilizers, volunteers and local community institutions.
6.     Improve hygiene and sanitation practices: Support construction of community latrines with
bathing space as well as latrines in the health institutions, and providing hygiene and sanitation kits
together with essential cookery utensils particularly targeting the households with pregnant or
nursing mothers and children 0-24 months. Considering the upcoming monsoon, and as a part of the
prevention of epidemic outbreaks of the communicable diseases, WASH responses will be
simultaneously implemented. For prevention of open defecation, community latrines together with
bathing space will be constructed so that each of these can be used by 15 families. Similarly, the
community water supply schemes, approximately for 15 families, will be periodically chlorinated for
Page 4 of 9


﻿prevention and control of water bome diseases and epidemic. The health cluster (of which UNICEF
is one of the lead members) has provided tents to all the affected health facilities and through this
project, support will be provided to construct the WASH facility in the health institutions. Hygiene
kits will be supported to each 1000 days household, together with some basic utensils for cooking
O
U         and eating.
UNICEF will be financed through an output based contract ("Technical Assistance and Related
Supplies Agreement") with MOFALD linked to delivery of assistance to the end beneficiaries.
UNICEF is responsible for supplying all required inputs for the delivery of the targeted outputs
agreed with MOFALD and the Bank in the contract's detailed terms of references.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Rapid Results Initiatives of Component 1 of the Project will continue to be supported in 15 districts,
selected on the basis of: (a) stunting levels; (b) population size; (c) poverty levels; and (d) the
absence of interventions by other partners that focus on social mobilization. The 15 project districts
are in the central Terai: Parsa, Bara, Rautahat, Sarlahi, Mahottari, and Dhanusa; in the Central Hills:
Dhading, Nuwakot, Makwanpur, Sindhuli and Ramechhap; in the Eastern Terai: Siraha, Saptari, and
Sunsari; in the Eastern Hills: Udayapur. The interventions in "Earthquake Relief Component" will be
implemented in in the critically affected districts which include Dhading, Gorkha, Rasuwa,
Sindhupalchowk, Kavre, Nuwakot, Dolakha, Sindhuli, Makwanpur, Okhaldhunga, Ramechhap and
Lalitpur.
These districts, selected on the basis of poverty, health indicator and due to earthquake, are spread
throughout the country and do not possess any physical characteristics that would be particularly
relevant for safeguard analysis. Similarly, no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts are
expected. Therefore, the project is expected to be Category B.
The main environmental and social safeguards policies to be triggered under this project are: OP/BP
4.01 on Environmental Assessment and OP/ BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples to ensure that any
adverse effects of the project are avoided or minimized, and that the indigenous people receive
culturally appropriate social and economic benefits.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Annu Rajbhandari (GENDR)
Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)
Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
Jun Zeng (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
No
Page 5 of 9


﻿Physical Cultural
lbdigurams(lWlW.(DP/   Yes
BP 4.10
O
U         Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
O
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Before restructuring, this project was classified as Category B because it was likely to have
minimal or no adverse environmental impacts. There were occasions when the RR team decided to
engage in small-scale civil works such as construction or rehabilitation of latrines in households
and schools, installing portable water tanks in school and construction of chicken coops
andconstruction of household improved stovesHowever, these were of very small scale, localized,
and none were expected to have irreversible impacts. To prevent, minimize, mitigate and improve
environmental performance, 'Environmental and Social Risk Screening and Management
Guidelines' was prepared for each of the sub-projects including start-up fisheries and small scale
drinking water supply envisaged under the project which included parameters for environmental
assessment. The training manual for coaches also include all these safeguard concerns.
0
During supervision missions in the field, the team observed that toilets in schools and households
and community chicken coops were constructed with due consideration for safeguard aspects, and
there was no purchase of additional lands. The overall safeguards assessment until now has been
rated as moderately satisfactory.
The addition of a new "Earthquake Relief Component" in the restructured project does not trigger
any additional new policies. The construction of latrines and rehabilitation of small scale drinking
water supply envisioned in this new project component are already subject to the existing ESMF
and ESRSM guidelines. Health and Hygiene aspects of these minor civil works are well accounted
for in the current project. The minor civil works will be limited to individual households and
communities (eg schools, health facilities) but will not be carried out in physical and cultural
heritage sites.
The project triggers OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous People. The whole project including the
restructured component, has been designed to benefit vulnerable groups, including Indigenous
People. The target groups for the restructured component are children under 5 years and pregnant
and lactating women in the earthquake affected districts where IPs are also present. The existing
ESMF and ESRSM guidelines developed for the project includes measures for addressing these
vulnerable groups and women and this will help to mitigate any adverse effects of the project and
Page 6 of 9


﻿enhance project benefits which are culturally appropriate and socially and economically beneficial
to these groups.
Considering the same nature of activities envisioned in the restructured component, and that the
O
existing ESMF and ESRSM guidelines well account for safeguard issues, an update of these
documents is not necessary.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no expected indirect and/or long-term impacts of the project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Given the nature of this project, only small scale infrastructure works, if any, are being
considered. Further, the project addresses some key equity issues directly in the project
components, implementation arrangements and results framework. Thus, no overall project level
alternatives were considered.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To ensure that any adverse social and environmental impacts are avoided or minimized, an
'Environmental and Social Management Framework' has been prepared for the project which
includes measures to mitigate the risks and impacts of the project, and also incorporates activities
and processes for public consultation and participation, monitoring mechanisms, grievance
redress, and measures to enhance project benefits to communities, including vulnerable groups,
through the design and implementation of sub-project activities.
For each of the 11 possible sub-projects envisaged under the project, 'Environmental and Social
Risk Screening and Management Guidelines' are also prepared which include parameters for
environmental assessment and vulnerable communities (including IPs), and measures to mitigate
the environmental and social risks and impacts of the sub-project activities.
The implementing agency, the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development (MoFALD) has
extensive experience in implementing Bank-financed projects. Further, at the regional level, the
Local Governance and Community Development Program (LGCDP) cluster unit that is
responsible for districts where the project will be implemented, has been planning and
implementing the Asian Development Bank's safeguard policies, which are closely aligned with
those of the World Bank. However, depending on the expertise available within the Project
Management Team at MoFALD set up for this project, and the coaches and RR teams at the local
levels that will be responsible for incorporating safeguards measures in the work plans for the sub-
projects, orientation trainings might be required for the team on a regular basis.
To implement the "Earthquake Relief Component", MoFALD will work with UNICEF Nepal,
which is best placed to provide emergency response in the areas of nutrition protection and water,
sanitation and hygiene as they have the required technical capacity, standard protocols and
guidelines in place, and a large network of partners working in the nutrition and water and
sanitation sectors. MoFALD will update the Operations Manual for the project which will
incorporate measures to ensure UNICEF will adhere to Environment and Social Safeguards to
avoid or minimize any adverse effects to the environment and that the indigenous people receive
culturally appropriate social and economic benefits. UNICEF Nepal has always mainstreamed
Page 7 of 9


﻿environment sustainability and equity in their health, Nutrition and WASH projects and ensures
every child and everywhere is included. In this component too, MoFALD will incorporate in the
terms of reference of the UNICEF Agreement the obligation to comply with the safeguard
instrument established for the project and will monitor that the existing guidelines are followed.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
The 'Environmental and Social Management Framework' developed for the project and the
'Environmental and Social Risk Screening and Management Guidelines' for the sub-projects will
be shared by the Ministry of Federal Affairs and Local Development with all concerned
institutions, including UNICEF, government agencies, and civil society organizations at the
national, regional and local levels. Further, at the local level, consultations will be held at the
Ward Citizen Forum, and the Rapid Results (RR) team selected at the ward level will incorporate
relevant elements/aspects from the framework and the guidelines while setting up targets and
preparing a work plan for attaining the nutritional outcomes, mobilizing the community, and
monitoring and evaluating results.
The 'Environmental and Social Management Framework' and the 'Environmental and Social Risk
Screening and Management Guidelines' were uploaded prior to negotiations. The framework and
the guidelines were disclosed in Nepali and English by MoFALD, and in English at the World
Bank's InfoShop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Apr-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Apr-2012
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal                                                    19-Apr-2012
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-Apr-2012
Date of submission to InfoShop                           19-Apr-2012
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal                                                    19-Apr-2012
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Page 8 of 9


﻿Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [ X]  NA[]
report?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA[    ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[    NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Manav Bhattarai
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)           Date: 12-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Albertus Voetberg (PMGR)           Date: 12-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


