INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR16600
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Feb-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Philippines               Project ID:  P106885
Project Name: Integrated POPs Management (P106885)
Task Team       Tijen Arin
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Dec-2009               Estimated    20-May-2010
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENO2                      Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
GEF Focal.
AEFca:         Persistent Organic Pollutants
Area:
Sector:         Solid waste management (50%), Crops (30%), Public administration- Water,
sanitation and flood protection (15%), Public administratio n- Health (5%)
Theme:          Pollution management and environmental health (60%), Environmental policies
and institutions (20%), Other urban development (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                 No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     24.67            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                      16.03
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                              8.64
Total                                                         24.67
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Global Environmental Objective(s)
Page 1 of 11


﻿The project development objective (PDO) is to assist the Philippines in minimizing the risk of human
and environmental exposure toPOPs by strengthening the regulatory and monitoring framework and
improving capacity for and providing demonstrations of, safemanagement of PCBs, reduction of
releases of unintentionally produced POPs, and reduction of exposure to POPs in contaminatedsites.
Proposed New GEO (from Restructuring Paper)
To strengthen the regulatory and management capacity of DENR and selected local government units
and to demonstrate environmentally sound management of persistent organic pollutants.
3. Project Description
The Project consists of the following five components:
Component 1: Strengthening Regulatory Framework and Capacity Building for POPs Monitoring
(US$0.71 million; GEF US$0.50 million; co-financing US$0.21 million). The objective of this
component is to strengthen the regulatory and monitoring capacity for phasing out the use of and
reducing exposure to and releases of persistent organic pollutants (POPs). The component will: (i)
assist DENR in developing and updating supporting policies and regulations for POPs management;
and (ii) undertake long term planning for residual POPs management issues.
Component 2: Reduction of Releases of Unintentionally Produced Persistent Organic Pollutants
(US$9.60 million; GEF US$3.07 million; co-financing US$6.53 million). The objective of this
component is to better understand and demonstrate the reduction of the releases of dioxin and furan
emissions. The component will: (i) through DENR assist local governments to demonstrate the
reduction of dioxin and furan emissions from municipal solid waste burning
at the household and in disposal sites; and (iii) assist DOST in disseminating and providing national
training to UPOPs generators on guidelines on Best Available Technology and Best Environmental
Practices for reducing                      UPOPs releases.
Component 3: Management of Polychlorinated Biphenyls (PCBs)(US$9.69 million; GEF US$2.47
million; co-financing US$7.12 million). This component will assist the country to in the process of
phasing out PCB use and to minimize the risk of human and environmental exposure to PCBs by
strengthening oversight and by improving the on-site management practices by PCB owners in all
sectors that use them. It will through training and technical assistance assist: (i) DENR in awareness
raising and completing testing, registration and developing a database and inventory of PCB sources;
and (ii) PCB owners in implementing on-site PCB management; (iii) DENR in monitoring and
enforcement.
Component 4: Identification and Remediation of POPs Contaminated Sites (US$2.95 million; GEF
US$1.70 million; co-financing US$1.25 million). The objective of th is component is to strengthen
the enabling capacity of the country to reduce risks posed by POPs contamination of the environment
by identifying contaminated sites; establishing a strategic framework, technical guidelines, and
professional capacity to help address them; and building public knowledge and awareness. The
component will assist (i) DENR in undertaking an inventory of contaminated sites and through a
hazard ranking system identifying those that pose a high risk to human health and the environment;
(ii) DENR in developing a national strategy for contaminated site remediation; (ii) landowners in
demonstrating site remediation and site control practices; (iii) DENR in developing guidelines and
standards for site remediation and control; and (iv) DENR to improve its capacity for enforcement
and to provide training and improve public awareness of contaminated site management. The
remediation demonstrations will be funded by DENR.
Page 2 of 11


﻿Component 5: Project Management (US$1.81 million; GEF US$0.90 million; co-financing US
$0.91 million). This component will finance consultants and incremental operating costs of the
Project Management Office (PMO) in DENR-EMB for its day-to-day project management activities,
O
Q)       including project management and coordination; information, education, and communication;
monitoring and evaluation; and financial management and procurement.
Project Status
Project implementation began with one year effectiveness delay and has been slow. The
disbursement rate is 55% which is low given that less than 1.5 is remaining before project closing.
The Project's progress towards PDO achievement is currently rated unsatisfactory, since only one of
the seven PDO indicators have registered any changes from the baseline. However, this is expected
to change by early FY 2017 when Component 2 dump site closure works are expected to be
underway in at least one beneficiary city. The Bank task team has been providing day-to-day
technical support to all three LGUs for the completion for their technical and safeguards documents.
The recent positive experience with the clearance by the Bank's Regional Safeguards Secretariat of
Legazpi's safeguards documents provided a significant motivation for the teams involved.
Furthermore, the national strategy on management of POPs contaminated sites under Component 4
has been completed. The strategy's adoption will satisfy another PDO indicator. Similarly, progress is
being made in PCB management under Component 3. Several training activities are also underway.
Finally, the recent signing of a contract for a contaminated site remediation demonstration constitutes
a significant step in project implementation. Compliance with applicable environment and social
safeguards policies is satisfactory.
Status by Component:
Component 1. To date, under this component a study of Philippine laws and jurisprudence related to
POPs management has been completed and the issuance of 3 new legal instruments. Under this
component, the project has suffered significant slippage relative to the Project Implementation Plan
as several activities were canceled due to difficulties in consultant selection, dealing with high cost of
consulting firms to secure their services, and to problems having to do with a tax issue.
o        Component 2. The national dioxin and furan inventory was updated with the completion of the
conduct of a National Inventory of Dioxins and Furans in 2014. DENR has reached a critical
decision to limit the number of beneficiary local government units (LGUs) from the original target of
six to three and focus on the three LGUs that have met all selection criteria and have made progress
in designing project investments and preparing associated safeguards documents. The project has
trained more than 200 DENR and LGU staff coming from the 6 partner LGUs and other stakeholders
in the application of Best Available Techniques and Best Environmental Practices to reduce dioxins
and furans emitted from solid wastes dumps and from industrial/agricultural sources. The component
has experienced several set-backs attributed to the slow progress of activities due to LGU and
consultant coordination on completing the UPOPs Action Plans, changes in the approaches and
design criteria at the middle of the process, and several stages of approval process. Waste dump
closure will affect waste pickers. The project is following strict procedures to mitigate such impact as
discussed under "Assessment and Status of Safeguards Implementation" below.
Component 3: The environmental sound management of Polychlorinated Biphenyl (PCB) in so far as
the inventory of PCB owners in the country has now reached the 100 percent target. It is expected
Page 3 of 11


﻿that among the 800 PCB owners, inventories 300 of them would submit PCB Management Plans
during the first and second quarters of 2016. Some 572 PCB owners were trained in environmentally
sound management of PCBs and some 45 DENR staff members were trained in enforcing regulatory
requirements. With the issuance of an updated regulatory instrument in a form of a memorandum
O
circular (MC) requiring PCB owners to prepare and implement PCB management plans, submission
of PCB management plans is expected to accelerate. The Technical Guidelines on PCB Management
Plans was issued May 29, 2015. With this, PCB owners have an incentive to prepare the required
management plans with the technical support of consultants already hired by the project. The PCB
Management Plans will follow the format of an EMP under OP 4.01. The PCB management plans
include measures to ensure proper identification and labeling; safe handling and storage; spill
prevention, mitigation, and cleanup; emergency and contingency plans in case of accidents; and
environmental procedures for closing storage facilities. The DENR has also issued an MC on
guidelines for laboratory accreditation for PCB analysis, which was prepared with project support.
Component 4: To date, a database of potentially contaminated sites has been produced and the
project has submitted to the DENR a national strategy for contaminated sites. The DENR within the
second quarter of 2016 would issue an order adopting said national strategy. The component has also
completed the drafting of 2 technical guidelines, on site characterization and on site remediation,
both were presented to the DENR central and EMB regional officers and subjected to stakeholders
consultations. Demonstration of site remediation and site control have been delayed due to
procurement issues. However, a contract for the remediation demonstration activity was signed in
early January, 2016 and a contract for the site control demonstration will be signed by the end of
January. With this development both demonstration projects will be implemented first or second
quarter of 2016. As far as training of DENR staff and other relevant agencies on the draft guidelines
on site characterization and site remediation is concerned, 193 participants have attended said
training while 127 from private stakeholders such as owners of contaminated sites, consulting firms
and related industry.
Assessment and Status of Safeguards Implementation.
The requirements of the Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) have been
incorporated into the operations manual. There has been adequate supervision of the project from the
Bank safeguards specialists. Under Component 2, the social risk is that dump site closures under
Component 2 may cause waste pickers to lose their livelihoods. Specifically:
In Butuan, the livelihoods of 9 waste pickers will be affected by the dumpsite closure, while up to 18
will need to be resettled. The LGU with support from the PMU Social Development Specialist is
currently finalizing a Social Development Plan (SDP) and an Abbreviated Resettlement Action Plan
(ARAP). In parallel, an Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) is being prepared by
the LGU. The Bank will not give no objection to any dump site closure activities until the SDP and
the ESMP, and the implementation report of the ARAP are cleared by the Bank's Regional
Safeguards Secretariat (RSS).
In Cabanatuan, 161 waste pickers have been identified as being affected by the dump site closure. An
SDP is being prepared by the LGU with the support of the PMO Social Development Specialist. In
parallel, an ESMP is being prepared by the LGU. There are no resettlement issues. The World Bank
will not provide no objection to any dump site closure related activities until the SDP is cleared by
the RSS.
In Legazpi, an SDP detailing the alternative livelihoods being provided to 71 affected waste pickers
Page 4 of 11


﻿and an ESMP detailing environmental impacts and management actions associated with the closure
of the dump site have been cleared by the RSS. Closure works are expected to begin imminently. The
PMU and the Bank team are closely monitoring the implementation of the SDP and ESMP.
O
Under Component 3, DENR EMB will review the draft PCB Management Plans as they are
submitted for approval and their their implementation. The Bank team will also review a sample as
part of its supervision activities. For the DENR-funded Component 4 site remediation demonstration
at the PAF Facility, DENR made compliance with World Bank safeguards requirements, namely
preparation of an environmental assessment a precondition for the start of works by the company.
The task team will supervise this activity as well.
Proposed changes under the Restructuring
The proposed changes include:
1) Change to PDO - the PDO would be simplified to remove confusing references to project impacts
and project activities. The amendment of the PDO focuses exclusively on wording to align it better
with the plausible outcomes of the project.
2) Change to Results Framework - Intermediate Results Indicators would be amended to reflect
changes in the project activities.
3) Amendments to Project Activities and corresponding amendment to Grant Agreement including
(i) Cancellation of the Component 1 technical assistance activity "Development of the National
Health Monitoring Program for POPS" under Component 1, since no suitable consultant could be
identified despite several rounds of selection processes .
(ii) Expansion of DENR laboratory staff training to include air plume sampling for select Air Quality
Management Section staff.
o
(iii) Procurement of two additional collection vehicles for Legazpi City to improve waste collection
efficiency under Component 2 of the Project and therefore reduce likelihood of backyard burning of
waste.
(iv) Expansion of the scope of Component 2 LGU training on best available techniques/best
environmental practices for waste management
(v) Lifting of the disbursement condition concerning payments for site control demonstration and
contaminated sites management guidelines until funds for site remediation demonstration have been
included in the National Expenditure Plan. This disbursement condition may now be lifted since
DENR has signed a contract with a company to carry out the said demonstration, using its own funds.
The EA category of the project will not change. Safeguards arrangements and instruments will
remain unchanged. The changes under this restructuring have to do with reducing the scope of the
activities.
Assessment of Safeguards Performance - The main safeguards instrument of the project is the
Environmental and Social Assessment Framework. This instrument is working and is effective in its
intended purpose. All the component activities are sufficiently covered by the procedures in the
Page 5 of 11


﻿ESAF. The restructuring proposed and the previous ones have reduced the scope of some of the
activities e.g. in component 4, there will be one remediation pilot activity instead of two. The EMB
PMO has provided sufficient resources in carrying out the required studies and safeguards
arrangement for activities which are on-going. Training on safeguards has also been carried out for
O
U         the stakeholders of the project (EMB, LGUs and PMO staff).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
O
analysis (if known)
The project sites will be located throughout the Philippines and will include solid waste management
systems in local governments; electrical facilities and former transformer and chemical storage sites.
the LGU beneficiaries under Component 2 have been reduced from 6 to 3 (Legazpi, Cabanatuan and
Butuan City) The pilot site remediation has also been reduced from 2 to 1 (Philippine Air Force
Area in the Clark Freeport Zone)
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Marivi Amor Jucotan Ladia (GSU02)
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GEN02)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environment: The project is an environmental improvement project and is anticipated to have
mostly positive environmental and health impacts. Potential impacts that are important to consider
in order to ensure adverse impacts are avoided or minimized include: environmental management
in relation to the environmental management of dump site interventions; ensuring safe
Page 6 of 11


﻿environmental management of PCBs; and the safe cleanup and management of contaminated sites
chosen for demonstration. None of the sites are in known historical or important cultural areas;
however, the project will include procedures for treatment of chance finds based on the Bank's
policy and local laws.
o
Social: The project will reduce the health risk of persistent organic pollutants, improve household
garbage collection, improve air quality and increase awareness of chemical risks in the country.
While not anticipated to be significant the                      re may be cases of
involuntary resettlement of structures related to dumpsite management or temporary or permanent
land acquisition or restricted access in relation to the land that would be subject to site remediation
and site controls. As part of the dump closures, the activities of the waste pickers will also be
affected. One of the project sites is subject to an ancestral domain claim by an indigenous cultural
community under the country's Indigenous Peoples' Rights Act.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project's long term impacts will be positive as they will remove or restrict exposure to
persistent organic pollutants from contaminated land and from electrical facilities and provide for
more environmentally sound solid waste management systems.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Focus of Solid Waste Investments: The choice of the eligible activities under component 2
considered the potential impact on air emissions from burning and rather than just focusing on
dump site closure, it focused on all activities that reduced burning.
Storage Facilities for PCBs: The project considered developing intermediate storage facilities for
PCBs as part of the PCB management component and based on limiting the scope of
environmental risk and current practice, it was decided that the project would focus on improving
on-site storage practices including proper closure/cleanup of storage areas after use.
o
Contaminated Site Remediation and Site Control: The process to be followed in the design of the
investments on site remediation and site control follows an analysis of alternatives approach that is
primarily based on risk reduction both in the final outcome and the process.
o         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental: Environmental impacts will be managed through the development of
environmental and social management plans (ESMP) and environmental assessments for each of
the project activities. These are outlined in an Environmental and Social AssessmentFramework
developed for the project
Works on Dumpsites: Activities are planned to demonstrate the suppression and prevention of
burning at dumpsites. To ensure these demonstration activities are effective and res ult in an
environmentally safe dumpsite closure, the project will not undertake these works unless the
municipality has: (i) an updated and enhanced dumpsite closure plan developed for each site in
accordance with the safeguards framework; (ii) confirmed financing for the closure; (iii) financing/
arrangements for disposal of wastes in a sanitary landfill upon closure. The safeguards
documentation to be prepared is described below which will be completed before commencement
of the works.
Page 7 of 11


﻿Works to Stop Current Burning at Dumpsites: These activities will include a combination of fire
suppression (excavation, foam application, injection of inert g as, and targeted water application)
and dumpsite rehabilitation (soil cover, restructuring of dumpsite areas, and slope stabilization).
O
An environmental management plan for these activities includes measures to ensure proper fire
safety, a dequate respiratory devices, proper slope stabilization, dust control, and site and worker
safety.
Dump Closure: These activities are governed by a dump closure plan developed for each site,
which is required by Philippine law and will follow the guidelines of an ESMP based on OP 4.01.
They include measures to ensure proper dump closure    , including security and fencing; slope
stabilization; soil cover and cap application; drainage; leachate management; gas management;
and prohibition of burning. The plan also addresses the residual impacts associated with the
closure process, including dust emissions, sourcing of soil, and worker health and safety.
Works on Landfill Operation: In municipalities that have established a landfill, demonstrations of
procedures to prevent burning during operation of the site w  ill be undertaken. These include
better application of soil cover, security, and improved waste screening and accounting of disposal
sites to prevent burning. T hese activities will require simple site specific measures as part of
project de    sign to help improve these aspects of landfill operations, both technically and
environmentally (proper soil cover application, slope stabilization, and fire an  d health safety
issues). Included in the design is an environmental and social managem  ent plan covering
environmental aspects.
Community Waste Collection: This will support the collection of wastes at the household/
community level. This collection will minimize the generation of dioxin and persistent organic
pollutants from backyard burning. These collection acti vities will be supported in the same
municipalities chosen for supporting the cl osure of existing dumpsites. Any potential adverse
impacts from the disposal of these wastes collected will be dealt with through the interventions
supported u nder the dumpsite closure plans including EMPs for each respective site.
Safe on-site PCB Management: These activities are governed by the PCB management plans
prepared by PCB owners as required by Philippine law and will follow the format of an ESMP
o           under OP 4.01. The PCB management plans include measures to ens  ure proper identification
and labeling; safe handling and storage; spill prevent ion, mitigation, and cleanup; emergency and
contingency plans in case of accidents; and environmental procedures for closing storage facilities.
Demonstration Site Remediation: The project with counterpart funds from the LGUs will finance
the remediation of contaminated sites . Site characterization, design, and cleanup will be designed
during the first year of the project, and the environmental assessment was undertaken during that
time. The environmental assessment covers the analysis of alternatives for and design of
remediation measures sufficient to meet cleanup standards for the proposed land use; mitigation
measures for air, odor and dust emissions, noise, cross-contamination of soil and water,
groundwater contamination, and land subsidence; and provision for consultation and
communication, security, and occupational health and safety plans.
Demonstration Site Controls: As an output of the inventory of contaminated sites, several sites
will be chosen based on risk, ease of implementation, and demonstration potential.These sites will
be subject to controls to ensure effective management to reduce exposure risks. These include
Page 8 of 11


﻿administrative controls, such as restrictions on the use of str uctures, land, natural resources, and
wells, and engineering controls, such as caps, covers, dikes, trenches, leachate collection systems,
signage and fencing, groundwater monitoring, and containment syst ems. These systems are
designed to reduce environmental risk and thus will in themselves constitute an environmental
O
management plan. Additional issues to be addressed in the environmental assessment includin g
consultation and communication, air and dust emissions, security, and worker health and safety
plans.
Social: While not anticipated to be significant, there may be cases where structures (temporary or
permanent) used by waste pickers as residence, resting places, or collection points, may have to be
relocated in the effort to improve dumpsite security, reorganize dumpsite operations, or to close
the dump completely. C omponent 2 activities can also directly affect the livelihoods of waste
pickers. Similarly, Component 4 activities may involve temporary cessation and relocation of
economic and other activities on the contaminated site itself and/or on control sites. To address
potential loss of assets and livelihoods, the Environmental and Social Assessment Framework
includes policy frameworks to a ddress involuntary resettlement, land acquisition, and impacts on
the livelihoods of waste pi ckers. All costs associated with the implementation of the social
development plan for waste pickers will be included in the costs of the given sub-activity and
budgeted accordingly, while a JSDF seed grant will assist in developing partne rships for the
implementation of these activities. One of the sites identified under Component 4 is a subject of an
ancestral domain claim by an Aeta tribe or Philippine aborigines. While no Aeta has been found to
be living on the site no r depending on the site for livelihood during the social assessment, the
projec t has prepared an Indigenous People#s Policy Framework that contains a procedure for
entering into a memorandum of understanding (MOU) with the claimants following national laws
and the Bank#s O.P.4.10. Other project sites (dumpsites, contaminated sites, and control sites)
can also be located in lands with pending a ncestral domain claims or with ancestral domain titles
or there may be community /ies of indigenous people living and depending on them for a living.
The Indigen ous People#s Policy framework contains a screening mechanism for the presence of
indigenous peoples in project locations. Health and safety procedures will be incorporated into
environmental management plans as outlined in the Environmental and Social Framework (ESF).
The ESF will also contain a communications strategy.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Environmental and Social Assessment Framework was consulted twice, once at the scoping
stage and a second time at the finalization stage. The frameworks contain mechanisms to consult
affected people at the solid waste management disposal sites and collection areas; contaminated
sites; and the project incorporates a grievance redress mechanism and a comprehensive
communications plan for information sharing and awareness buildi ng on POPs issues as part of
the project.
The Environmental and Social Assessment Framework was disclosed in the World Bank#s
Infoshop in Washington, Manila and in the Philippines regional Knowledge for Development
Centers. It was also disclosed in the DENR library.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Sep-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                           17-Sep-2009
Page 9 of 11I


﻿For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  30-Dec-2009
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Sep-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                           17-Sep-2009
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Sep-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                           17-Sep-2009
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X]  No[     NA
report?
O
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes[X]  No[    NA
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Page 10 of I1


﻿Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [  ]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Tijen Arin
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                   Date: 17-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: lain G. Shuker (PMGR)                Date: 21-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


