                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSC16871

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Oct-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Armenia                         Project ID:       P159054
                            Project Name:        Strengthening Armenia's Integrated Living Conditions Survey
                            Team Leader(s):      Moritz Meyer,Nistha Sinha
                            Estimated Date       01-Dec-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GPV03                           Lending           IPF
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.2                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                   0.2
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of this activity is to strengthen poverty monitoring in Armenia via
                           improvements to the quality of microdata (ILCS) collected by the National Statistical Service
                           (NSSRA).
                           C. Project Description
                           This grant project aims to improve the quality of the ILCS.

                           First, the ILCS survey last underwent improvements in 2004, more than 10 years ago. A review of
                           the sampling design and survey procedures would be important to undertake so that the survey
                           design can be updated.

                           Second, over the last decade the country has experienced population shifts and changes in structure
                           of economic activity which should be reflected in the ILCS survey design. Non-response has
                           emerged as a concern with the highest rate of refusal (18 percent) in the capital city, Yerevan. Up
                           until the 2013 survey, ILCS was using a sampling frame (database of addresses) based on the 2001
                           population census which contributed to the non-response rate. From 2014 round, the NSSRA has
                           begun to use the list of addresses (sampling frame) derived from the 2011 population census. Given
                           the population dynamics in the country, it is important to understand the extent to which this list of
                         addresses is still current 6 years after the census was conducted. Because any selected household that
                         refuses to be interviewed is replaced from a list of reserve addresses, use of an outdated sampling
                         frame will exacerbate non-response because the reserve address might no longer exist and new
Public Disclosure Copy




                         housing units created after 2011 will not be represented. Procedures to address this issue will have to
                         be developed.

                         Third, there appears to be underreporting of consumption expenditures in the ILCS perhaps in some
                         part due to better off households refusing to participate in the survey. Consumption estimated from
                         the ILCS is only about a third of private consumption calculated from the national accounts. Such
                         discrepancies between household and national accounts based consumption estimates are common
                         across the world but the discrepancy tends to be much smaller than what we observe in the ILCS.
                         This underreporting in the survey could arise from richer households refusing to participate and/or
                         from responding households not fully reporting income/consumption. Training of field teams will
                         help address underreporting or concealing of consumption and income by responding households
                         given that they visit households 5 times during the month of interview and recording of consumption
                         and income. Analysis of the characteristics of those who refuse to participate in the survey will help
                         understand to what extent selective refusal by the better off is affecting the survey.

                         Finally, working with the NSSRA, the World Bank?s poverty team in Armenia has identified the
                         precision of poverty estimates produced by the ILCS as a key concern. The ILCS is designed to
                         produce consumption-based poverty estimates at the national, rural-urban, and 11 regional (or marz)
                         levels. Having precise and reliable estimates of poverty at all these levels is important for informing
                         government?s development policies especially at the regional level. Statistically, precision or degree
                         of reliability of poverty estimates is represented by the standard error of the point estimate of poverty
                         (the number that is usually reported) and the associated 95 percent confidence intervals which
                         indicate the range of poverty estimates within which the actual poverty rates must lie. One rule of
                         convention used by statisticians is that this confidence range should not be too wide: if the point
                         estimate of poverty is z then the confidence range should not exceed 2*0.05z. Although poverty
                         estimates at the national and rural-urban level are estimated with some precision (that is, low
Public Disclosure Copy




                         standard errors and narrow 95 percent confidence intervals), marz-level poverty estimates tend to be
                         less precisely estimated. In 2014, the national poverty estimate was 30 percent with a confidence
                         interval of 27.9 percent and 32 percent implying that the actual poverty rate was somewhere within
                         this range with 95 percent certainty. At the marz level this confidence interval varies widely making
                         it difficult to rank regions by their poverty rates or estimating the number of poor. For example, both
                         Ararat and Armavir marzes are estimated to have a poverty rate of 29 percent but the confidence
                         interval for the latter ranges from 19 percent to 38 percent while that of the former ranges from 23.5
                         percent to 34.6 percent.

                         Expanding the sample size is important for improving reliability of poverty estimates. The accuracy
                         or precision of the poverty estimates depends on both the sampling error, which can be measured
                         through variance estimates, and the nonsampling error, which results from all other sources of error,
                         including response and measurement errors as well as coding, keying and processing errors. The
                         sampling error is inversely proportional to the square root of the sample size and hence expandi ng
                         sample size is one way in which precision of poverty estimates can be improved. Expansion of
                         sample size would be particularly important for the regions were the ILCS currently reports very
                         wide confidence intervals.

                         The grant will provide additional resources to NSSRA to enhance the quality of 2017 ILCS data by
                         addressing the issues identified above. This grant will be complemented with a Bank-executed
                           technical assistance supporting a review of survey design and processes, identifying the updates/
                           changes needed, and providing training to NSSRA staff on these topics. The recipient executed grant
                           will support a) implementation of updates to the survey design and training for field teams; and b)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           expansion of the sample size. For the given budget and costs, the grant can support the addition of
                           2,600 households, taking the total sample to 7,784 households. The expansion of the ILCS sample
                           will come from addition of enumeration areas (primary sampling units) rather than increases in the
                           number of households interviewed within each enumeration area.

                           The proposed activities will build on the World Bank?s ongoing engagement with NSSRA and will
                           be complemented through a Bank-executed technical assistance for reviewing and updating sampling
                           design and survey implementation. These enhancements will be implemented with the 2017 ILCS
                           round.
                           The grant has two components:
                           1) Component 1 ($190,000, expanded ILCS sample) will implement a sampling design with
                           expanded the sample size. The revised sampling design will be supported through a separated Bank-
                           executed TA to the NSSRA. Based on early discussions with NSSRA, the grant could finance
                           additional field personnel needed (consultant services), training of the additional personnel and
                           printing of additional interview material (questionnaire, field manuals etc).

                           2) Component 2 ($10,000, Project Management) will finance the operating costs of the Grant.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
                           Projects on International        No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Moritz Meyer,Nistha Sinha
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                               Date: 27-Sep-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Carolina Sanchez (PMGR)                                      Date: 29-Sep-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
