                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSA19490
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Oct-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                             Project ID:   P155303
                            Project Name:     Madhya Pradesh Urban Development Project (P155303)
                            Task Team         Uri Raich
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         15-Nov-2016               Estimated     14-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSU12                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       166.00           Total Bank Financing:    116.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                     Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                               50.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                 116.00
                              Total                                                                                 166.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance the capacity of Madhya Pradesh Urban
                           Development Company (MPUDC) to improve coverage of key urban services and increase the
                           revenue of participating urban local bodies.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed MPUDP would be the first urban operation supported by the Bank in MP, but it builds
                           on a long term experience of the Bank supporting municipal development funds in the States of
                           Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The proposed operation builds on such institutional design that has


                                                                     Page 1 of 10
                         proven successful in other States but builds in a series of lessons learned and specific requirements
                         by MP. The proposed project is expected to comprise the following two components.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Institutional Development Component (Cost: US$26.5 million, Bank Loan: US$ 18.3
                         million). This component will have two subcomponents:

                         1.1 Policy Reforms (Bank Loan: US$9.3 million). This subcomponent will provide support to the
                         implementation and sustainability of urban policy reforms in areas such as: (i) property tax; (ii) user
                         charges; (iii) advertisement tax; (iv) accounting; (v) budgeting; and (vi) credit improvement.

                         1.2 Institutional Strengthening of MPUDC (Bank Loan: US$9 million). This subcomponent will aim
                         at: (i) strengthening institutional capacity of MPUDC to function as the nodal urban infrastructure
                         implementation agency in MP; (ii) building project management capacities within MPUDC; and (iii)
                         providing technical assistance to MPUDP to develop a regional urban and economic development
                         plan and related investment proposals for the BISCO region.

                         Component 2: Urban Investments (Bank Loan: US$97.4 million). This component will have two
                         subcomponents:

                         2.1 Access to Finance for Urban Investments (Bank Loan: US$92.9 million The main objective of
                         this sub-component is to help participating ULBs improve urban services/infrastructure. It will do so
                         by providing sub-loans and sub-grants to participating ULBs to support the development of
                         sustainable urban investments in areas under the mandate of ULBs such as water supply, solid waste
                         management, septage management, water waste management based on demand driven City
                         Development/Vision Plans developed by ULBs. Selection of subprojects will be based on demand
                         from ULBs, and will be assessed in accordance to technical, financial, social, and environmental
                         screening criteria laid down in the Operations Manual.

                         (b)    Subcomponent 2.2: Credit Enhancement Facility (Bank Loan: US$4.5 million). The credit
Public Disclosure Copy




                         enhancement subcomponent will create a reserve fund in GoMP (MPUDC) to provide credit
                         enhancements to ULBs to help them leverage commercial finance. The Credit Enhancement Facility
                         (CEF) will be 'demand-driven' and open to all ULBs in the state.

                         Component 3: Project Management
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Madhya Pradesh (MP) is the second largest, fifth populous, and eighth most urbanized state in India.
                         Although MP recorded a higher rate of urbanization compared to rural growth in the last decade, its
                         urbanization rate is still below the national average but it is projected to catch-up in the next 15
                         years. At present, MP total urban population is of 20.1 million (28% of total population) concentrated
                         in 476 urban centers as follows: Of the 14 municipal corporations, four (Indore, Bhopal, Jabalpur,
                         and Gwalior) are million-plus cities. Access to water and sanitation is the biggest challenge for the
                         urban population particularly the poor. Slum population is about 6. 4 million as per Census of India
                         2011.

                         While the institutional development component (Component 1) of MPUDP supports ULBs across the
                         state, the urban investment component (Component 2) proposes to support development of water
                         supply projects in 7 cities and sewerage infrastructure in about 18 cities of the state. Three sub-


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         projects in Khargaon, Burhanpur (water supply) and Chhindwara (Sewerage) will be implemented in
                         the first year and sub-projects in the remaining cities are being developed for implementation in the
                         subsequent years. Based on the environmental and social assessments carried out for first three sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         projects and screening of remaining project cities indicate that the water supply sub-projects involve
                         sensitive water bodies such as River Tapti in Burhanpur, River Chambal in Morena, River Narmada,
                         etc. and construction of intake structure in Crocodile Sanctuary in River Chambal for Morena water
                         supply for project. Number of historic and religious structures are also located in many of the cities,
                         which requires careful planning and implementation of project activities.

                         In addition, the proposed project will also have positive environmental and social impacts owing to
                         benefits such as improved water supply, sanitation, wastewater management, in the project cities.
                         The benefits are likely to be, in the form of saving time for collection of water, improved health and
                         personal hygiene and improved quality of life. On the other hand, the project may also have some
                         adverse social impacts related to displacement of people, especially the non- title holders and also
                         involve some private land for the proposed infrastructure improvement interventions.

                         In Madhya Pradesh, the tribal population in urban areas is 14.5 percent(census 2011) and scattered
                         all over the State. Some of the project Towns fall in the Scheduled V areas. However, the tribal
                         people in urban areas do not explicit typical characteristics such as living as a group; speak separate
                         language from dominant population, having separate institutions in close attachment to the forest etc.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GEN06)
                         Sangeeta Kumari (GSU06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            Projects such as water supply, sewerage, are likely to have
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       negative impacts on the project communities, if not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     designed and implemented with consideration to the
                                                                     nature and significance of the environmental profile of the
                                                                     project area. The environment impacts in MPUDP, are
                                                                     also likely to be significant for water and wastewater
                                                                     treatment plants, as they may affect sensitive
                                                                     environmental features such as Rivers, Crocodile
                                                                     Sanctuary in Morena and cultural properties in some
                                                                     participating ULBs. Impacts of urban infrastructure
                                                                     projects are expected to be significant, during the
                                                                     construction phase in the urban areas, The project hence
                                                                     has been categorized as ➢❨ Category A➢❨ and OP 4.01
                                                                     has hence been triggered.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP       Yes            The intake structure proposed for the water supply project
                         4.04                                        in Morena city, is located in Crocodile Sanctuary in
                                                                     Chambal River and would require management measures
                                                                     to avoid impacts on crocodile habitat. The policy hence
                                                                     has been triggered. The environmental and social
                                                                     assessment to be carried out for the particular sub-project,
                                                                     will analyze the alternatives to avoid impacts on the



                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                        sanctuary and will recommend an appropriate natural
                                                        habitat management plan along with the EMP for the sub-
                                                        project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    Based on the current list of sub-projects, the project does
                                                        not involve substantial conversion of forest areas and
                                                        impacts on the forest resources. OP 4.36, hence has not
                                                        been triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     Project activities, are not expected to trigger the
                                                        requirements of OP 4.09. The policy hence has not been
                                                        triggered.
                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Based on the current information, the project activities are
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           not expected to directly impact the cultural resources.
                                                        However, some of the sub-projects are located in cities
                                                        that have number of historic and cultural monuments. OP
                                                        4.11, hence has been triggered. Respective sub-project
                                                        environmental and social assessments will carry out an
                                                        analysis impacts on these structure will include suitable
                                                        cultural properties management plans including EMP for
                                                        the sub-project. Safeguard documents and the sub-project
                                                        bid documents will also include, ➢❨ Chance find➢❨
                                                        provisions.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The scheduled Caste and Scheduled Tribes shall also be
                         BP 4.10                        part of project beneficiary population. About all the
                                                        potential sub projects are likely to have presence of
                                                        scheduled tribes. The ESMF includes the Indigenous
                                                        Peoples Management Framework. The IPMF provides the
                                                        guidelines for identification of Indigenous People and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        preparation of Indigenous People Plan for the sub
                                                        projects.

                                                        The ESA for three sub projects carried out reveal that
                                                        although STs are present in the respective towns the tribal
                                                        people in urban areas do not exhibit typical characteristics
                                                        such as living as a group; speak separate language from
                                                        dominant population, having separate institutions in close
                                                        attachment to the forest etc based on the identification
                                                        process provided in the IPMF. Results of the
                                                        identification process and Consultations have been
                                                        provided in a separate chapter in the ESA. No separate
                                                        IPP is prepared for the first three sub projects.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The project is anticipated to have some adverse impacts
                         OP/BP 4.12                     related to displacement of people, especially the non- title
                                                        holders and also involve some private land acquisition for
                                                        the proposed infrastructure improvement interventions.
                                                        The Resettlement Policy framework in ESMF outlines the
                                                        process of sub project screening, assessment of impacts,



                                                         Page 4 of 10
                                                                      entitlement framework for management of R&R etc. The
                                                                      respective sub projects are required to prepare RAPs as
                                                                      applicable to manage resettlement and Rehabilitation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      owing to land take. However, as per the draft ESAs of
                                                                      first three subprojects the investments shall be carried out
                                                                      on available land and will not lead to any permanent
                                                                      displacement. The temporary disruption to income
                                                                      activities and any damage to roadside properties during
                                                                      excavation works for laying pipes shall be managed as per
                                                                      ESMP provided in the ESA report.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            Some of the water supply sub-projects, in Khargaon and
                            4.37                                      Burhanpur involve construction of minor storage
                                                                      structures of about 4-6 m height on Rivers. As per
                                                                      OP4.37, these structures, can be categorized as new small
                                                                      dams below 15 m height. The DPRs and respective EMPs
                                                                      for this sub-projects shall incorporate generic dam safety
                                                                      measures as required by OP 4.37. Hence, the policy is not
                                                                      triggered.
                            Projects on International   No            Project activities do not involve and are not located in
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      International waterways. OP 7.50, hence has not been
                                                                      triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            Project activities are not located in disputed areas. OP
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          7.60, hence has not been triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
Public Disclosure Copy




                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Safeguard Issues:
                              Some of the sub-projects activities, especially intake structures for water supply projects are
                              located on environmentally sensitive locations such as River Tapti in Burhanpur, River Chambal
                              in Morena and River Narmada, etc. These sub-projects are likely to cause significant water quality
                              impacts during construction and the River Ecology during operation phase. In addition, the intake
                              structure for water supply project in Morena city is likely to impact the Crocodile Sanctuary in
                              River Chambal, both during construction and operation phase. Number of religious and historic
                              monuments are located in many of the 25 project cities identified for the sub-projects. Detailed
                              design and implementation of the sub-projects in these cities would require careful finalization of
                              designs and execution during the construction phase of the respective sub-projects. Considering
                              the urban nature of the project cities, impacts such as construction site management, safety of
                              neighboring communities and construction workers, impacts on various utilities, temporary traffic
                              diversions, temporary air and noise impacts are also expected during construction phase of the
                              sub-projects. The environmental and social assessments carried out for the three first year sub-
                              projects assesses the impacts in the respective sub-project and includes specific EMP to address
                              these impacts. In addition, the ESMF prepared for MPUDP provides for carrying out
                              environmental assessments to address all the environmental impacts of the sub-projects and
                              development of specific environmental management plans. All sub-project ESAs will be shared


                                                                        Page 5 of 10
                           with the Bank for review and clearance.

                           Social Issues:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           No large scale land acquisition or R&R is expected under the project so far. All the sub projects
                           shall be subjected to screening for impacts. All Sub projects RAPs and IPPs shall be shared with
                           World Bank for necessary review and clearance. The ESAs for the first three sub projects do not
                           require any land acquisition or permanent displacement. The temporary loss to income and any
                           damage to roadside properties identified during excavation works and laying of pipes shall be
                           compensated/restored as per ESMP.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Environmental Impacts:
                           The indirect environmental impacts of MPUDP sub-projects could include increased generation of
                           wastewater in cities where water supply sub-projects are implemented. The other indirect impacts
                           of the project, include discharge of partially treated wastewater from the treatment plants and /or
                           improper maintenance of wastewater infrastructure. Indirect impacts are also expected due to the
                           inadequate operation and maintenance of water treatment plants, pumping stations, booster
                           stations and water/wastewater network In order to address these impacts, action plans will be
                           agreed with the respective project cities during the sub-project preparation, to ensure treatment and
                           disposal of increased wastewater generated in the project cities. Similarly, clear O&M plans and
                           budgets will also be agreed with the respective project cities during the preparation of wastewater
                           sub-projects. These principles have been incorporated in the ESMF for the MPUDP, to ensure the
                           implementation by MPUDC.

                           Social Impacts:
                           Improved water supply and sanitation in the participating cities shall result in positive benefits in
                           the long term.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                           While the provision of urban infrastructure and improving service levels is the primary objective
                           of MPUDP, the principle of alternatives has been embedded in the ESMF developed for the
                           project. Each sub-project during the design phase will analyze alternatives for locating various
                           facilities such as treatment plans, pumping stations for the sub-projects and also in finalizing
                           alignment of transmission lines and distribution networks. These have been analyzed in the three
                           sub-projects that have been appraised for the implementation in the first year of the project. In case
                           of Khargaon water supply project, based on the analysis of alternatives, the existing water
                           treatment plant is being refurbished, so that the capacity of new treatment plant is optimized.
                           Similarly, in Chhindwara Sewerage sub-project, centralized sewerage system for the main city and
                           decentralized sewerage system peripheral areas is being proposed. Similar approach will be
                           followed for other sub-projects that will be developed in future.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           MPUDP is likely to implement sub-projects, which could involve complex environmental issues
                           such as avoiding impacts on crocodile sanctuary, historic and religious structures and construction
                           safety issues in densely populated urban areas. The sub projects could also involve some land
                           acquisition, damage to roadside structures and loss of income. MPUDC with its Project
                           Implementation Units (PIU) at various parts of the state, will be responsible for the preparation of


                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                           sub project specific safeguard management plans and its implementation. The Project
                           Management Unit (PMU) at MPUDC headquarters supported by a team of Project Management
                           Consultants (PMC) will be monitoring the implementation of sub-projects. All these agencies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           (PMU, PMC and PIU) will be staffed qualified environmental engineers / specialists and social
                           scientists/specialists to ensure implementation of safeguard management plans. Their capacity will
                           be strengthened with regular training and orientation programs during implementation. While a
                           dedicated environmental engineer and social specialists are already on board, the safeguard
                           specialists for the PMC and at the PIUs will be on board prior to negotiations for MPUDP.

                           In addition to the above institutional arrangements, the borrower has prepared an ESMF for the
                           project and have also prepared Environmental and Social Assessments (ESAs) for the three sub-
                           projects (Burhanpur, Khargaon water supply and Chhindwara sewerage), which have been
                           reviewed and cleared by the Bank. These ESAS will be verified based on the final design of the
                           Design Review, Build and Operate (DRBO) Contractor and the respective ESMPs will be updated
                           to address the impacts due to the design changes (if any). In addition to addressing the issues that
                           may arise from various urban investment sub-projects, the ESMF will also be applicable for all the
                           technical assistance including BISCO activities and also the credit enhancement sub-component of
                           MPUDP.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders for the project include the people of participating cities, the respective urban
                           local bodies, the Department of Municipal Administration and Environment Department,
                           MPUDC, state government agencies, other local NGOs and people directly / indirectly affected by
                           the sub-projects. Multi-stakeholder meetings for the three sub-projects at the ULB level have been
                           conducted on July 12, 2016, to share the draft ESMF and respective ESAs. A state-level
                           consultation of the revised ESMF was undertaken on September 07, 2016 in Bhopal. The minutes
                           of these consultations have been attached to the respective final reports. .
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The draft ESMF and ESAs for the first year sub-projects have been disclosed locally by MPUDC
                           at http://www.mpudc.co.in/esmf.html on July 18 and July 19 respectively. These draft reports have
                           also been disclosed at the Bank➢❨ s infoshop on July 19, 2016. These draft reports were finalized
                           based on the inputs from stake holders and the Bank. The final reports were re-disclosed locally by
                           MPUDC, including the executive summary in local language (Hindi), on October 19, 2016 at the
                           following locations.
                           ESMF Volume-I : http://mpudc.co.in/files/MPUDP-ESMF-Volume-I_1f92423z.pdf
                           ESMF Volume-II : http://mpudc.co.in/files/MPUDP-ESMF-Volume-II_1f92423z.pdf
                           ESMF Summary: http://mpudc.co.in/files/MPUDP-ESMF-Executive-Summary-Hindi_1f92423z.
                           pdf
                           ESA Burhanpur: http://mpudc.co.in/files/ESA-Burhanpur_1f92423z.pdf
                           ESA Chhindwara: http://mpudc.co.in/files/ESA-Chhindwara_1f92423zpdf
                           ESA Khargone: http://mpudc.co.in/files/ESA-Khargone_54079ye3.pdf>.

                           The final reports were re-disclosed at Bank➢❨ s infoshop on October 21, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          20-Oct-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       21-Oct-2016

                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive           20-Jul-2016
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           India                                                                 19-Oct-2016
                           Comments: "In country" Disclosure : July 18 (ESMF) and July 19 (subproject ESAs)
                                         Re-disclosure of final reports: October 19, 2016
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           20-Oct-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        21-Oct-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                                 19-Oct-2016
                           Comments: "In country" Disclosure : July 18 (ESMF) and October 19, 2016 (re-disclosure)
                                         Re-disclosure of final reports: October 19, 2016
                                         The Resettlement Policy framework in ESMF outlines the process of sub project
                                         screening, assessment of impacts, entitlement framework for management of R&R
                                         etc. Hence, ESMF has been disclosed under OP 4.12. However, as per the draft
                                         ESAs of first three subprojects the investments shall be carried out on available land
                                         and will not lead to R&R. Hence, no RAP has been prepared and disclosed under OP
                                         4.12. The temporary disruption to income activities during construction phase shall
                                         be managed as per ESMP provided in the ESA report.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                           20-Oct-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                        21-Oct-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                                 19-Oct-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: "In country" Disclosure : July 18 (ESMF) and July 19 (subproject ESAs)
                                         Re-disclosure of final reports: October 19, 2016
                                         The ESMF includes the Indigenous Peoples management Framework. The ESA for
                                         three sub project towns carried out so far reveal that the tribal people in the
                                         respective sub project area do not exhibit typical characteristics of Indigenous
                                         people . Results of the identification process and Consultations as per the guidelines
                                         of IPMF have been provided in a separate chapter in the ESA. Hence no separate IPP
                                         is prepared. The ESMF and respective sub-project ESAs have been disclosed under
                                         OP 4.10.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         n/a
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Uri Raich
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Takeaki Sato (SA)                              Date: 04-Nov-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ming Zhang (PMGR)                             Date: 06-Nov-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     Page 10 of 10
