INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 13429
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Liberia                    Project ID:   P124073
Project Name:    Liberia-FCPF REDD READINESS (P124073)
Task Team        Paola Agostini,Neeta Hooda
Leader(s):
Estimated
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENO7
Sector(s):       Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):        Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       8.80             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility          8.80
Total                                                             8.80
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is unchanged from the parent grant: to carry out a consultative
and quantitative analysis of the different land use options for development of the national REDD+
Strategy for Liberia, to be approved by the National Climate ChangeSteering Committee.
C. Project Description
The structure of components are similar under the additional funding as under the US$3.6 million
grant. Nevertheless, there are a few proposed changes to more accurately reflect the focus of REDD+


﻿readiness activities being supported under additional funding notably in the amount of funding per
component and sub-component. The progress of under the components are described below along
with a brief description of what is proposed for additional funding.
Component 1 Coordination of the REDD+ Readiness Process and consultations. This component will
O
Q)     finance technical assistance, goods, workshops, training, services and operational costs under the
sub-components.
Progress under US$3.6 million grant:
-      Generalized outreach and awareness, and the development and adoption of a comprehensive
Consultation and Participation Plan (C&P Plan) was achieved.
-      A communication firm was hired to support the process, and an outreach campaign to
increase awareness has been achieved.
-      The REDD+ Technical Working Group (RTWG)-a multi-sector stakeholder platform and
advisory and decision-making body for REDD+ activities and the Implementation Unit (RIU) is
operational and coordinating the REDD+ process.
Proposed under additional funding:
-      At the national level support will be provided to operationalizing the National Climate
Change Steering Committee (NCCSC) as a high level decision making body for REDD+.
-      Support will be provided to continue strengthening civil society platforms at the national and
county level, and county level institutional capacity will be strengthened within Liberia's Forest
Development Authority (FDA) and Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
-      Capacity for monitoring and evaluation (M+E) of REDD+ programs will be strengthened, in
RIU, RTWG, line ministries, land rights commission, civil society platforms and regional offices.
-      Options for channeling climate finance will be analyzed and proposed in order to be
consistent with the complex and evolving policy environment, and taking into consideration the
national legislation on land and natural resource rights and efforts from across the political spectrum
to improve transparency and governance.
-      Financial management capacity will be built in relevant institutions.
Component 2 Contribute to the design of the national REDD+ strategy (including design of Emission
Reduction Program). This component will finance technical assistance, goods, workshops, training,
services and operational costs under the sub-components.
Progress under US$3.6 million grant:
o      -      The process for developing a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) is well
developed in Liberia and a robust consultation process is underway.
-      A SESA roadmap was developed through a highly participatory process, a consulting firm
has been hired to develop the SESA, and a draft is expected in early 2016 based on a broad
consultation process.
-      A preliminary assessment of land use, forest policy and governance, capacity building and
multi-stakeholder policy dialogue, land policy under development as well as a forest sector
diagnostic.
Proposed under additional funding:
-      To complete the work of developing detailed strategic options for addressing the drivers of
deforestation and forest degradation in key sectors.
-      Review of legislation relevant to REDD+.
-      REDD+ strategy options for key sectors will be prioritized and partnerships with private
actors launched in priority areas.
-      A REDD+ registry will be established and the REDD+ strategy will be finalized and


﻿validated through a national workshop.
-      The design of an Emissions Reduction Program, will be an important indication that Liberia
is prepared to apply the capacities of REDD+ readiness to the implementation REDD+ in a targeted
program.
0
Component 3 Development of Reference Level or Reference Emissions Level. This component will
finance technical assistance, goods, workshops, training, services and operational costs under the
sub-components.
Progress under US$3.6 million grant:
-      The development of a comprehensive forest cover map has been launched as an initial step in
of a Reference Level for Liberia.
-      Initial analysis of an appropriate measurement, reporting, and verification (MRV) system are
launched and consulting firm hired to identify the appropriate next steps for designing and
developing an MRV system in Liberia.
Proposed under additional funding:
-      Analysis combing recent historical data on emissions from deforestation and/or forest
degradation and other relevant land uses, and estimation of future emissions and removals to produce
a national REL.
-      Development, peer review and validation of an REL, peer reviewed and validated.
-      Further refinement of REL that includes assessment of significance of emissions from
degradation in Liberian context will be undertaken.
-      An MRV roadmap will prepared, and an MRV system designed and operationalized.
-      The MRV system will be piloted in preparation for results-based REDD+ initiatives.
-      Assessment of the linkages between the MRV system with existing, sub-national monitoring
systems, FLEGT and the information system for safeguards.
-      Capacity building for FDA and LISGIS staff as well as regional offices for MRV will also be
supported.
-      Liberia-specific indicators for an information an information system on safeguards and co-
U       benefits based on the framework of principles and criteria of the REDD+ Social & Environmental
Standards.
O
Activity 4 Project Management. This component will finance technical assistance, goods, workshops,
a      training, services and operational costs.
Progress under US$3.6 million grant: project coordination of the FCPF grant is ensured by the
REDD+ Implementation Unit (RIU) that is hosted in the FDA.
Proposed under additional funding: project coordination will continue to include supervision,
monitoring and evaluation, management of activities, financial management and audits.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
At this phase there are no specific project locations, since the activities are mostly capacity building.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Demba Balde (GSUO1)
George Campos Ledec (GENO 1)
Gloria Malia Mahama (GSUO 1)
O
U       Robert A. Robelus (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         In line with the nature of the REDD+ Readiness
OP/BP 4.01                              preparation activities, the Government of Liberia will
use a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
(SESA) as the applicable safeguards approach. The
strength of the SESA for REDD+ is that it will
combine analytical work and consultation in an
iterative fashion to inform the preparation of the
REDD+ strategy. The SESA will help ensure
compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies by
integrating key environmental and social
considerations relevant to REDD+ including all those
covered by the safeguard policies.
The SESA will help the Government of Liberia
formulate its REDD+ strategy in a way that reflects
inputs from key stakeholder groups and addresses the
main environmental and social issues identified. The
SESA includes an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) as a distinct
output, which provides a framework for managing
and mitigating the environmental and social risk
related to investments and carbon finance
transactions in the context of the future
implementation of REDD+. Certain future REDD+
investments will still require specific Environmental
and Social Management Plans (ESMP), but these
will benefit from the SESA, which will include
standard methods and procedures, along with
appropriate institutional arrangements for screening,
preparing, reviewing, implementing and monitoring
specific ESMPs to prevent adverse impacts as well as
cumulative impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes        This policy seeks to ensure that all options proposed
in the National REDD+ Strategy should take into
account the conservation of biodiversity, as well as
the numerous environmental services and products
that natural habitats provide to human society.
Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
significant positive impacts on natural habitats, as the


﻿country puts in place an effective strategy to reduce
loss of natural forests. The SESA will address issues
related to natural habitats and potential impacts of
the National REDD+ Strategy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes         Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
significant positive impacts on forests, in that the
main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation
and forest degradation, while contributing to the
well-being of forest-dependent communities.
Potential impactof the National REDD+ Strategy on
natural forests will be assessed through the SESA
and included in the ESMF. The SESA and associated
ESMF will reflect the requirements of the Bank's
Operational Policy regarding forest management, in
particular as these relate to the establishment of
plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           This project, which essentially involves planning and
technical assistance, will not involve any pest
management activities. However, the ESMF and
SESA will address potential pest management needs
in subsequent (post-project) REDD+ follow-up
activities involving forestry plantations or
agricultural intensification.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          This project does not include civil works and
OP/BP 4.11                               therefore will not affect physical cultural resources.
However, the ESMF and SESA will provide criteria
and procedures for properly addressing physical
cultural resources (including sacred forests, trees,
and shrubs) in future REDD+ implementation
activities.
O
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no communities in Liberia who meet the
4.10                                     specific Indigenous Peoples criteria of OP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        This project does not plan to undertake on-the-
BP 4.12                                  ground investments that would involve involuntary
land acquisition and/or new restrictions of access to
protected forest areas. However, all project-
supported land use and forest conservation planning
activities will take measures to avoid involuntary
resettlement or adverse social impacts upon forest-
based livelihoods to the extent feasible, consistent
with the guidance provided by OP 4.12 during up
REDD+ implementation. The SESA will recommend
procedures to address adverse social risks associated
potential land acquisition or restriction of access to
natural resources in future investments.


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           The REDD+ activities do not involve the
construction of new or use of existing dams.
Projects on International   No           The REDD+ activities do not involve international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No        The REDD+ activities under this project do not
BP 7.60                                  involve disputed areas between countries, as defined
in OP 7.60.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
June 2017
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paola Agostini,Neeta Hooda
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                Date: 10-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                      Date: 22-Jan-2016
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


