                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSC12732

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Nov-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Indonesia                        Project ID:      P154782
                            Project Name:      Indonesia National Urban Slum Upgrading Program (P154782)
                            Task Team          George Soraya
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          04-Dec-2015                      Estimated        31-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU08                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other social services (50%), Housing construction (25%), Solid waste
                                               management (25%)
                            Theme(s):          Other social development (25%), Urban services and housing for the poor
                                               (25%), Urban planning and housing policy (25%), Other urban development
                                               (25%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:   1200.00                     Total Bank Financing:        400.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     800.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        400.00
                              Total                                                                       1200.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The overall project development objective is to improve access to urban infrastructure and services in
                           targeted slums in Indonesia.
                           C. Project Description
                         1. Project scope. The new National Urban Slum Upgrading Program (2015-2019) will focus on
                         meeting the Government of Indonesia’s target of alleviating 38,431 hectares of slum areas across 393
                         cities and 3,600 urban wards by 2019, while also working towards preventing slums in another 8,700
Public Disclosure Copy




                         urban wards. The Bank will support part of this a nation-wide GoI program. This program will be
                         based on institutional and implementation arrangements established under the Bank-supported
                         PNPM Urban program, with some modifications to support the integrated provision of urban services
                         and infrastructure at all levels. Learning from previous experiences, there will be a substantial focus
                         on empowering local governments to take a lead in the program, and on resolving land and tenure
                         issues that may restrict the development of informal settlements.

                         2. The project would assist the Government in setting up and running institutional, monitoring and
                         evaluation and training systems for the whole program. It would finance capacity building and
                         program facilitation in approximately 200 cities and will directly fund the cost of infrastructure,
                         housing improvement and livelihood initiatives in approximately 50 of these cities. The selection of
                         these 200 cities will be done in consultation with the Ministry of Public Works and Housing
                         (MPWH) as well as other donors including the Asian Development Bank (ADB) and the Islamic
                         Development Bank (IDB). The selection of the subset of 50 cities will be done following the criteria
                         mentioned in Component 3.

                         3. Project Cost. The estimated project size is US$ 1 billion, of which US$ 200 million (20%) will be
                         financed under the loan. The remaining costs will be financed by counterpart funds (national and
                         local government budgets, as well as community contributions). The project will follow a five-year
                         funding cycle.

                         4. Preliminary project components identified during the concept stage are as follows:

                         Component 1: Institutional Development and Policy Reform (Loan US$5 million)
                         This component supports the National Government in:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a) setting up an institutional framework at national and city level that will ensure effective support
                         and coordination of the program;
                         (b) setting up general guidelines on comprehensive plans for slum upgrading, slum prevention and
                         housing resettlement;
                         (c) integrating and synchronizing slum data and definitions used by the MPWH and the National
                         Statistics Agency;
                         (d) reforming land and settlements development policy, mobilizing regulations to operationalize such
                         legislation and pushing forward a land reform agenda at the local government level.
                         This component would finance, inter alia, the recruitment of consultants as well as workshops and
                         training sessions.

                         Component 2: Integrated Planning Support and Capacity Building for Local Government and
                         Communities (Loan US$50 million)
                         This component would support:
                         (a) local governments and communities through the provision of urban planners and community
                         facilitators to assist with (i) the preparation of Slum Improvement Action Plans (SIAPs) at city level
                         and Community Settlement Plans (CSPs) at community level (including slum mapping, capital
                         investment design, programming and budgeting), as well as their effective integration, (ii) building
                         an institutional set-up and coordinating stakeholders at the city level, and (iii) developing slum
                         prevention initiatives involving livelihoods support and community behavior change; Slum mapping
                         will include information or data on social-economic conditions of households, access to basic
                         services, housing conditions, land ownerships, etc.
                         (b) capacity building training and workshops, including the preparation of project guidelines and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         training materials on slum upgrading for the whole program; and
                         (c) knowledge exchange and peer-to-peer learning activities to facilitate the transfer of experiences
                         and expertise between cities.

                         Component 3: Urban Infrastructure and Services in Selected Cities (Loan US$125 million)
                         This component would directly support infrastructure provision in slum areas in selected cities. The
                         selection of cities would be agreed with the MPWH and will depend on (1) the commitment of a
                         local government to slum upgrading in its jurisdiction, (2) the number of people living in slum areas
                         within a city and (3) the potential for a city to serve as a model for the rest of the program. Where
                         resettlement is required, funding can be used for the development of sites-and-services and the
                         construction new housing. The two main sub-components include:

                         Sub-component 3.1: Support for Tertiary Infrastructure Upgrading and Basic House Upgrading for
                         the Poorest
                         The project would finance a multi-sector package of tertiary infrastructure and service improvements
                         in identified slums. This would include, inter alia, water supply, drainage, sanitation, widening of
                         alleys for emergency vehicles, paving of alleys and roads, electricity, etc. In addition, continuing the
                         well-established activity under Neighborhood Development (ND) and PNPM Urban, housing
                         rehabilitation for the poorest would be included if identified as a priority by communities in their
                         CSPs through a Community Demand-Driven (CDD) approach.

                         Sub-component 3.2: Support for Primary and Secondary Infrastructure and Resettlement
                         The effectiveness of the community level investment depends on whether or not the investment is
                         properly linked to the rest of the city networks and the existing infrastructure is able to absorb
                         additional new capacity. These investments would mainly consist of improvements in large-scale
                         sanitation, water and drainage systems (together with strengthening their connection to the tertiary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and household systems), as well as strategic connecting roads. Where slums exist in disaster-risk
                         areas and there is no alternative, this component would fund basic infrastructure costs for the
                         resettlement of slum communities.

                         Component 4: Implementation Support and Technical Assistance (Loan US$20 million)
                         This component would finance: (a) the hiring of National Management Consultants (NMCs) and
                         Oversight Consultants (OCs) to strengthen the capacity of the Project Management Unit (PMU) to
                         oversee the overall implementation of the program at national, provincial and city level; (b)
                         monitoring and evaluation activities to strengthen project implementation and receive timely
                         feedback on project progress.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         5. The program will focus on meeting the Government of Indonesia’s target of alleviating 38,431
                         hectares of slum areas across 393 cities and 3,600 urban wards by 2019 (a list of cities is available at
                         www.p2kp.org; this list will be finalized during appraisal), while also working towards preventing
                         slums in another 8,700 urban wards. The project will directly fund the cost of infrastructure, housing
                         rehabilitation for the poorest and livelihood initiatives in approximately 50 of these cities. The cities
                         covered under this project will be selected by the MPWH in consultations with ADB and IDB, and
                         they will not overlap with cities supported by these two donors. Government budgets (Central and
                         Local) that support the same slum areas in a particular city with those of supported by the project will
                         be considered as part of the overall Bank’s supported project, and if this is the case, the project’s
                         environmental and social safeguards requirements and procedures as specified in the framework and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         guidelines approved by the Bank apply. In terms of infrastructure provision plans that would be
                         relevant to a safeguards analysis, the project will finance investment at the community level as well
                         as at the city level:

                         - At the community level and through a CDD approach, the project will support tertiary infrastructure
                         upgrading, including among others, water supply, drainage, sanitation, widening of alleys for
                         emergency vehicles, paving of alleys and roads, electricity, etc., as well as basic house upgrading for
                         the poorest.

                         - At the city level, the project would finance investments comprising of improvements in large-scale
                         sanitation, water and drainage systems (together with strengthening connections to tertiary and
                         household systems), as well as strategic connecting roads, that would complement the infrastructure
                         improvement in the slum areas. In the case where slums are located in disaster-prone areas and there
                         is no alternative, the project would fund costs associated with the resettlement of slum communities.
                         Relevant to the social and environmental safeguards analysis, investment in infrastructure at both
                         community and city levels will be supported by Integrated Planning Support and Capacity Building
                         for Local Government and Communities (Component 2) and Institutional Development and Policy
                         Reform at the National Level (Component 1).

                         There has been and ongoing discussions with the GOI mainly with the MPWH on the confirmation
                         of the 50 targeted cities that will be getting the project’s support. However, specific slum areas and
                         what exactly would be the upgrading approaches in these targeted cities will be defined based on the
                         detail mapping of the areas and on the discussions and agreements between the community and the
                         local government, which will be done in the first year of project implementation. The identification
                         of targeted slum areas and their improvement schemes can be only identified when the Slum
                         Improvement Action Plans (SIAPs) at the city level and slum detail mapping as well as Community
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Settlement Plans (CSPs) at community level are completed.

                         The ongoing PNPM Urban program indicated that there are IPs communities present in 11 urban
                         wards in 8 districts/cities (districts of Aceh Tenggara, Pidie, Tanah Laut, Malinau, and Toli-toli, as
                         well as Kotas Gorontalo, Manokwari , and Palopo). However, during the implementation of the
                         ongoing PNPM Urban and ND, there was no report that IPs communities were affected or benefited
                         from the projects. For this project, once the participating cities and targeted slum areas are identified,
                         screening on the presence of IPs will be carried out by the project in reference to the World Bank IPs
                         Screening Study (2010), IPs criteria based on OP 4.10 and “Masyarakat Hukum Adat” criteria
                         summarized from various Indonesian regulations.
                         E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         6. The Ministry of Public Works and Housing (MPWH) will be the Executing Agency for this
                         project. The MPWH, previously the MPW, has gained substantial experience in executing PNPM
                         Urban and UPP and has shown a strong commitment to slum upgrading. In particular, it has
                         significant experience in social and environmental management for PNPM Urban and PNPM-ND
                         (Neighborhood Development). The project will utilize the well-established implementation
                         arrangements set up under the PNPM Urban program, with some modifications to strengthen the set-
                         up. In addition, the MPWH, has extensive experiences and capacity in managing higher safeguards
                         risks such as series of the Integrated Urban Infrastructure Development Projects, Urban Sector
                           Development Reform Project, road, flood management, and irrigation projects. The project will
                           revise the current Environmental Guidelines into ESMF (Environmental and Social Management
                           Framework) that will also include LARPF (Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and the IPP Framework to manage risks as a Category A project. The new ESMF including LARPF
                           and IPPF will be prepared based on the experiences and lessons learned from the ongoing PNPM
                           Urban (particularly for the voluntary land donation) and comprehensive review and assessment of
                           other World Bank’s supported project on land acquisition and resettlement beyond PNPM Urban
                           project.

                           7. As is the case with PNPM Urban, a Project Management Unit (PMU), with experienced
                           personnel from PNPM Urban, will be established under the Directorate General of Human
                           Settlements (DGHS) under MPWH. The PMU will manage the contracts for consultants and
                           facilitators to assist in capacity-building and project implementation. A ministerial steering
                           committee will be established to provide guidance and oversee the program. It will include high-level
                           officials from Bappenas, the Ministry of Finance, the Ministry of Agrarian and Spatial Planning, the
                           Ministry of Health, and the National Statistics Agency (BPS).

                           8. Technical assistance will be provided through National Management Consultants (NMCs) -
                           which include environmental and social safeguards experts - at the central level, and Oversight
                           Consultant (OC) teams at the provincial level, with OC offices in participating provincial and city
                           governments, and facilitators at the urban ward level. Facilitators will work with Community Board
                           of Trustees (BKMs) to manage slum upgrading activities on the ground and facilitate and organize
                           community participation. Staff from relevant agencies of participating cities in charge of
                           environmental, land acquisition and resettlement as well as IPs communities will be trained.

                           9. During project preparation, as part of the plan to implement Component 2, the project will discuss
                           and prepare the capacity building plan for the project management staff at all levels including
                           consultants and facilitators to strengthen the current capacity of environmental and social safeguards
                           management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Indira Dharmapatni (GSURR)
                           Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (GENDR)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The project will assist the Government in setting up
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      and running institutional, monitoring evaluation and
                                                                           training systems for the National Urban Slum
                                                                           Upgrading Program. It will also directly fund the
                                                                           cost of infrastructure, housing improvement and
                                                                           livelihood initiatives in approximately 50 cities to
                                                                           improve the physical environmental conditions of the
                                                                           slum area.

                                                                           Physical improvement will include renovations,
                                                                           urban redevelopment and infrastructure provisions
                         for water, sanitation, drainage and road systems, as
                         well as improvement of sub-standard houses.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Major potential environmental and social impacts
                         from the improvement scheme are likely from
                         physical construction activities related to urban area
                         redevelopment and/or resettlement.

                         During project preparation, the locations of targeted
                         cities and the specific targeted slum areas are still
                         being discussed with the Executing Agency in
                         consultations with the districts/cities local
                         government.

                         During first year of implementation, the project will
                         do the mapping of the slum area, identification and
                         prioritization of the slum areas and what exactly
                         would be the upgrading approaches in the targeted
                         slum area. Planning and site identification would be
                         the main activities at the first year with possibility of
                         small scale on site improvement at the end of the first
                         year.

                         On the second year, the exact improvement schemes
                         that are larger in scale and complexity will be
                         determined when the Slum Improvement Action
                         Plans (SIAPs) at the city level and Community
                         Settlement Plans (CSPs) at community level, are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         completed. This will take place during project
                         implementation. Thus, the ESMF is proposed to be
                         the safeguards instrument for this project because
                         specific environmental and social impacts and their
                         magnitude in the possible construction sites at
                         specific targeted slum areas cannot be determined
                         prior to appraisal as subprojects are only identified
                         during implementation. Environmental assessments
                         for subprojects will take place during project
                         implementation based upon the ESMF.

                         The project will adopt the current Technical
                         Safeguards Guidelines of PNPM-Urban and
                         upgraded the same into the ESMF to manage the
                         increased risk as compared to a generic PNPM Urban
                         project.

                         The ESMF will be developed to ensure that the
                         following aspects are covered:
                         (i) screening process to cover the different categories
                         and types of activities/sub-projects to be supported
                         under the project;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (ii) screening and assessment of ancillary facilities
                         and potentially linked activities;
                         (iii) gap analysis and gap filling measures between
                         Indonesia's AMDAL System and Bank's EA policy;
                         (iv) screening and assessment of cumulative impacts
                         following established methodology such as the IFC
                         Good Practice Hand Book on Cumulative Impact
                         Assessment;
                         (v) WBG Environmental Health and Safety
                         Guidelines (Environmental Health and Safety being a
                         pervasive issue in the Indonesia portfolio);
                         (vi) Social impact assessment and social
                         management plan.
                         (vii) LARPF and IPPF
                         (viii) Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs)
                         Management Plan

                         As Components 1 and 2 include policy developments
                         affecting capacity to manage both environmental and
                         social impacts of investments, the ESMF will include
                         arrangements to screen, identify and manage any
                         potential gaps or conflicts between TA policy
                         products and Bank safeguard policies. The
                         Guidelines should also refer to the Bank's Interim
                         Guidelines on the Application of Bank Safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Policies for TA and TFs for Component 1and 2
                         activities.

                         At this concept stage, the project is proposed to be
                         Category A, as the potential environmental and
                         social impacts from possible primary infrastructure
                         construction and resettlement are complex, large,
                         significant and irreversible, particularly if it is at the
                         city scale. The project may require land acquisition
                         and resettlement, also some physical works at the
                         river or coastal area.

                         However, the scale, budget and staging/timing of
                         infrastructure interventions for slum upgrading will
                         be determined during preparation and the result
                         might affect the project categorization. The
                         Government is preparing the Ministerial Decree
                         about the criteria for slum area identification and its
                         upgrading options. During project preparation, the
                                                             decree would be enacted and will be assessed to
                                                             determine the project’s scope and scale.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Given the larger scale of sub-projects in urban
                                                             settings compared to typical PNPM project,
                                                             cumulative impacts might be an important impact
                                                             under the project. In addition, the potential social
                                                             impacts of the project covered by OP 4.01 other than
                                                             land acquisition and resettlement, health and safety
                                                             issues are also important given its urban setting and
                                                             potential impacts of ancillary facilities such as
                                                             disposal sites, etc. Specifically, social assessment
                                                             might be conducted during the community self-
                                                             mapping to better understanding of community
                                                             needs, especially to prevent adverse impact for the
                                                             poor and vulnerable people (including gender aspect)
                                                             and to also prevent elite capture and community
                                                             tension from sub projects selection. Means to
                                                             improve livelihood and better community
                                                             participation shall also be covered in the assessment.


                                                             Potential impacts can be managed by good
                                                             engineering design and construction practices.
                                                             Observations in some PNPM Urban projects suggest
                                                             that environment-related issues mainly arise due to
                                                             inadequate guidance, monitoring and supervision by
                                                             the facilitators and OCs during the planning and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             implementation stages, or due to an absence of
                                                             environmental considerations in the contract
                                                             document with the local contractor. Mitigation and
                                                             prevention methods proposed include proper training
                                                             (on specific technical measures) and monitoring of
                                                             the supervising field engineers, improved contract
                                                             management and improved maintenance of the
                                                             facilities.

                                                             An agreement will be reached with the Executing
                                                             Agency to have a robust plan for capacity building
                                                             and institutional strengthening for the consultants,
                                                             community facilitators and participating local
                                                             governments.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   TBD   The project will support the upgrading of slums
                                                             located in urban and peri-urban areas. Based on
                                                             experiences from PNPM-Urban and PNPM ND
                                                             (Neighborhood Development), infrastructure
                                                             development usually takes place on already-
                                                             developed land rather than on sensitive or protected
                                                             land. The current Environmental Guidelines of
                                                             PNPM Urban regulates that the project will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             finance activities that involve significant conversion
                                                             or degradation of critical natural habitats or natural
                                                             habitats as defined under the policy. The proposed
                                                             ESMF will still continue to adopt the same
                                                             principles.

                                                             However, the policy is TBD as all investments and
                                                             50 participating cities have not yet been identified.
                                                             Also, the policy could also be triggered when there
                                                             are opportunity for improving natural habitats such
                                                             as river systems from the improved sewerage
                                                             connection, drainage etc. Determination whether to
                                                             trigger this policy or not will be made during project
                                                             preparation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The project will not finance activities that involve
                                                             significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                             forest areas or natural forests as defined under the
                                                             policy. The project is not intended for commercial
                                                             plantation and there is no project component to
                                                             improve the forest function.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not supply any pesticide or support
                                                             activities that may lead to a significant increase in
                                                             the use of pesticide.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   The existing Environmental Guidelines of PNPM
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP 4.11                          Urban have covered the requirements for the
                                                             preparation of PCR Management Plans (PMPs).
                                                             During the preparation of PNPM Urban IV, the task
                                                             team triggered this policy. Some possible urban slum
                                                             improvement areas might also be in the location of
                                                             PCR sites. PMPs along with the Community
                                                             Settlement Plans (CSPs) will be prepared by
                                                             community groups for those sub-projects which are
                                                             geared towards supporting the management or
                                                             conservation of cultural heritage assets. The
                                                             proposed ESMF will also include the PMPs
                                                             preparation as part of the ESIA.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes   The project will support slum upgrading in urban
                         4.10                                areas. At this point, the list of participating cities is
                                                             still yet to be confirmed. The ongoing PNPM Urban
                                                             program indicated that there are IPs communities
                                                             present in 11 urban wards in 8 districts/cities
                                                             (districts of Aceh Tenggara, Pidie, Tanah Laut,
                                                             Malinau, and Toli-toli, as well as Kotas Gorontalo,
                                                              Manokwari, and Palopo). If these districts/cities are
                                                              part of the project, it is likely that the project covers
                                                              urban areas where IPs communities are present. As
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              of to date, ongoing PNPM-Urban has not involved or
                                                              affected IPs communities. Screening of the IP
                                                              presence in project areas will be carried out once the
                                                              list of the targeted districts/cities is confirmed during
                                                              implementation. The screening will be done in
                                                              accordance with the requirements of OP 4.10, and in
                                                              reference to the World Bank IPs Screening Study
                                                              (2010) as well as additional information gathered
                                                              from the respective local governments, as well as
                                                              criteria for determining the presence of “Masyarakat
                                                              Hukum Adat” (MHA) summarized from various
                                                              Indonesian regulations. The project will continue to
                                                              adopt the IPP Framework (including the guideline to
                                                              prepare an SA for urban areas where IPs
                                                              communities are present and affected by the project)
                                                              for PNPM Urban (will be under updated ESMF, to
                                                              be completed prior to appraisal) with necessary
                                                              adjustments to manage risks due to the anticipated
                                                              interventions in more complex slum areas. In the
                                                              case that the project affect IPs community, the
                                                              District/City local government will have to prepare
                                                              an IPP for city level secondary and primary
                                                              infrastructure, and the representative group for the
                                                              slum area will prepare an IPP as part of the CSP for
                                                              tertiary infrastructure built in the slum area.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   Yes   - Component 1 constitutes Institutional Development
                         BP 4.12                              and Policy Reform and Component 2 covers
                                                              Integrated Planning Support and Capacity Building
                                                              for Local Government and Communities. The ESMF
                                                              will include arrangements to screen, identify and
                                                              manage any potential gaps between the TA policy
                                                              products or downstream activities due to the policy
                                                              and capacity building products and Bank safeguards
                                                              policies. The TORs for the training and consultancy
                                                              works under both Component 1 and 2 will be shared
                                                              with the Bank for review and approval.

                                                              - As participating cities have not been confirmed and
                                                              hence, targeted slum areas have not been identified at
                                                              this point, learning from the past experiences in
                                                              PNPM-Urban and other projects, some scenarios
                                                              could take place that relates to land. Subprojects may
                                                              range from small scale to large scale, and therefore
                                                              land needed would vary from small size (such as for
                         tertiary community infrastructure) to large size (such
                         as secondary and primary infrastructure at the city
                         level). The need to prepare an SA at the city level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         due to the land taking will be defined during project
                         implementation, once participating cities have
                         defined the targeted slum areas in the SIAP. As an
                         integrated slum upgrading project, it will likely
                         involve land acquisition and resettlement, mainly to
                         accommodate new city-level secondary and primary
                         infrastructure for water, sanitation, drainage and road
                         systems. Land consolidation or land readjustment in
                         slum areas may need to take place for in-situ
                         redevelopment/ rearrangement. The project may also
                         require slum dweller relocation to new sites or to
                         new public housing complexes. In the case of
                         ongoing PNPM Urban and PNPM ND, new tertiary
                         infrastructure was usually built on land voluntarily
                         donated by the beneficiaries. This scheme would
                         likely continue to take place in the proposed project
                         as the land needed for the tertiary subprojects, which
                         are community-based, is usually small in size and
                         provides direct benefit for the land owners.

                         - The project will revise the current PNPM-Urban
                         Environmental Guidelines into ESMF, Land
                         Acquisition and Resettlement Policy Framework
                         (LARPF) and the IPP Framework for PNPM Urban.
                         The new ESMF including LARPF will be prepared
Public Disclosure Copy




                         based on the experiences and lessons learned from
                         the ongoing PNPM Urban (particularly for the
                         voluntary land donation) and comprehensive review
                         and assessment of other World Bank’s supported
                         project on land acquisition and resettlement beyond
                         PNPM Urban project. The substance and structure of
                         the LARPF will follow the OP 4.12, and entitlement
                         matrix and GRM will be part of it. The LARPF will
                         also adopt the GoI’s law and regulations pertaining
                         Land Acquisition for the Development for Public
                         Purpose.

                         - The LARPF (in the ESMF) will also include a set
                         of guidelines for implementing land consolidation
                         which will be developed in compliance with OP/BP
                         4.12 and the GOI’s regulations on land
                         consolidation. Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs)
                         will be developed by cities for the secondary and
                         primary infrastructure as well as for tertiary
                         infrastructure for slum upgrading, in the case that
                         provision of this infrastructure involves land
                         acquisition and involuntary resettlement under the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         eminent domain principle. In the case that slum
                         upgrading involves land consolidation, RAPs should
                         include land consolidation implementation plans
                         (LCIPs). When voluntary land donations are required
                         to facilitate the provision of tertiary infrastructure,
                         this should be included in the CSP.

                         - The current VLD protocol covering principles,
                         procedures and documentation for voluntary land
                         donations under PNPM Urban will be updated and
                         adopted by the upcoming project for community
                         infrastructure. The update of the protocol will
                         include the follow-up on the legal status of the
                         remaining land that should be processed by the local
                         government. Furthermore, the VLD protocol will be
                         part of the LARPF.

                         - For the time being, the list of participating cities
                         still needs to be confirmed and the list of targeted
                         slum areas are still being discussed by the Executing
                         Agency in consultation with district/city
                         governments. However, specific slum areas and what
                         exactly would be the upgrading approaches in the
                         targeted cities will be defined based on the detail
                         mapping of the areas and on the discussions and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         agreements between the community and the local
                         government, which will be done in the first year of
                         project implementation. Therefore, slum upgrading
                         schemes (on-site redevelopment, on-site upgrading,
                         land consolidation, relocation, etc.) in districts/cities
                         as well as their targeted sites cannot be identified at
                         this stage. Similarly, the size and the sites of city-
                         level secondary and primary infrastructure cannot be
                         defined at this stage.

                         - The identification of targeted slum areas and their
                         improvement schemes can be only identified when
                         the Slum Improvement Action Plans (SIAPs) at the
                         city level and slum detail mapping as well as
                         Community Settlement Plans (CSPs) at community
                         level, are completed. This will take place during
                         project implementation.

                         - The project will not finance the purchase of land,
                                                                                                                        however, it would finance basic infrastructure in the
                                                                                                                        relocation sites.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The Project will not finance construction or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of dam.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The Project will not finance construction or
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   rehabilitation of dam.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The Project is not located in any known disputed
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                areas as defined under the policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      November 30, 2015
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: George Soraya
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                                                                                      Date: 24-Nov-2015
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                                                                                                 Date: 24-Nov-2015
                                 Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
