                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC18644

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Nepal                  Project ID: P160523
                            Project Name:
                            Team Leader(s): Abdelaziz Lagnaoui,Andrea Kutter
                            Estimated Date 20-Sep-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:                             Lending        IPF
                                                                       Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    0.25               Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:         0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Financing Gap                                                                               0.25
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of this project is to support the Government of Nepal with the preparation of Nepal's
                           Forest Investment Plan and enhance its capacity for implementation.
                           C. Project Description
                           In March 2015, the Government of Nepal submitted an Expression of Interest (EoI) to participate in
                           the FIP to the FIP Sub-Committee. The EoI provided a description of the country and sector context,
                           forest-related climate change mitigation potential, drivers of deforestation and potential investments
                           needed to address those, as well as the potential to generate enhanced development co-benefits, as
                           required by the FIP. The major barriers for reducing /avoiding deforestation and forest degradation as
                           outlined in the EOI included:
                           - Lack of political will to take a transformational change in forest governance;
                           - Inadequate financial resources for intensive implementation of SFM;
                           - Lack of research needed for strong policy decisions;
                           - Weak governance (including institutional capacity, and law enforcement)
                           - Inadequate technical capacity among forest officials, user groups and local institutions;

                           The information provided in the EoI remains relevant and current. Hence the FIP resources will be
                           used to address the challenges listed above. The main activities to accomplish the objective of this
                           project will include:
                           - Review and analysis of national strategies and plans relevant for forests and climate change,
                           including REDD+;
Public Disclosure Copy




                           - Identification of the main areas of investment to be co-financed by the FIP;
                           - Hiring of consultants to prepare thematic studies which will inform the investment plan in
                           accordance with FIP criteria;
                           - Stakeholder meetings and consultations to discuss the investment plan;
                           - Finalization of the investment plan and presentation to the FIP Sub-Committee for endorsement in
                           May 2017.

                           The Government of Nepal is committed to address Nepal➢❨ s forest challenge and is eager to expand
                           the contribution of forests and trees to the national economy while improving forest governance and
                           private sector engagement During the preparation of the investment plan, priority areas of action to
                           be co-financed by the FIP will be identified through a consultative process.

                           The FIP IP is envisaged to position the country to avail of available and potential new financing such
                           as from the Green Climate Fund and other bilateral and multilateral financing sources.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           No investments or pilot activities will be undertaken on site. The investment plan will be prepared
                           for the country and will be based on the country's REDD+ Readiness (draft) strategy, the draft forest
                           sector master plan as well as the climate change strategy and will identify potential areas for
                           investment.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The REDD Implementation Center has been trained on Safeguards issues as they related to Forestry,
                           Indigenous peoples, REDD and FIP processes. Staff of the Center successfully implemented the
                           REDD Readiness prepaparation project, recently completed as such are familiar with the requirement
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of the Bank safeguard policies.

                           The AF to further advance the REDD readiness process supported through the FCPF will revist and
                           modify the SESA conducted during the original readiness grant and inform the ESMF. The GoN will
                           lead that process. FIP will build on the additional information generated through the additional
                           finance, including the development of a feedback and grievance mechanism.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Annu Rajbhandari (GEN06)
                           Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)
                           Haddy Jatou Sey (GSU02)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        Yes              This policy and OP4.10 are triggered to indicate
                           BP 4.01                                              that the team acknowledges that the project
                                                                                concepts included in the investment plan are
                                                                                likely to have environmental and social issues
                                                                 that need to be addressed during project
                                                                 preparation. However, during plan preparation,
                                                                 activities will only be limited to review and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 consultations based on the country's existing
                                                                 national forest/climate change strategies and
                                                                 other relevant sectoral policies and strategies.
                                                                 No on-site investments or changes or revisions
                                                                 to forest or other policies will be carried out. If,
                                                                 after the endorsement of the Plan the World
                                                                 Bank agrees to finance one of the projects, then
                                                                 relevant Bank policies and procedures including
                                                                 safeguard policies, will be applied during
                                                                 project preparation. It is proposed that
                                                                 environmental and social screening of proposed
                                                                 investment project concept and the investment
                                                                 plan disclosure and consultation will be carried
                                                                 out per the guidance and requirements of the
                                                                 FIP Design Document and the FIP investment
                                                                 criteria. However, environmental and social
                                                                 screening would be carried out after the
                                                                 investment plan is prepared as the investment
                                                                 plan only include the concepts of investment
                                                                 projects.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       No    No on-site investments or changes or revisions
                                                                 to forest or other policies will be carried out
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    No on-site investments or changes or revisions
                                                                 to forest or other policies will be carried out
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    No on-site investments or changes or revisions
                                                                 to forest or other policies will be carried out
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    No on-site investments or changes or revisions
                         BP 4.11                                 to forest or other policies will be carried out
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   This policy is triggered to acknowledge that the
                                                                 investment plan may include project concepts
                                                                 that are likely to adddress indigenous peoples
                                                                 issues. During plan preparation, consutlations
                                                                 will be held with several stakeholder groups
                                                                 including Indigenous Peoples groups per FIP
                                                                 guidance on consultations. The investments
                                                                 supported through the FIP will be
                                                                 complemented by a Dedciated Mechanism for
                                                                 Indignous Peoples and Local Communities.
                                                                 Feedback from all stakeholders will also be
                                                                 obtained by the government during the public
                                                                 disclosure of the draft plan.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    No on-site investments or changes or revisions
                         4.12                                    to forest or other policies will be carried out
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   No on-site investments or changes or revisions
                                                                                             to forest or other policies will be carried out
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects on International        No                               No on-site investments or activities that would
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              involve International waterways
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               No on-site investments or activities that would
                           7.60                                                              involve Disputed areas

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Abdelaziz Lagnaoui,Andrea Kutter
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                                     Date: 21-Sep-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (PMGR)                                    Date: 21-Sep-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
