INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13163
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         China                      Project ID:   P152860
Project Name:    Yunnan Early Childhood Education Innovation Project (YECEIP) (P152860)
Task Team        Xiaoyan Liang
Leader(s):
Estimated        20-Jan-2016                Estimated      15-Jul-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDO2                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Pre-primary education (100%)
Theme(s):        Education for all (80%), Nutrition and food security (10%), Child health (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      78.94             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         28.94
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            50.00
Total                                                            78.94
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objectives are to: improve the access and quality of ECE provision in
Yunnan and to pilot sustainable ECE service delivery models in rural Yunnan. The Project will have
four components: (i) increasing rural access to ECE by constructing pubic preschools in strategic
locations and establishing rural ECE teaching points, (ii) improving the quality of ECE by
strengthening the capacity of teacher training, delivering relevant in-service and pre-service teacher
training programs, (ii) establishing a provincial ECE quality assurance and sustainable financing
framework, and (iv) project management, monitoring and evaluation. The proposed YECEIP will


﻿have a total investment of US$65 million, with US$50 million from the IBRD loan and US$15
million in counterpart funds. The decisions were made in consultation with counterparts in Yunnan
during the March 2015 identification mission.
O
)       In each of the components, the Project will support activities that complement the Province's own
efforts in the implementation of the 2nd Three Year Action Plan for ECE. Activities have been
designed to fill the gaps and complement the government??s own actions to avoid overlap and
duplication. The YECEIP will focus on seven poor counties in Yunnan. The counties were selected
using a number of criteria including poverty status, demand for ECE, current government investment
in ECE, as well as local government capacity and ownership, the Provincial Departments of Finance,
Development Reform Commission, and Education. In addition, three university diploma and
bachelor programs for preschool teacher training have been selected as project beneficiaries to
receive capacity building and provide pre-service and in-service training in turn.
C. Project Description
The Project will have four main components:
Component 1: Increasing Rural Access to ECE. The project proposes to build 17 model public
preschools, including 15 preschools in the more densely populated areas of the seven project counties
with a total of 146 classes and two research preschools affiliated with Zhaotong University and
Kunming University with a total of 24 classes. The project will also pilot different models of
sustainable rural ECE service alternatives in Weishan county of Dali prefecture where the terrain is
more mountainous and population sparse. Options include contracting experienced NGOs to provide
ECE services based on these organizations' current model of rural and community ECE service
provision which could be potentially more sustainable. This component will also include an impact
evaluation to be financed by SIEF and Korea Development Institute. A total of 60 village ECE
centers/classes will be established benefiting about 900 children of 3 to 6 year olds.
Component 2: Improving ECE quality. The project proposes to deliver a comprehensive in-service
teacher and manager training program through the participation of the three universities and seven
project counties. The development of training program will be informed by an in-depth needs
assessment to be conducted in every project county. The training will serve the preschools
constructed under the project as well as all the other public and private preschools in the project
counties. All project entities will set aside approximately 20 percent of the loan proceeds for training
of the preschool teachers based on agreed upon training plans.
The project will also enhance the capacity of pre-service ECE teacher education programs in
Kunming University, Zhaotong University, and Yunnan Normal University. Under the project,
Kunming University will build a research center focusing on ECE and rehabilitation services for
children with disabilities, particularly focusing on early intervention in 0-3 age group. Zhaotong
University will be assisted in building a teacher training center for ECE. The Project will support the
Yunnan Normal University to develop a premium research institute for ECE research and teaching
towards the Southwestern areas of China as well as the bordering countries of Myanmar, Laos, and
Vietnam, by financing the construction of a state-of-the-art ECE research center and by recruiting
and developing faculty and research associates. In each university, ECE faculty will be strengthened
with training, exchanges, and collaboration with domestic and foreign research organizations. The
ECE faculty members at the project universities can also receive competency enhancement support
through involvement in the university-affiliated preschools and resource platform. The project will
develop an on-line resource bank and platform for ECE teaching and learning.


﻿Component 3: The project hence proposes to facilitate a more favorable ECE policy environment
bydeveloping and piloting ECE institutional quality accreditation standards as well as preschool
teacher competency standards applicable to both private and public preschools. Additionally, the
U       project will design and implement a culturally relevant information and advocacy campaign for ECE
with the objective influencing local community and their knowledge of scientific childrearing
practices. This intervention is considered relevant from the point of view of project's sustainability
and engagement with local community of Yunnan, and hence all efforts will be made to engage local
experts to ensure that the disseminated information and campaign content builds upon local best
practices of child rearing and is culturally sensitive. Furthermore, the Project will invest in an
innovation fund for ECE
teaching and learning activities to enable research and experimentation, and emergence of locally
viable innovations. Finally, in order maximize the impact of quality assurance framework, advocacy
campaigns, and new innovations, the Project will work with local partners to facilitate policy
development on ECE including the development of sustainable ECE financing mechanisms.
Component 4: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation. Project management and monitoring
and evaluation are key areas to ensure the achievement of the PDOs. This component will include
activities related to project management, financial management, procurement, safeguards, monitoring
and evaluation. In addition to the SIEF impact evaluation designed for the rural ECE, the project will
also establish a comprehensive monitoring and evaluation framework to measure the overall success
of the project. Capacity building of all project personnel both at the provincial and at the local level
will also be routinely financed under this component.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
A total of seven project counties and three colleges in two cities are selected for project
implementation across Yunnan Province on Yun-Gui Plateau, Southwest of China. The seven
project counties are located in five municipalities, with a total of 2.51 million of population. They
include Weishan, Eryuan, and Yangbi Counties in Dali Prefecture, Jianshui County in Honghe
Prefecture, Qiaojia County in Zaotong City, Xichou County in Wenshan City, and Zhanyi County in
Qujing City. Two participating colleges are located in Kunming, and one collage in Zaotong City.
Their climate ranges from subtropical, continental temperate to alpine zone with annual average
precipitation from around 700 to about 1000 mm. Most of project counties are national poverty
counties. About 28 percent of population are ethnic minorities in the project counties, ranging from
5-6 percent in Xichou and Zhanyi to 71 percent in Eryuan.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Yunnan PPMO has been managing one ongoing Bank financed Technical and Vocational
Education and Training (TVET) project in several cities across the province. For this early childhood
education project, it has dedicated staff on environment and plan to engage experienced consultant to
prepare the environmental and social assessment. However, PMOs at city and county level have little
knowledge about the Bank safeguard policy and requirements. Extensive training by the Bank
safeguard specialist will be continued during the whole project period to enhance their institutional
capacity on preparing and implementing environmental and social safeguard.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Xin Ren (GENDR)
Youxuan Zhu (GSU02)


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Project will build 17 preschools in built-up area
OP/BP 4.01                               or
suburb and research and training centers within
existing
campuses in several cities, most of them county
seats.
Due to the small scale of each subproject,
environmental
impacts are small, mostly confined to the site with
limited
social disturbance. Thus, category B was assigned.
Environmental Assessment (EA) will be carried out
to
investigate social-environmental baseline including
pollution control facilities and analyze the impacts.
An
Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be
developed based on the consolidated EA covering all
subprojects. As per the World Bank policy OP4.01,
public
consultation in all project cities is needed after the
draft
EA/EMP is publicly disclosed locally. Feedback
from
the public needs to be recorded in the EA and
incorporated in the EMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          The EA process has verified that all project sites are
either
in built up area or suburb of project cities or in
existing
campuses and facilities. Thus this OP is not applied.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          Not applicable
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          Not applicable
Physical Cultural Resources  No          Systematic investigation during the EA process has
OP/BP 4.11                              confirmed that the project doesn't affect any physical
cultural resources as defined by this OP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    Yes         The policy is triggered since quite large portion of
4.10                                    project
beneficiaries are ethnic minorities. About 28 percent
of
population in the project counties are ethnic


﻿minorities,
ranging from 5-6 percent in Xichou and Zhanyi to 69
percent in Eryuan. Among them, Yi, Bai, and Hui are
three main minorities. Minority population appear
more
concentrated in rural townships and villages, where
the
rural ECE alternative pilot components are located.
In
order to ensure broad support by local population on
different components of the project, extensive
consultations were conducted with local
communities,
particularly ethnic minority people in the project
areas,
and an ethnic minority development plan (EMDP)
has
been prepared. Based on the consultations, issues
concerning minority children, parents, and school
teachers
were identified and concrete measures for ECE
improvement are incorporated in project design and
included in the EMDP. The EMDP will be disclosed
locally in project counties, and through the InfoShop.
The
key social benefits of the Project are increasing
enrollment and quality of ECE in the project areas,
particularly among ethnic minority communities,
through
development of new schools, provision of teacher
training, and improvement of ECE policy and social
support. All these recommendations have been
accepted
by the PMO and built into the project design. The
PIU of
project county will lead the implementation of the
EMDP
under the oversight of the provincial project leading
group. An experienced external monitoring agency
will be
contracted to conduct independent monitoring and
evaluation over the course of the project
implementation.
The monitoring results will be reported twice a year
and,
if needed, remedial actions will be designed.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No         Under the Project, a total of 17 preschools will be


﻿BP 4.12                                   constructed, including 15 preschools in the seven
project counties and 2 experimental preschools in the
two project universities. In addition, 3 research and
training centers/buildings will be constructed in the
universities.
A total of 243 mu of land areas (1 ha = 15mu) is
required. All the required land areas are either
located within the existing campuses of three
colleges or allocated by county governments.
According to the due diligence review, land
acquisition and compensation for all sites were
carried out in accordance with national laws and
regulations as well as basic principles of OP4.12.
Therefore, the policy of involuntary resettlement will
not be triggered.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           Not applicable
Projects on International    No           Not applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Not applicable
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Dec-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
EA is ready. EMP is expected to by ready by Appraisal December 14, 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Xiaoyan Liang
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 14-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos (PMGR)             Date: 17-Dec-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


