INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSAl 170
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Senegal                     Project ID:  P153078
Parent        P101415
Project ID:
Project Name: Transport & Urban Mobility Additional Financing (P153078)
Parent Project SENEGAL: TRANSPORT & URBAN MOBILITY PROJECT (P101415)
Name:
Task Team       Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto,Ibou Diouf
Leader(s):
Estimated        10-Aug-2015                Estimated    26-Nov-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO5                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (38%), Public administration-
Transportation (19%), General transportation sector (12%), Ra ilways (1%),
Urban Transport (30%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (33%), Regional integration (33%),
Infrastructure services for private sector development (17%), T rade facilitation
and market access (17%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      65.00             Total Bank Financing:    50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                           15.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  50.00
Total                                                                        65.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 8


﻿Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The development objectives of this project are to: (i) improve effective road management,
maintenance and safety, both at national level and in urban areas; and (ii) help improve safety,
efficiency and environmental quality of public transport in the GDA. The project results would
be measured through the following outcome indicators: (i) reduced transport time [or cost] inside
the area; and (ii) increase in customer satisfaction with public transport services in the Greater
Dakar Area (GDA).
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The project activities will be scaled up by the construction and rehabilitation of about
(i)69 km of interurban roads, (ii) about 30 km of urban roads paving using labor based approach, and
(iii) complementary studies for pilot BRT, and (iv) technical, environmental and social impact
assessment studies for rural and urban roads. The targeted roads are those connected to the Grandes
Niayes roads under rehabilitation by the original Project and are located in the peripheral zone of
Dakar (Pikine, Gu6diawaye and Parcelles Assainies and Sangalkam). The AF for the Project will also
finance technical assistance to CETUD in the development of a pilot BRT project in Dakar. Finally
the Project would continue supporting implementation, monitoring and evaluation activities and the
coordination unit's operating costs.
The main activities would also take into account:
Component 1: Support to Interurban and Urban Road Infrastructure Development (estimated cost:
US$53million financed by IDA): This component comprises two sub-components: (i) Institutional
strengthening; and (ii) Interurban and Urban Road Infrastructure investments.
Sub-componentl: Institutional strengthening (estimated cost: US$lmillion IDA):
This sub component aims to support the operational capability of the institutions in charge of road
management, maintenance and safety (FERA, DR and DTR). This Component would finance
targeted technical assistance, awareness campaign for road safety, light training needed for project
implementation, as well as light equipment for the key sector agencies (FERA, DR, DTR and
AGEROUTE). The AF will pursue the implementation of road safety activities started under the
initial Project. The activities to be implemented comprise sensitization campaigns for road users and
urban community members, particularly school children. For that, the Project will finance the
implementation of part of the road safety priority program.
Focus will be put on continuous policy dialog regarding the Second Generation Road Fund's
autonomy and the maintenance program managed by the FERA to strengthen road maintenance
program planning and programming and ensure efficient road maintenance works. Support would be
provided through capacity building, technical assistance and training activities as needed for FERA
Page 2 of 8


﻿and AGEROUTE and the Ministry in charge of finance on the mechanism of sustainable road
maintenance system.
Sub-component 2: Investments (estimated cost: US$52 million IDA):
This component would finance (i) works for 30 km of urban roads paving, (ii) works for around 70
km of inter urban roads, (iii) consultant services for urban and inter urban works control and
supervision, (iv) environmental and social impact mitigations measures for urban roads paving and
inter urban roads construction and (v) technical audit for works. The urban roads paving will use
High Intensive Labor Works Method (HILM) in Dakar peripheral zones (Pikine, Gu6diawaye,
Parcelles Assainies and Sangalkam).
Paving of urban roads through High Intensity Labor Approach (US$15 million).
The project would finance the works for the 30 km of urban roads paving including (i) Consultant
services for works control and supervision and (ii) Environmental and social impact mitigations
measures for urban roads paving. Urban roads are located in the GDA periphery and densely
populated zones (Pikine, Gu6diawaye and Parcelles Assainies and Sangalkam) connected to the
Grandes Niayes. The construction will executed through High Intensive Labor Works approach. The
Project would finance the update of the detailed studies, the economic analysis and the EIA of the
roads works. The bidding process should be initiated during the preparation process to enable having
contractors sometime after the effectiveness.
The main objective of paving those urban roads is to improve living conditions of the targeted zones
and contribute in reducing poverty by creating jobs. The works will also help fighting flooding.
Rehabilitation of about 69 km of interurban roads (estimated cost about US$37 million of which IDA
is funding US$22 million and the GoS US$ 15million).. This concerns the road section Lompoul-
Leona-Potou-Gandiole and including (i) Consultant services for works control and supervision and
(ii) Environmental and social impact mitigations measures for interurban roads asphalting. This road
is approximately 68 km long and is located in the North West of the country in the region of Louga
and Saint Louis. The road contains three main sections:
*      Section Lompoul - L6ona: 43 kilometer
*      Section L6ona - Potou: 7 kilometer
Section Potou - Gandiole: 19 kilometer
Component 2: Support capacity building for the Development of Public Transport Services in the
GDA and complementary studies and technical assistance in designing a pilot BRT project in Dakar.
(Estimated cost: US$4 million financed by IDA). The activities proposed to be financed under this
component are: (i) an institutional study for the BRT pilot Project and design of the Public and
Private Partnership scheme; (ii) technical assistance to CETUD for BRT project impl ementation
(advisory activities for technical design, financial engineering and legal expertise); (iii) facilitation
of institutional arrangements to define responsibility of the different stakeholders, and (iv) support to
a participatory/consultative process to build ownership and social acceptance of the Project
(information, sensitization and communication on the BRT concept).
Component 3: Support to implementation, monitoring and evaluation (US$0.5 million). The
component will finance the management cost of the Project and the audits and monitoring and
evaluation. The detailed activities financed are as follows: (i) operating costs; (ii) technical and
financial audits; and (iii) support for monitoring and evaluation, including surveys and beneficiary
Page 3 of 8


﻿assessments for the project.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The urban activities will be implemented in the Greater Dakar Area (Pikine, Gu6diawaye and
Parcelles Assainies and Sangalkam). The interurban activities will be implemented in the Grandes
Niayes area identified during project preparation. The road section concerned is Lompoul-Leona-
Potou-Gandiole (69 km).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Yacouba Konate (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The project will involve road upgrading and road
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                construction (national and rural programs) in selected
areas. The Environmental and Social impact Assessments
(ESIA) for both the interurban and urban roads and
associated Environmental Management Plan (EMPs) have
been prepared, published in-country on July 23, 2015, and
cleared by RSA and submitted at Bank Infoshop on
August 21, 2015. These studies have confirmed that the
projects do not present significant environmental risks or
impacts. Additional public consultations will be organized
by the PCU to better inform various stakeholders of the
content of the ESIA reports.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The project activities would not result in any conversion
4.04                                 or degradation of critical natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           There is no standing forest in the project area.
Nevertheless the project has provisioned a budget to do a
reforestation.as per the EMP.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       Yes          OP 4.11 is triggered because Senegal, as a country, is
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 viewed as a rich physical cultural resource area. While it
is not known at this point which sites may contain PCR, it
would be prudent to exercise caution when implementing
road sub-projects. This will entail ensuring that EIAs
consultants, Resident Engineers and contractors are
teamed up with PCR experts, to ensure that impacts on
PCR are covered and mitigation measures commensurate
to those impacts, including proper handling of chance
finds are implemented in the design, implementation and
maintenance of road subproject, in accordance with
national and Bank policies and procedures. Since the
locations of sub-projects are not known, the updated
environmental safeguard framework will provide
guidance for determining that the suitability of the
Page 4 of 8


﻿location from the perspective of PCR is included in the
selection, screening, impact assessment, development of
mitigation measures, and the monitoring and reporting of
the implementation procedures.
The project team and implementers will ensure that
proposed mitigation measures derived from Sub-projects
specific ESIAs/EMPs: (i) have been discussed with and
agreed upon by concerned parties; (ii) include an
assessment of the capacity to implement the measures;
and (iii) are acceptable within the national regulatory and
legal framework, including laws and regulations
concerning cultural heritage and antiquities.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The RPF were prepared by Gos and and cleared by the
OP/BP 4.12                           safeguards adviser and disclosed in-country on March 19,
2015 and at the Bank's Infoshop on March 19, 2015.
When required, a Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will
be prepared and implemented before any starting of
works.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01). The project will involve road upgrading and road
construction (national and rural programs) in selected areas. The Environmental and Social
impact Assessments (ESIA) for both the interurban and urban roads and associated Environmental
Management Plan (EMPs) have been prepared, published in-country on July 23, 2015, and cleared
by RSA and submitted at Bank Infoshop on August 21, 2015. These studies have confirmed that
the projects do not present significant environmental risks or impacts. Additional public
consultations will be organized by the PCU to better inform various stakeholders of the content of
the ESIA reports.
Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11). OP 4.11 is triggered because Senegal, as a country, is
viewed as a rich physical cultural resource area. While it is not known at this point which sites
may contain PCR, it would be prudent to exercise caution when implementing road sub-projects.
This will entail ensuring that EIAs consultants, Resident Engineers and contractors are teamed up
with PCR experts, to ensure that impacts on PCR are covered and mitigation measures
commensurate to those impacts, including proper handling of chance finds are implemented in the
design, implementation and maintenance of road subproject, in accordance with national and Bank
Page 5 of 8


﻿policies and procedures. Since the locations of sub-projects are not known, the updated
environmental safeguard framework will provide guidance for determining that the suitability of
the location from the perspective of PCR is included in the selection, screening, impact
assessment, development of mitigation measures, and the monitoring and reporting of the
implementation procedures.
The project team and implementers will ensure that proposed mitigation measures derived from
Sub-projects specific ESIAs/EMPs: (i) have been discussed with and agreed upon by concerned
parties; (ii) include an assessment of the capacity to implement the measures; and (iii) are
acceptable within the national regulatory and legal framework, including laws and regulations
concerning cultural heritage and antiquities.
Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12). The RPF were prepared by Gos and and cleared by the
safeguards adviser and disclosed in-country on March 19, 2015 and at the Bank's Infoshop on
March 19, 2015. When required, a Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared and
implemented before any starting of works.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
*      Increase incidence of poaching to access roads;
*      soil erosion and degradation;
*      sedimentation of water bodies due to lack or improper borrow pits rehabilitation;
*      improper waste management;
*      Noise pollution due to operating machinery;
*      Air pollution due to dust and smoke emanating from machinery during civil works;
*      Increase in the prevalence of HIV/AIDS and STDs at construction sites and at the
enterprise base
*      Risks of loss of livelihoods due to relocation
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Most investments consist in the rehabilitation of existing roads in an interurban environment and
the paving of existent urban roads section. Environmental and social impact is one of the key
criteria used for the identification of the roads section to be financed under this project. The HILM
used has less adverse impact on the environment and provide huge benefit in terms of social
impacts. Although the location of each road is not likely to be changed, alternatives will be
considered during the implementation to minimize negative impact (adjustment of standards,
improvement of drainage of neighboring areas, etc.).
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower will draw lesson from the implementation of initial project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are: (i) the transport operators, population of villages along the roads, the
periphery zones of Dakar populations.
For the initial project, Safeguard instruments were prepared and disclosed (an Environmental and
Social Management Framework -ESMF- for the entire project and the Resettlement Policy
Framework -RPF- for the entire project). The implementation of social and environmental
safeguards is rated Moderately Satisfactory: (i) the environmental and social mitigation measures
Page 6 of 8


﻿identified through the Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) of roads works on the
Grandes Niayes have been integrated in contracts, implemented and reported; (ii) during the works
on lot 3 Diogo-Lompoul (23 km), few impacted peoples were numbered (essentially field
impacted by deviations and road section enlargement); (iii) a full compensation evaluation has
been prepared by the national compensation committee, and people affected (mainly on the Diogo-
Lompoul road section) have been successfully compensated by the GoS and reported; (iv) the
Government has disbursed about XOF 13.770.129 or 25,000US to compensate the affected people
(around 15 people); and (v) a safeguard compliance assessment study recommended during the
supervision missions was completed on May 2015. The report was cleared and disclosed in the
country on July 232015 t. The study provided the necessary recommendations to further improve
safeguards monitoring for both the original Project and the Additional Financing activities. All the
safeguards supervision reports revealed that the project environmental and social adverse impacts
are actually few and very low in magnitude.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                30-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             21-Aug-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Senegal                                                   23-Jul-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                26-Jan-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Jan-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Senegal                                                   26-Jan-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Page 7 of 8


﻿Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Aguiratou Savadogo-Tinto,Ibou Diouf
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                 Date: 27-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Nicolas Peltier-Thiberge (PMGR)      Date: 27-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


