INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15806
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Dec-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Vietnam                    Project ID:  P151086
Project Name: Vietnam Energy Efficiency for Industrial Enterprises(VEEIE) (P151086)
Task Team       Franz Gerner,Thi Ba Chu
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Dec-2015                Estimated    04-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE02                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (90%), Banking (10%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     315.00            Total Bank Financing:  203.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                        112.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     200.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                 3.00
Total                                                                     315.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve energy efficiency in Vietnam's industrial sector.
The project will thereby contribute to achieving the government's energy efficiency and GHG
reduction objectives.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 14


﻿1.     This is an integrated IBRD/IDA-funded project designed to help remove the principal
barriers to investments in industrial EE projects. The technical assistance activities financed by IDA
will address the knowledge, institutional and capacity building needs of the banking and industrial
sectors, mitigate risk concerns of enterprises, and strengthen government supervision of industrial EE
and energy conservation. Those efforts will be accompanied by an EE financial intermediary lending
program, which will demonstrate viable mechanisms for financing industrial EE investments, in
direct support of the Government's EE targets and green growth strategy.
2.      Component 1 - Energy Efficiency Investment Lending (US$312 million, of which US$200
million from IBRD, US$50 million from PFIs, and US$62 million from lEs)
3.     This component consists of an EE lending program of US$312 million over five years: (a)
US$200 million in IBRD debt financing; (b) PFIs will co-finance project activities, financing 20
percent of the loan to lEs; and (c) sub-borrowers (i.e. lEs) will contribute 20 percent of investments
as equity financing, which is common practice for loan applications in Vietnam.
4.     A US$200 million IBRD loan will be on-lent by MOF to selected PFIs. The PFIs in turn will
lend the funds to lEs and/or energy service companies for EE investment subprojects. Their lending
rates will be determined based on market conditions and will adequately cover the financing and
operating costs and provide for a reasonable profit margin for the PFIs.
5.     The PFIs will be selected in accordance with financial and non-financial criteria. Non-
financial criteria will include demonstrated EE lending strategy/commitment, experience and ability
to generate a solid EE project pipeline. The selection of PFIs will fully comply with the Bank's
OP 10.0 requirements. The IBRD funds will be allocated among the selected PFIs based on the
demonstrated pipeline and remaining funds will be allocated on a first come, first served basis.
6.     An Operational Manual (OM) will be developed which outlines selection criteria for sub-
borrowers and subprojects, appraisal procedures and guidelines, roles and responsibilities of the PFIs
and the government, PFIs' internal institutional arrangement for project implementation, technical
evaluation, environmental and social, procurement and financial management frameworks that are
consistent with the Bank and Vietnamese Government rules and procedures. During project
implementation, the PFIs will be responsible for identifying, appraising, and financing subprojects
that meet the criteria in the OM, and bear all associated risks.
O
Q)        Component 2 - Technical Assistance and Capacity Building for Improving Energy Efficiency (US
$3million financed through IDA)
7.     This TA and capacity building component will assist: (a) MOIT and relevant government
agencies, which are responsible for EE policies and targets, to implement voluntary agreements with
relevant industries, improve incentives for industry to carry out EE investments and develop
mandatory EE standards and benchmarks in the energy-intensive industries; (b) PFIs to improve their
knowledge, experience and expertise in identifying, appraising, and implementing EE lending
projects in the industrial sector and business development to generate deal flows; and (c) lEs and EE
service providers (such as Energy Service Company - ESCOs) to develop bankable projects. This
component will be closely linked with the ongoing CPEE on developing EE policies and industry
voluntary agreements.
8.     IFC is providing advisory services to Vietinbank and is working with the Bank to identify a
suitable support capacity mechanism once the PFIs are identified. Under the existing CPEE project,
the Bank is providing TA to key energy consuming lEs to develop voluntary agreements, which
could form a key part of the pipeline. The TA and capacity building for PFIs will include support to:
(a) capacity building and training, particularly to staff at both the HQ and branches as well as risk
assessment staff, including support for the development of necessary procedures, and the creation of
an adequate knowledge base to evaluate and extend EE loans; (b) marketing and business
development to generate a robust EE lending pipeline; (c) support to due diligence of eligible EE
Page 2 of 14


﻿sub-loans, including financial, technical, social and environmental assessments; and (d) development
of energy conservation-related financing instruments and risk management tools.
9.     TA and capacity building to MOIT will support: (a) assessment of National EE target
program period 2010-2015 and preparation for implementation of next phase EE target program
O
period 2016-2020; (b) strengthen the policy and legal and regulatory framework for EE in lEs; (c)
develop relevant energy use standards and establishment of EE industrial benchmarks; and (d)
develop ESCOs, scale up and encourage EE voluntary agreement, and conduct a communication
campaign to raise awareness on EE for lEs.
10.    The TA and capacity building to the PFIs include: (i) business startup, including creation,
organization, staffing, and initial business plan of the EE lending business unit (or team); (ii)
capacity building and training, including support for the development of necessary financial
instruments, procedures, and the creation of an adequate knowledge base to evaluate and extend
energy efficiency loans; (iii) marketing and development of an EE subproject pipeline; (iv) support to
due diligence of eligible EE sub-loans, including financial, technical, social and environmental
assessments; and (v) development of energy conservation-related financing instruments and risk
management tools.
11.    The TA and capacity building for lEs will include support to: (a) identify EE projects and
prepare relevant energy audits, technical design and EE project preparation; and (b) raise awareness
through a communication campaign organized jointly with relevant industry associations. Capacity
building on safeguards for the PFIs, ESCOs, and lEs as well as on-the-job training will be provided.
TA to ensure adequate capacity for the review and implementation of safeguard issues will also be
considered.
12.    A detailed TA and capacity building program and plan for MOIT, PFIs and lEs and
associated procurement plan will be developed as a next stage of project preparation. A bank
executed grant from the Canadian Externally Financed Output (EFO) will be used to conduct a
strategic sector study for the food processing industry in Vietnam, including:
*      Strategic sector work on energy savings and ozone/climate benefit potential and EE
benchmarking resulting from EE policy and investments in the seafood processing sector. (This work
will draw from an initial sector survey that was carried out under the Phase I HCFC Phase-out
Project (P115762) in Vietnam as well as the IFC study from 2010);
*      Workshops to inform industrial enterprises, financial institutions and government, as well as
donors about opportunities for EE technologies and financing; and
*      Pipeline preparation support, with specific energy audits, technical pre-FS.
o         13.   The Bank discussed with various donors including the Government of Israel, SECO,
DANIDA, GIZ, and UNIDO for potential cooperation on the EE for lEs agenda, leveraging donors'
effort to address EE barriers. The Israeli Government has indicated its interest to support specific
sectors and industries through targeted EE workshops and studies conducted in parallel to the
VEEIEs project. Similar targeted activities are being discussed with UNIDO and are closely
coordinated with MOIT.
Anticipated subprojects under component 1 include:
Energy efficiency and energy saving technologies vary by industrial sub-sectors but potential energy
saving measures includes:
* Energy systems: upgrading boilers and switching fuels, using co-generation facilities and
electric-driven systems, including compressed air systems, electric chillers, machinery and lighting;
* Process technology: upgrading and replacing equipment, machinery and facilities;
* Waste heat and waste use: use of waste heat (of hot/warm gases, liquids and solids) and
burning combustible waste (gases, liquids, solids). Use of Renewable Energy (RE) sources in order
to decrease fuel and/or electricity consumption in lEs may also be considered. Investments may
include: a) co-generation facilities, or process furnaces and stoves, and b) solar water heaters for
Page 3 of 14


﻿sanitary hot/warm preparation.
*      Use of Renewable Energy (RE) sources in order to decrease fuel and/or electricity
consumption in lEs may also be considered.
O
)         Potential of Energy efficiency and energy saving is significant in intensive energy industrial sectors
include cement, steel, textile, pulp and paper, food processing, bricks and ceramics, which are
originated in targeted sub-projects.
Hereafter is listed some of potential energy efficiency and energy saving projects of three intensive
energy industrial sectors include cement, steel, pulp and paper.
Energy saving and energy efficiency projects for cement industry include, but not limited as:
*      Using roller mill for grinding raw material,
*      Improving furnace fans and optimization of fans,
*      Installation of variable speed drivers,
*      Using waste fuel and waste heat recovery.
*      Utilization of heat exhaust for power generation.
Energy saving and energy efficiency projects for steel and iron industry include, but not limited as:
*      Oxy-fuel burners/lancing
*      Construction of closed production lines
*      Replacement of low performance air compressor,
*      Installation of inverter for motor to operate at low or fluctuating load.
*      Waste Heat Recovery utilizes the heat from flue gas (exhausted heat from electric arc
furnaces, furnaces, kilns, etc.).
*      Combustion air preheating for reheating furnace.
Energy saving and energy efficiency projects for Pulp and paper industry include, but not limited as:
*      Investment of a new efficient boiler for cogeneration (heat and electricity),
*      Replacement of motors,
*      Switching biomass fuel technology,
*      Chemical waste recovery for heating.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented by the selected ESCOs and Industrial Enterprises located in the
whole country. It is anticipated that most of the EE subprojects financed under the proposed loan will
be within the existing premises of industrial facilities. However, in rare cases, it may involve
potential need of land acquisitions. During preparation, locations of the subprojects will be carefully
considered in order to avoid potential significant environmental and social impact.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Nghi Quy Nguyen (GSURR)
Thuy Cam Duong (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The policies is triggered due to potential environmental
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                and social impacts associated with implementation of
subprojects under component 1 and certain TA activities
under component 2.
The project will bring about positive impacts to the
Page 4 of 14


﻿environment as it will contribute to the reduction of
GHGs and pollutants, increasing energy savings and
encourages the promotion of environmental good
industries and good practices.
Under the component 1, the Project will finance various
subprojects under energy intensive industries such as
cement, iron and steel, and pulp and paper, public and
private; using these potential energy saving measures: (a)
adoption of energy saving industrial technologies (e.g.,
efficient industrial boilers, kilns, and heat exchange
systems); (b) recovery and utilization of wastes and waste
heat; (c) installation of highly efficient mechanical and
electrical equipment (e.g. motors, pumps, heating and
ventilation equipment); and (d) industrial system
optimization to reduce energy use.
The sub-projects mostly involve small scale construction
for installation or replacement of energy efficient
technologies and equipment. The environmental impacts
associated with the sub-projects during construction/
installation of new equipment could be noise, air
emission, domestic waste, labor safety, and disposal of
old parts and equipment which may contain PCB and
hazardous waste.
The impacts during operation period of new equipment
and facilities potential include air emission, solid waste,
wastewater, safety issue during operation, chemicals and
solid wastes which are considered as at a lower amount or
lesser polluted than those arisen from old technologies
and equipment. The project is expected to have overall
positive social benefits because it promotes EE and thus
reduces greenhouse gas emissions and other pollutants
into the atmosphere. It will also have positive impacts
from the perspective of consumers, and workers who are
employed by the participating lEs. In a very rare case, the
subprojects may have impacts on land acquisition or on
the ethnic minority in the subproject areas. New skills are
required for workers in order to enable them adapting
with the new working context.
It is anticipated that most the sub-projects under VEEIEs
are category B with the above noted typical impacts
which are assessed as localized, varying from small to
moderate scale and mitigation measures could be readily
designed.
Page 5 of 14


﻿An ESMF to guide and set out the requirements to ensure
the safeguard compliance of the Project during
implementation period has been prepared by the client in
line with the Bank's safeguard policies and national
legislations on environmental protection. It will be
adopted by MOIT and integrated in the Project Operation
Manual. The ESMF lays out procedures which includes
(i) screening mechanism to namely to exclude ineligible
subprojects, (ii) identification of environmental and social
impacts associated with the EE project and the mitigation
measures; (iii) procedures for preparation and approval/
clearance of EA documents per GoV regulations and
Bank safeguard policies which include an environment
and social due diligence of existing facilities/IEs as part of
the ESMF; (iii) monitoring, institutional arrangement and
financial sources for ESMF implementation and (iv)
public consultation and information disclosure
requirements in accordance to the Bank safeguard
policies.
As indicated in the ESMF a detailed protocol or TOR for
conducting environment and social due diligences of
existing facilities that will be supported by the project will
be developed at the beginning of project implementation
prior to the screening of the first sub-projects. The
protocol or TOR will be submitted to the RSS for review
and clearance.
The Technical Assistant (TA) under component 2 mostly
involves capacity building activities. These activities
usually do not cause potential adverse environmental and
social impacts and risk. In fact, it would result in
enhancement of safeguard performance of subproject
under Component 1. For these TA no safeguard
instrument will need to be prepared for these activities.
Safeguards policy requirements will be integrated directly
in the TA activities or the TORs. Nevertheless, under
Component 2, technical pre-feasibility studies will be
carried out for pipeline support for the food processing
industry under Canadian Externally Finance outputs,
which have social and environmental aspects that will be
covered by the ESMF.
As the subprojects are not identified prior to appraisal, an
ESMF has been prepared by the Client to guide the
environmental assessment process and ensure compliance
Page 6 of 14


﻿with the government's environmental management
regulation and the Bank's safeguards requirements and
the WBG Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines
(WBG EHS Guidelines). The ESMF also refer to the
Interim Guidelines on the Application of safeguard
Policies for TA activities in Bank-financed Projects and
TA activities will be screened against the Interim
Guidelines.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No            The exact location of subprojects are unknown prior to
4.04                                   appraisal. However, it is noted that most of the
subprojects' work will take place within existing premises
of existing facilities and industries, hence they will
unlikely to cause negative impacts on natural habitats.
In a rare case, the subproject may involve land
acquisition, which takes place as an extension from the
existing facilities. In that case, locations for land
subprojects will be carefully considered in order to avoid
potential adverse impact to natural habitat.
The Project will finance renewable energy sources which
include Solar Photovoltaics and biomass fuel energy, but
will not involve in hydroelectric sector. It is noted that the
materials used for newly equipped biomass fuel industry
are by-products from other sectors such as rice straw from
agriculture and woodchip from wooden industry.
Therefore it is determined that the safeguard policy OP/
BP 4.04 on natural habitats is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No            The project is not anticipated to involve forests and/or
impact on the rights and welfare of local people and their
level of dependence upon low quality natural forests and
plantation forests.
It is noted that the materials used for newly equipped
biomass fuel industry are by-products from other sectors
such as rice straw from agriculture and woodchip from
wooden industry instead of being directly exploited from
forest plantation or natural forest. Therefore the safeguard
policy OP/BP 4.36 is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The project will not involve any investment that would
result in procurement of pesticides or any increase in the
use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural        Yes           The project would not involve significant excavations,
Resources OP/BP 4.11                   demolition, moving of earth, flooding, or other
environmental changes. It is not expected that the Project
will affect any known PCR.
Page 7 of 14


﻿However, there is a possibility that the some unknown
PCR may be found during the subproject implementation
as they include excavation activities. Therefore, the policy
is triggered and a chance fmds procedure has been
prepared and included in the ESMF, site-specific
subproject safeguards instruments, bidding, and
contractual documents.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes       The policy is triggered due to the potential presence of
BP 4.10                             ethnic minorities or their collective attachment to land/
natural resources in the subproject areas. The project will
ensure that ethnic minority communities will fully benefit
from the project and that they will be fully informed and
consulted about the project, its potential impact and
mitigation measures. Ethnic Minority Planning
Framework (EMPF) has been prepared by Appraisal to
guide the compliance with the World Bank's OP 4.10.
The EMPF will include an Annex with guidance for the
preparation of SA among Ethnic Minority communities or
alternatively include OP 4.10, Annex A - Social
Assessment at the end of the document.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The types of EE projects to be financed under this project
OP/BP 4.12                          could include: (a) adoption of energy saving industrial
technologies (e.g., efficient industrial boilers, kilns, and
heat exchange systems); (b) recovery and utilization of
wastes and waste heat; (c) installation of highly efficient
mechanical and electrical equipment (e.g. motors, pumps,
heating and ventilation equipment); and (d) industrial
Q)                                            system optimization to reduce energy use. It will be likely
that the EE subprojects financed under the proposed loan
will be within the existing premises of industrial facilities.
However, this policy is triggered due to the possibility of
the involuntary taking of land required for subprojects
implementation cycle. By appraisal, the resettlement
policy framework (RPF) has been prepared to guide the
compliance with the World Bank's OP 4.12.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The Project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                of any dam. The project is also not dependent on any
existing dam or dam under construction.
Projects on International  No       The project is not implemented in areas of international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No          The project is not located in any known disputed areas as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    defined under the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Page 8 of 14


﻿1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is part of the Bank's long term engagement to support Vietnam to increase energy
savings and improve demand side energy efficiency. Overall the project would bring benefits to
the industries and the environment by contributing to reduction of GHGs and pollutants, energy
savings, and promotion of the environmentally good industry practices
Environment.
The sub-projects involves the small construction for installation or replacement of energy efficient
technologies and equipment. It is anticipated that the Project would mostly include category B
subprojects. In any case, all subprojects will be screened carefully case by case, to determine the
appropriate category and environmental safeguard instruments to manage the potential impacts.
The construction related impacts are likely to be localized, can be easily managed and mitigated to
acceptable levels by applying good construction standard and practices. The potential impacts
during construction period involve: (i) noise, dust, disposal of nonhazardous wastes common to
the installation of new equipment; (ii) waste management for the energy inefficient equipment
being removed from service; and safety issue during the construction/installation of new
equipment and facilities. The impacts can properly mitigated via the application of the ECOPs and
the WBG industry standards by contractors and closely supervised by the industrial enterprises
(IEs) and the construction supervision consultants, the participating financial institutions (PFIs)
following specific provisions of subproject EMPs.
The possible impacts during operation period of new equipment and facilities may include safety
issues; air emission, solid waste, and wastewater. For example, there may be some issues of
combustion gas emissions associated with the installation of new boilers, kilns or other types of
heat treating equipment. These are long-term impacts, however, the magnitude and amount of
pollutants generated from the new energy efficiency facilities are assessed as lower than those
from the old technologies and equipment. These impacts are site-specific and measures for
managing these impacts are outlined in the ESMF and shall be elaborated in detailed in each
subprojects EMPs.
O
The Technical Assistant (TA) under component 2 mostly involve capacity building activities.
*           These activities usually do not have potential adverse environmental and social impacts and risk.
In addition, technical pre-feasibility studies will be carried out for pipeline support for the food
processing industry under Canadian Externally Finance outputs, which may imply potential
environmental and social aspects. As such, the TOR for these studies will include requirements on
screening, analysis, and on environmental and social aspects so as to ensure that the proposed
activities are in accordance to the Bank safeguard policies and the national regulations
Social. The project is expected to have overall positive social benefits because it promotes EE and
thus reduces greenhouse gas emissions and other pollutants into the atmosphere. It will also have
positive impacts from the perspective of consumers, and workers who are employed by the
participating lEs. Through EE investments, the company's energy cost will be reduced per unit of
output with positive impacts on final prices of consumer products and services. This will also
make lEs more competitive and ensure job security and potential expansion of the workforce.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Page 9 of 14


﻿No other negative potential indirect and/or long term environmental and social impacts due to
future activities are anticipated in the project areas
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
During the project implementation, the locations of proposed subproject will carefully considered
to reduce environmental and social impacts and avoid the potential impacts to natural habitats.
Environment and social performance of lEs for sub-project eligibility will also be undertaken.
o         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment
During the preparation stage, the MOIT has prepared one ESMF to guide and set out the
requirements to ensure the safeguard compliance of the Project during implementation period. The
ESMF is in compliance with the Bank's safeguard policies and national legislations on
environmental protection. It will be adopted by MOIT and integrated in the Project Operation
Manual. The ESMF lays out procedures which includes (i) screening mechanism to exclude
ineligible subprojects, (ii) identification of environmental and social impacts associated with the
EE project and the mitigation measures; (iii) procedures for preparation and approval/clearance of
EA documents per GoV regulations and Bank safeguard policies which include an environment
and social due diligence of existing facilities/IEs as part of the ESMF; (iii) monitoring,
institutional arrangement and financial sources for ESMF implementation and (iv) public
consultation and information disclosure requirements in accordance to the Bank safeguard
policies.
The ESMF also covers TA under Component 2. Concretely, it provides requirements for TA
activities identified by appraisal stage. The ESMF also refer to the "Interim Guidelines on the
Application of safeguard Policies for TA activities in Bank-financed Projects" to screen the other
TA activities during implementation period for their implications on environmental and social
impacts and determine the appropriate safeguard instruments.
o
The key stakeholders participate in ESMF implementation include lEs, PFIs and MOIT. A Project
Management Board (PMB) set up under MOIT will provide support to enhance capacity for PFIs
staff on safeguard screening and management via TA activities.
Each PFI will form a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) teams, supported by technical, safeguard
and procurement experts. The PIU will implement the sub-lending activities and act as the PFI's
focal point to interact with the Bank, MOIT, MOF and other stakeholders. The PIU with dedicated
safeguard specialist to carry out the safeguard screening, appraisal, clearance and monitoring of
subprojects under its management. The WB will associate with PMB to provide technical support
to enhance capacity of PFIs as needed.
As set out in the ESMF, the lEs will have to prepare all necessary documents in line with the
national regulations on environmental assessment and protection. In addition, the category of the
subproject will be classified in accordance to the Bank's safeguard policies and appropriate
instruments will be required as necessary. The results of subproject screening by PFIs will be
reviewed by the WB.
The TOR for EIA and the EIA report shall be prior review and cleared by the Bank. For category
Page 10 of 14


﻿B subprojects, one EMP shall be prepared by IE in line with the Bank's safeguard policies. The
Bank will selectively review about 30% of EMP report of category B subproject. In the case that
the EA report of category B subprojects is available when the lEs approach the loan, an internal
due diligent of EA reports may be conducted and could followed by an EMP preparation as
O
necessary.
During subproject implementation, the lEs will have the overall responsibility to carry out
mitigation measures as set out in subproject EMPs. The lEs will be responsible for inclusion of
ECOPs into the bidding documents of construction contracts. The lEs and its CSC will carry out
internal monitoring to ensure the contractors' implementation of mitigation measures. The PFIs,
PMB and WB and local authorities will carry out external monitoring on lEs safeguard
implementation on periodical basis.
Social.
Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF). During the preparation stage, RPF was prepared in
accordance to OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement to guide the policy compliance during the project
implementation. It lays down the principles and objectives, eligibility criteria of displaced persons,
modes of compensation and rehabilitation, participation features and grievance procedures, review
and clearance process of subproject's RP etc. in implementation phase, where relevant, the RP
(full resettlement plan or abbreviated resettlement plan) will be prepared in accordance with the
policy principles and planning and implementation arrangements set forth in this RPF, and
established appropriate mitigation measures as appropriate for all categories of adverse impacts.
Each RP will include, among others: description of the subproject; census and baseline
socioeconomic characteristics of the DPs; details of impacts on assets, livelihood and incomes;
eligibility; valuation and compensation for losses; suggested mitigation measures; site selection,
site preparation and relocation, where necessary; income rehabilitation measures; Grievance
Redress mechanism; implementation schedule; and estimated resettlement cost. Draft version of
RPs will be prepared by lEs and reviewed by PFIs, PMBs and be submitted to the World Bank for
review and clearance before the subproject appraisal.
Ethnic Minority Planning Framework (EMPF). During the preparation stage, EMPF was prepared,
conforming to the OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, ensuring that the development of subprojects
a           fully respects the dignity, human rights, economies, and culture of affected ethnic minority
peoples. The lEs must be able to demonstrate that it has obtained broad community support for
the subproject through a process of free, prior, and informed consultations with the affected ethnic
minority communities. In this regard, the EMPF sets out guidelines to: (a) ensure that the ethnic
minority peoples receive social and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate; (b) avoid
potentially adverse effects on the ethnic minority communities; and (c) when such adverse impacts
cannot be avoided, minimize, mitigate, or compensate for such effects. The lEs is in charge of
preparing EMDP with the technical support of qualified social consultant. The EMDP will be
prepared in a flexible and pragmatic manner, and its level of detail varies depending on the
specific project and the nature of effects to be addressed.
The knowledge and experience of key stakeholders of safeguard implementation i.e. lEs, PFIs and
MOIT are considered limited. The MOIT has engaged in several WB's funded project. However,
it is unlikely that the safeguard staff assigned for previous project could participated in the
VEEIEs project. The interested PFIs include BIDV, SHB, Vietinbank, Vietcombank, and
Techcombank. All those banks are currently participating Renewable Energy Development Project
Page 11 of 14


﻿funded by the Bank. Two PFIs (BIDV and Vietinbank) have participated in Rural Finance 3
Project (RF3). In BIDV, there is an Environmental Division equipped with 03 staffs with
environmental background and are familiar ith WB's safeguard policies explicitly to apply in the
agricultural subprojects. In other PFIs, a designated credit officer is assigned to screen and
O
supervise safeguard implementation. As such, they are quite familiar with safeguard requirements
of the World Bank. Still, other potential PFIs have not experienced with the WB's safeguard
policies. lEs have almost no experience with those policies. Close guidance and tailored training
program must be developed and implemented to enhance capacity of those stakeholders in
performing the safeguard policies.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultation workshop was conducted on October 9, 2015 with the aim to collect feedbacks/
comments on the frameworks developed under the project. The workshop was attended by various
participants coming from NGO, central government, research institute. Comments received in the
workshop have been incorporated in the final version of the framework. All safeguard frameworks
will be disclosed at the subproject sites, MOIT's website, and in the InfoShop. All subproject
safeguard instruments are also required to follow the Bank policy on access to information in
public consultation and disclosure of information.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           23-Nov-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                  09-Dec-2015
Comments: Confirmation letter of Ministry of Industry and Trade dated December 9, 2015.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           23-Nov-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                  09-Dec-2015
Comments: Confirmation letter of Ministry of Industry and Trade dated December 9, 2015.
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           23-Nov-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Vietnam                                                  09-Dec-2015
Comments: Confirmation letter of Ministry of Industry and Trade dated December 9, 2015.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 12 of 14


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [ X]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ X]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 13 of 14


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[     NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[   NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
0          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Franz Gerner,Thi Ba Chu
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                   Date: 18-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)               Date: 18-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 14 of 14


