INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR13434
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:       Kazakhstan                Project ID:  P099270
Project Name: SOUTH-WEST ROADS: WESTERN EUROPE-WESTERN CHINA
INTERNATIONAL TRANSIT CORRIDOR (CAREC lB & 6B) (P099270)
Task Team      Jacques Bure
Leader(s):
Estimated      21-Jul-2008               Estimated    30-Apr-2009
Appraisal Date:                          Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIDR                     Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:        Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (99%), Public administration-
Transportation (1%)
Theme:         Trade facilitation and market access (85%), Regional integration (15%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                No
Emergencies)?
O
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   2500.00           Total Bank Financing: 2125.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                             Amount
Borrower                                                     375.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development      2125.00
Total                                                      2500.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a      No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 9


﻿The overall goal of the Government's Western Europe to Western China (WE-WC)Corridor
development program is to improve transport efficiency and safety, and promote development along
one of Kazakhstan's main strategic road transport corridors. Transport and trade efficiency will be
improved through provision of better infrastructure and services along the entire corridor to reduce
0
transport costs, and through gradual reform of the entities responsible for all categories of roads. In
the original Project the Bank finances the portion of the Corridor from Shymkent to Aktobe/
Kyzylorda oblast border (1,065 km) as a Specific Investment Loan, whereas other International
Financial Institutions (ADB, EBRD and IDB) will finance other sections of the same corridor.
The proposed Project restructuring is a second restructuring. The first restructuring was prepared in
response to a request from the Government of Kazakhstan to reallocate project savings to finance an
additional 80 km of the Western Europe-Western China Transit Corridor beyond the original Project
location. The original Loan was approved on April 30, 2009, and became effective on December 9,
2009, with a closing date of December 31, 2013. The proposed restructuring is also following a
request from the Government dated December 30, 2014 to reallocate US$217 million of project
savings to finance an additional 85km of the road section north of Almaty, connecting Almaty with
Karaganda and the capital city Astana. The restructuring entails (i) an extension of the loan closing
date, (ii) creation of an additional financing category and reallocation of funds among financing
categories, (iii) modification of the Project Development Objective (PDO) to reflect the location of
the additional works, and revision of target values of corresponding Intermediate Outcome
Indicators, (iv) modification of project description, and (v) revision of disbursement estimates. The
restructuring does not modify the safeguard category nor trigger new safeguard policies.
The proposed restructuring adds a new road section which extends into Almaty Oblast and which
was not captured under the current PDO. The proposed revised PDO includes this addition. The
Project Development Objective (PDO) will be adjusted to reflect the proposed expansion of Project
scope. The new PDO will read as follows: "The objective of the Project is to improve transport
efficiency along road sections in Kyzylorda, South Kazakhstan and Almaty Oblasts, improve road
management and increase traffic safety in Kazakhstan". The aim is to support local and regional
O
)         socio-economic development. Benefits will include transport efficiency gains and traffic safety
improvement.
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed restructuring adds upgrade and reconstruction of a new road section which extends into
Almaty Oblast. It specifically refers to about 85km of Kurty-Buribaital road section. The estimated
cost of additional civil works is approximately US$276 million.This will be component six of the
project, thus the project will have the following components:
Component 1: Upgrade and reconstruction of road sections within Kyzylorda Oblast, excluding the
bypass to Kyzylorda. This component finances the upgrade and reconstruction of road sections in
Kyzylorda oblast totaling about 834 km with a design oriented towards increased road safety, and
includes the costs of consultant services for supervision. Preparation and design costs have been
financed by the Borrower's own funds. The reconstruction once completed will improve riding
quality leading to lower operating costs for road users, guarantee road structural soundness for
a prolonged period, and prevent collapse, leading to lower life-cycle cost for the road asset.
Communities living along the Corridor would also benefit from improved access to markets.
Component 2: Upgrade and reconstruction of road sections within South Kazakhstan Oblast (from
Page 2 of 9


﻿Kyzylorda Oblast border to Zhambyl Oblast border, including the bypasses to Kyzylorda and
Shymkent). . Preparation and design costs are financed through the Borrower's own funds.
Component 3: Project Management Consultants. The consultant services assist the Committee with
O
U        the management of all activities associated with the Projects as part of a joint effort by all IFIs and
the Government to ensure efficient and transparent implementation of the WE-WC Corridor
program. Monitoring of the implementation of safeguards instruments, especially EMPs and section-
specific RAPs, is also be part of the responsibility of the Project Management Consultants.
Component 4: Institutional Development and Improvement of Road Safety and Road Services. The
component comprises consulting services, technical studies, the provision of equipment, and training
to strengthen the internal management and operations of the Committee, particularly to improve road
sector planning, programming, budgeting, and implementation, and to improve the efficiency of road
management and maintenance practices, including environmental management. This component also
includes technical
studies to prepare actions plans for road safety improvements, and implementation of an action plan
to facilitate private sector investments in the provision of services to transporters along the corridor.
Component 5: Supervision of Civil Works. This includes review of detailed engineering designs and
supervision of the implementation of Environment Management Plans prepared for each road
section.
Component 6: Upgrade and reconstruction of road sections within Almaty Oblast. This new project
component is proposed to finance civil works to support the upgrade and reconstruction of road
sections within Almaty Oblast. It specifically refers to about 85km of Kurty-Buribaital road section.
The estimated cost of additional civil works is US$276 million.
In addition to component six, the the restructuring also suggest to expand the implementation of the
Project by three years.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
o        Lola Ibragimova (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Remains triggered as per original project.
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Page 3 of 9


﻿Involuntary Resettlement Yes        Remains triggered as per original project.
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
O
)         4.37
Projects on International  No
O
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The salient points regarding social, land acquisition and environment are similar to the original
project and can be summarized as follows:
Environment:
The generic baseline data (land use, vegetation, soils, fauna and flora, climate, surface and
groundwater, etc), the impacts expected from the project, and the related mitigation measures are
consistent with the existing Environment Management Framework (EMF). The Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) was prepared by the RC for Kurty-Burybaital road section and
it will remain unchanged in impact analysis and mitigation since the new section of road is not
raising any environmental issues not already covered in the existing ESIA. It will be used by the
RC to prepare site specific EMPs that will be included in the bidding documents, following the
pattern already used for the ongoing civil works on other road sections of the project.
Environmental impacts of the additional road section appear to be standard for road widening and
U           newly constructed alignment. The steppe vegetation is predominant with patches of grassland.
Both physical-geographical situation and geotechnical conditions are expected to be very similar
to conditions found under SWRP broadly. Mitigation measures to address the potential negative
impacts will be listed in the contract requirements.
Land acquisition and Resettlement:
Under the original project, the Borrower prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) prior
to Appraisal providing detailed information about procedures and standards set in Kazakhstan for
the acquisition of private land and rights-of-way. The RPF also identifies any additional
provisions that will be undertaken to assure compliance with OP 4.12. The RFP was disclosed in
country in August 2008. In parallel to the environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA)
consultants hired by the Borrower prepared an Expanded RPF, which will be transformed into a
RAP once the final design is completed and additional socio-economic analysis is carried out of
project affected persons. The Expanded RPF was disclosed both in-country and in InfoShop in
March 2009. RAPs have been prepared for all sections of the the project requiring land
acquistion. The draft RAP for the section Kurty -Burybaital section has also been prepared by the
Comittee for Roads under Ministry of Investments and Development. The survery identied 30
Page 4 of 9


﻿properties, mainly commercial and leased farm land and includes 8 state owned properties. The
land acquisition will not have impacts on any private houses or other residential structures.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment: The major part of construction works will be
confined to the existing right-of-way. The corridor of the ROW is generously dimensioned, thus
no significant / major impact on local population's health, safety or quality of life is expected. The
alignment will not affect sensitive habitats or protected areas. During the recent (April 17) field
visit conducted by the Bank safeguards specialist, it was verified that the impacts localized and
manageable with readily available standard mitigation measures. The impact of the works on soils
and vegetation is expected to be minor, if managed diligently. Rehabilitated road sections show
natural re-vegetation only 2-3 years after works, despite the arid climatic conditions. The
extraction of fill and aggregate materials will be restricted to non-river sources in the project area.
Extraction procedures are well regulated under Kazakh environmental laws, rehabilitation is
compulsory and noncompliance is prosecuted. Nonetheless, the ESIA sets the requirements for
extraction of the material that will be used for the constructions financed under the project.
An increased amount of traffic (which is desirable from the economic perspective) is expected to
result in higher emissions of exhaust gases and noise. The ESIA addresses and investigates the
impact of this issue and for emissions concludes that the gaseous limit values set by Kazakh
authorities will continue to be respected. Regarding noise the ESIA presents a number of
mitigation and management measures, such as buffer zones, sound barriers, tree plantations and,
most effectively, the re-routing of the alignment around settlements via bypasses. These measures
will be incorporated in the design. The possible development of new activities or the extensions of
existing activities along the corridor is not considered to be a significant issue and will consist
mainly of additional services to the road users. Any induced and indirect impacts will take effect
over a longer period and over a larger area than affected by the Project. These include increases in
traffic volumes, economic activities, better connectivity and further development along the roads
corridor. However, as the project deals with rehabilitation of a road, which during the Soviet Era
used to be a technically sound, functioning transport corridor and still performs this function albeit
impacted by the deteriorated physical state of the road, no radical, rapid development is likely to
occur. Instead long term, gradual processes are expected, which will allow the synchronous
development of appropriate institutional and regulatory instruments for monitoring and control.
Several implementation issues regarding land acquisition and resettlement have arisen during the
*           implementation of the ongoing Project. One common factor appears to be poor coordination
between CR and local akimats, who are responsible for many aspects of land acquisition. This has
caused problems when akimats are unaware of, or lack commitment to implement special RAP
measures that differ from normal domestic practice. To diminish the likelihood that similar
problems may arise for the additional road section under the restructuring, the Bank team will
work with the CR and the PMC in presenting a workshop informing akimat officials about RAP
requirements, and confirmation of akimat acceptance of all RAP requirements will be sought.
Overall, the social social impacts of the additional civil works under under the Restructuring are
expected to be limited.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The bulk of the Project location is defined by the existing alignment, which will largely remain
unchanged and will be rehabilitated and reconstructed. The alignment sections will be constructed
based on: (i) assessments of negative impacts and nuisance for local populations, and (ii) the need
to avoid any significant negative environmental impacts.
Page 5 of 9


﻿4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
In the course of original Project preparation the Borrower with assistance from the Bank and
other IFIs prepared the following safeguards documents, covering environmental and social issues
along the road alignment: (a) a preliminary Environmental Assessment prepared for the
Committee by a Kazakh Design Institute (2007); (b) an Environmental Assessment Review
Framework (2008); (c) a Resettlement Policy Framework (2008); and (d) an Environmental and
Social Impact Assessment report (2009) and an Expanded Resettlement Policy Framework (2009).
All of these documents have been subject to public consultation and disclosed at the World Bank
InfoShop and in Kazakhstan. In 2015 the ESIA and RAP for Kurty-Burybaital have also been
prepared.
The project will be implemented by the same implementing agency - Roads Committee (RC) of
the Ministry of Investments and Development (Ministry) through its national road operator, JSC
KazAvtoZhol (KAZ). Kazakhstan has made good progress with reforming and strengthening its
road sector institutions. The Bank supported the Government in the reform aimed to introduce
more efficient and commercially oriented management practices. In 2013 creation of the KAZ
aimed at the following results, which were aligned with best global practices and supported by the
Bank through the ongoing SWRP and EWRP:
*      Improved institutional structure with decision making level and sector policy at the
Ministry, road sub-sector policy management at the RC, and operational implementation of the
road policy at KAZ
*      Separation of the client and supplier functions/organizations
*      Better management of road assets by a new commercialized organization KAZ
KAZ has built its capacity through implementing projects financed by the World Bank and other
international development institutions such as ADB and EBRD. In particular, environmental and
social safeguards has become an integral part of the requirements stipulated in the tender
documentation for the civil works contractors. Each contractor employs environmental specialists
responsible for environmental control, monitoring and reporting. There are two people in KAZ
Department for Roads Network Development and Investment Projects responsible for the
implementation of the environmental safeguards. KAZ has also benefitted from the safeguards
*           trainings provided by the ADB and the World Bank during last 2 years. Significant progress is
observed in relation to the public participation and consultation regarding the road construction
works during the project preparation as well as the project implementation and completion.
Safeguards related documents are publically disclosed on the existing projects website with the
opportunity for the public feedback and discussion.
Nonetheless, the capacity -building efforts will still be required, particularly with regards to the
implementation of the land acquisition and the robust grievance redress and monitoring of social
impacts around resettlement and land acquisition practices of the client. This is due to the recent
the land code changes introduced in 2011, designating the responsibility for resettlement and land
acquisition implementation to the local authorities. The local administration has limited
knowledge and skills around application of international practices for resettlement and land
acquisition
KAZ is now operational with local departments in 14 oblasts, and as a result of their work in
Page 6 of 9


﻿2013-2014 the overall institutional set up and local technical capacity has improved. However,
changes in the Government of Kazakhstan structure in autumn of 2014, including in the top
positions, led to a lack of coordination and overall understanding between the RC and KAZ. The
transfer of implementation of construction and maintenance projects from RC to KAZ, as planned
O
earlier by end 2014, so that the company becomes an operator for the entire republican roads
network, has not yet materialized.
As of February 2014, the KAZ has become a part of the JSC Kazakhstan Temir Zholy, a national
railway company. At the same time the Ministry remains to be a sole shareholder of the KAZ,
which gives grounds for solid involvement of KAZ in the project implementation. TBC
Institutional Framework: The current institutional capacity of the borrower to implement the
described measures relies on four main entities currently in charge of country based environmental
and social safeguards. Those entities are responsible for: (a) environment; (b) water resources; (c)
forestry and hunting; and (d) land management. Construction works are supervised by the Ministry
for Environmental Protection (MoEP) and its subordinate agencies. Local units of the MoEP,
Environmental Expertise and Nature Use Regulation Department are structured into thematic
groups, which at Oblast level include among others (i) environmental expertise, (ii) permitting,
(iii) supervision and monitoring, (iv) environmental laboratories. At the Rayon level each of these
thematic units is represented by one inspector. The capacity of KAZ to supervise and monitor
social impacts is moderate and will require additional capacity building measures.
Projects and operations where negative impacts may occur are usually inspected once per year and
carried out by the MoEP staff and/or Oblast and Rayon representatives. During construction works
Oblast and Rayon level staff monitor the sites and play a key role in commissioning the finalized
project, thereby checking environmental compliance with design and final implementation of all
required environmental restoration and recultivation measures. The MoEP regional staff usually
contacts the project developers, the contractor#s environmental staff and the unit on site, which is
a mandatory requirement (called "production control" under the Kazakh legislation). At the same
time, the MoEP and other regulatory bodies have limited resources for the permanent inspections
and monitoring of the civil contractors and, in particular, small size limited duration works
subcontractors. The capacity of the KAZ, therefore, should be strengthened in order to monitor
day to day environmental and health and safety performance of the subcontractors. There have
a          been changes to the expropriation laws in the country. Particularly, the land code introduced in
March 2011, introduced new changes around methodology and the compensation rates in addition
to designating local administration to be responsible for the land acquisition process. Various legal
clarifications have also been issued to date. CR has proposed the possibility to to ensure that the
legal documents reflect the expanding role and obligations of the Akimats to carry out land
acquisition.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the population of the project area, businesses, economic sectors and
countries using the corridor, The Roads Committee and the PMC will disclose the ESIA and
conduct public consultations in the project area. The consultations on draft RAP have taken place
in Almaty region and Akshy village of Kurty rural district in spring 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Page 7 of 9


﻿Date of receipt by the Bank                                11-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             30-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  30-Apr-2014
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                11I-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             27-May-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Kazakhstan                                                 30-Mar-2015
Comments: Draft RAP disclosed in local Akimats of Almaty District and Akshy village on
March 30, 2015
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 8 of 9


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jacques Bure
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Qays Hamad (SA)                      Date: 27-May-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                  Date: 27-May-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


