INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1057
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Dec-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Gabon                      Project ID:  P146152
Project Name: Gabon Skills Development Project (P146152)
Task Team       Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil
Leader(s):
Estimated       09-Dec-2014                Estimated    10-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDO7                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Vocational training (100%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     100.00            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
Borrower                                                                    0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     100.00
Total                                                                     100.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the project is to improve effectiveness of vocational training, short term skills
development, and entrepreneurship programs in key growth sectors in Gabon.
3. Project Description
26.    The project is in the amount of US$100 million and will be implemented over a 5-year
period, from 2016-2020.
Page 1 of 10


﻿27.    The project will work to address the current skills mismatch and low employability of youth
by (1) improving and expanding formal vocational training in key growth sectors; and (2) supporting
skill development to address the needs of unemployed youth (graduates and school-leavers). The
project is designed around the following components: Component 1 will support interventions to
O
improve the effectiveness of vocational training institutions by supporting the creation of two new
training centers (one in construction and public works, and one in information communication
technology) and strengthening relevance of training in current vocational training institutions with a
focus on realigning them towards key growth sectors. Component 2 will target skill needs of
unemployed youth (graduates and school leavers) by supporting skills delivery programs including i)
apprenticeships and professional insertion programs; (ii) internships; and (iii) entrepreneurship
training. Component 3 will support the institutional strengthening of the Ministry of Employment,
Labor and Vocational Training and other implementing institutions.
28.    To maximize impact the project will be focused on a public-private partnership (PPP)
approach. The project will engage the private sector through all levels of the project including in the
overall management as representatives in the technical steering committee, in the management and
curriculum development for newly created and restructured vocational institutions in component 1,
and in articulating needs of skills development activities in component 2, in order to ensure better
alignment.
D.     Project Components
Component 1: Extension of Training Supply and Quality Improvement in TVET in key growth
sectors (US$65 million)
29.    This component aims at extending access and improving quality of training for youth in
formal vocational training in order to meet the needs of key growth sectors with considerable
employment potential. This objective will be reached through two sub-components: (i) support to
two new vocational training centers including construction and a new pedagogical and management
approach; and (ii) upgrading quality and realigning existing TVET institutions toward key growth
sectors on a competitive basis.
30.    The target group of component 1 is youth (age 16-24) who meet the qualifications for entry
into the newly created and restructured vocational training institutions, of which at least 30% are
a        female. The component expects to reach 10,350 direct beneficiaries.
31.    At the core of Component 1 is a partnership model with the private sector, focused on both
management and pedagogy. The collaboration between the private sector and the vocational training
institutions supported by the project (both newly created and restructured) is to be instituted by the
law on the general orientation of national education, research and training in 2011. Partnership
agreements detailing four specific areas of collaboration will be signed between the institutions
supported by the project and private sector representatives. Annex 2 further details areas of
collaboration. The PPP model is the first of its kind in Gabon and will serve as a model for the full
TVET system. Additional institutional upgrades will include: development of competency-based
curricula, and training of trainers and school managers, which are interrelated with the partnership
agreements.
32.    The partnership model necessitates the autonomy of the institution and, as a result the
establishment of a new relationship with the related Ministry. Multi-year performance contracts will
be signed with the targeted institutions and the Ministry in charge of Employment, Labor and
Page 2 of 10


﻿Vocational Training to ensure clearly defined institutional goals including: (i) number of students
enrolled by field; (ii) proportion of females enrolled; (iii) proportion of students in dual training
programs; (iv) number of graduates; (v) employment rate of graduates; (vi) continued training of
trainers;; and (vii) financing model of the institution (budgetary resources for current and non-
Q)        recurrent costs; own resources; and relationship between public resources and commitments achieved
by institution). These performance contracts will be monitored by the Ministry and each institution
through their M&E systems.
Sub-component 1.1. Creation of Two New Training Institutions in Priority Growth Sectors (US $30
million)
33.    Sub-component 1.1 aims at extending training supply through the construction of two new
TVET institutions (US $15 million per institution) focused on key growth sectors. The institutions,
one to be focused on construction and public works and the other on information communication
technology (ICT) will follow the new pedagogical and administrative management model involving
the private sector. At present, of the 20 vocational training institutions, none focus exclusively on
construction and public works, or information communication technology, despite the need for
skilled labor in both sectors. The aim of this sub-component is to support the creation of two new
centers through the PPP approach to be more responsive to the country's economic needs.
34.    The selection of the sites where the new institutions are to be built is based on the
concentration of private sector companies nearby the site relevant to the specific sector that the
institution will be focused on. The construction center will be implemented in the new industrial area
and the ICT institution will link with the "E-Gabon" project to be established near one of the
incubators supported by the project. This will make it possible to more effectively promote
partnership with the private productive sector and develop dual training schemes in both institutions.
Sub-component 1.2: Quality Improvement and Upgrading of Existing TVET Establishments on a
Competitive Basis (US$35 million)
35.    Sub-component 1.2 aims at the restructuring and general upgrading of at least 14 of the
current 20 TVET institutions, through (i) the implementation of new pedagogical and administrative
a        management models involving the private sector (ii) the reinforcement of vocational skills of
trainers; (iii) the provision of equipment; and (iv) light rehabilitation of training space (no more than
20% of total costs).
36.    This support will be made on a competitive basis open to all TVET institutions and will
focus on realignment toward key growth sectors. Training establishments willing to benefit from this
support, will prepare development proposals that will be subject to an open competition. For that
purpose operation and procedure manuals and development proposal preparation guides will be
developed and made available to all of the institutions. Training sessions will be carried out to aid in
preparation of institutions to submit sound proposals.
Component 2: Employability Development, Youth Integration and Entrepreneurship Promotion (US
$20 million):
37.    This component is aimed at facilitating the integration of young people into the labor market
by offering youth with different skill levels work experience, training, and entrepreneurship skills.
Page 3 of 10


﻿The project wouldpromote: (i) apprenticeship programs for youth with low educational attainment;
(ii) employment adaptation programs for young graduates; and (iii) entrepreneurship training
sessions.
O
38.    The target groups of this component are two-fold and include youth with a limited level of
instruction (sub-component 2.1 apprenticeships) and youth who have graduated from higher
education institutions or TVET institutions (sub-component 2.2 employment adaptation program).
Sub-component 2.3, entrepreneurship training, targets youth with a mix of levels of instruction.
39.    The apprenticeship and employment adaptation programs will be implemented by ONE
under the purview of the Project Coordination Unit (PCU) as the ONE has appropriate experience in
managing similar programs. ONE manages the Insertion and Reinsertion Fund (Fonds d'Aide a
l'Insertion et d la R6insertion Professionnelle, FIR) created in 1993 with the mission to support the
insertion and reinsertion of young people in the labor market through financing training internships
for young graduates. A revised format of the FIR for improved implementation and results is
supported under component 3.
40.    The entrepreneurship component will be implemented by the Project - Investment Promotion
and Competitiveness, a current World Bank project in Gabon aimed at improving enterprise
development.
Sub-component 2.1 Apprenticeships
41.    The apprenticeship scheme would enable the integration of youth with low educational
attainment into training programs adapted to their level of qualifications. It would constitute an
alternative for youth with low educational attainment to gain access to training programs. The project
would support dual apprenticeship schemes in urban, peri-urban and rural professional activities and
training-professional insertion for a total of 3000 youth during the project. At least 30 percent of all
participants will be female.
o
42.    To further incentivize the private sector and to help place youth in jobs the project would
provide subsistence and transportation stipends to the participants in the amount of 40 000 FCFA and
accident at work insurance, as described in national laws. The project would also finance the costs of
a        complementary mentoring and coaching training, tool kits for 3000 urban and rural youth in
apprenticeship and training-professional insertion as well as the costs related to skills upgrading of
apprentice instructors and equipment.
Sub-component 2.2 Employment Adaptation Program
43.    The objective of this mechanism is to improve th e transition from higher education and
TVET institutions to the labor market. The current dynamics in the educational system do not
involve strong partnerships with the productive sector and do not enable young graduates to be
immersed in enterprises during their time at school or after their graduation. The sub-component
would address the skills gap of current graduates.
44.    This sub-component would target 3500 youth (up to the age of 34), who are graduates from
higher education institutions and TVET schools, and place them in professional internships during
the life of the project. At least 30 percent of participants will be female.
Page 4 of 10


﻿45.    The project will finance the following activities: (i) internships stipends for 3500 graduates;
(ii) accident insurance coverage; (iii) medical visits and vaccinations; (iv) monitoring and follow-up
activities of youth during their internship period; and (v) monitoring survey of youth after their
internship period.
Sub-component 2.3 Entrepreneurship Promotion
46.    This sub-component aims at promoting youth employment through the development of
entrepreneurial initiatives. It consists of entrepreneurship training aimed at developing
entrepreneurial spirit among youths, helping them develop business plans and accompanying them in
finding necessary funding as well as assistance during the post-creation stage.
47.    Direct beneficiaries wil 1 be youth (age 16 to 34 years), of which at least 30% will be female.
Youth with different education levels will be targeted. For youth with lower levels of educational
attainment including young school leavers, measures will be simplified and the training length will
be shortened.
48.    Following entrepreneurship training sessions delivered to 2000 youth, 1000 participants will
be selected by a committee designed for this purpose to develop business plans. A competition of the
best business plans will be organized for 300 of the 1000 youth. 150 participants will receive
financial support for their projects ranging from $15,000 to $25,000. Young beneficiaries will be
monitored during the subsequent launch of their projects.
49.    The project will finance: (i) promotion campaign of the associated activities; (ii)
development of entrepreneurship-training modules; (iii) delivery of 120 entrepreneurship training
sessions; (iv) training of 50 trainers for the entrepreneurship training; (v) entrepreneurship and
business plan training at various levels; (vi) seed funding for winning proposals and organization of
the business plan competition; and (vii) impact evaluation study of the competition.
Component 3: Institutional Capacity Support and Project Implementation (US$10 million)
50.    The purpose of this component is to strengthen the institutional capacity of the Ministry of
a        Labor, Employment and Vocational Training and enforcement agencies (including ONE) through
technical capacity strengthening and creation of a mechanism for coordination and collaboration.
The component will fund the following activities:
(i)    Capacity strengthening activities for the Ministry of Labor, Employment and Vocational
Training, ONE and the General Direction of Human Resources (Direction G6n6rale des Rssources
Humaines, DGRH) including execution and evaluation of skills development programs and TVET
supply.
(ii)   Communications activities to raise awareness of the project activities (including the role of
ONE) amongst key stakeholders, especially youth and the private sector.
(iii)  Assessment activities including impact evaluation and beneficiary surveys of components 1
and 2 as well as support to the National Observatory on Employment and Training (Observatoire
National de 1'Emploi et de la Formation, ONEF) in conducting tracking surveys of those entering the
workforce.
Page 5 of 10


﻿(iv)   Support the implementation of a revised format of the Insertion and Reinsertion Fund (FIR)
mechanism including the programs under this projects and regulations and procedures for
implementing them that will be adopted by the ONE.
o
(v)    Financing of the project implementation unit's coordination and management activities.
51.    Component 3 will finance goods, works, consultants' and non-consulting services, training
and operating costs.
52.    US$5 million will be unallocated.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This project will target existing vocational schools in order to rehabilitate and upgrade them and will
build two new centers.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Abdoulaye Gadiere (GENDR)
Lucienne M. M'Baipor (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The OP/BP 4.01 policy is triggered due to the civil works
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               associated with rehabilitation and construction / extension
of new Technical and Vocational training institutions.
Since the exact locations and numbers of institutions to be
rehabilitated or built are not known, the relevant
safeguard instrument that has been prepared is an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF). This document once prepared has been
reviewed, consulted upon, disclosed in-country on
November 15, 2014 and at the Infoshop on November 26,
2014
S Natural Habitats OP/BP  No        This policy is not triggered as there will be no potential
4.04                                impact on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          This policy is not triggered as there will be no
reforestation or forest clearance.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          There will no use of pesticides or health related concerns
with respect to vector management.
Physical Cultural       Yes         As civil work activities under the Project will involve
Resources OP/BP 4.11                excavations within the construction of new
infrastructures, the probability to discover graves,
vestiges, etc. is not negligible. Hence the triggering of the
policy. However, no specific safeguard instrument is
required. The ESMF that has been prepared includes a
chapter in order to provide guidance in case of such
discoveries.
Page 6 of 10


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           This policy is not triggered, as no project's activities are
BP 4.10                              planned to be implemented in indigenous people's areas.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project will not involve land take, but for due
OP/BP 4.12                           diligence, the borrower has prepared a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) that has also been reviewed,
consulted upon, disclosed in-country on November 15,
2014 and at the Infoshop on November 26, 2014.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           This policy is not triggered, as there will be no dam
4.37                                 construction or rehabilitation of dams that will necessitate
dam safety status report.
Projects on International  No        This policy is not triggered, for there are no international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterways in the project sites.
Projects in Disputed    No           This policy is not triggered because project intervention
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     sites are not within disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
There are no significant or irreversible adverse impacts that are expected from the implementation
of activities that will be financed under this project. Most of the adverse environmental and social
impacts associated with these investments will be small-scale and site-specific. Hence, they will
be manageable at an acceptable level.
The project is classified as being EA category B and triggers three safeguards policies which are
OP/PB 4.01; OP 4.11 and OP/PB 4.12. To comply with these policies the following safeguard
instruments (ESMF and RPF) have all been prepared reviewed, consulted upon and disclosed
within the country and at the infoshop. Regarding the ESMF,it includes a chapter that provide
guidance for any physical cultural resources discovery. During the project phase, the ESMF and
the RPF will be implemented as guidance/guidelines for the activities.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Given the nature of the activities and their potential adverse impacts that will be manageable at an
acceptable level, no long-term impact due to project activities is foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The borrower has prepared all the required safeguard instruments (ESMF and RPF).
The ESMF contains : (a) a systematic environmental and social impact assessment for all
activities before selection and implementation; (b) procedures for conducting activity-specific
ESIAs, Limited Environmental Impact Assessment (LEIA) or Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP); (c) capacity strengthening and awareness raising campaigns targeted
Page 7 of 10


﻿at relevant stakeholder groups for better implementation and monitoring of project safeguard
measures; and (d) establishment and implementation of a consultation framework for the
environmental control and monitoring.
O
Q)          As the ESMF, the RPF also helps to clarify the principles, organizational arrangements, and design
criteria to be applied to investments to be prepared during project implementation. Investment
specific Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared in line with the RPF and submitted to
the bank, as required, for approval after specific design information becomes available.
Lastly, the physical cultural resources treated as a specific chapter in the ESMF is relevant to
provide guidance in how to protect discoveries charged of history or which represents important
cultural aspects for communities.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations held within this project included teachers, jobs seekers, young people, young
apprentices, entrepreneurs and public and private training operators. In addition, several ministries
have also been consulted. There are the ministry in charge of technical and professional education,
the Ministry in charge of Professional Training, and the ministry in charge of environment. During
the preparation of the ESMF and the RPF, all the above stakeholders have been consulted and their
comments taken into account. When, the documents have been prepared, another consultation held
through a national workshop in order to integrate recommendations, comments and suggestions
from main stakeholders into the final version of the documents. Later, the Client will prepare for
each construction site a focused Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), an
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and/or a resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
based on the screening mechanism contained in the ESMF and the RPF. Stakeholders will be
consulted during the preparation of ESIAs, ESMPs and RAPs.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                15-Sep-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                             26-Nov-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Gabon                                                      15-Nov-2014
Comments: N/A
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank//
Date of submission to InfoShop//
"In country" Disclosure
Gabon                                                      15-Nov-2014
Comments: N/A
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 8 of 10


﻿Physical Cultural Resources policies have been addressed and disclosed in the Environment
Assessment.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[   ]   NA [X]
report?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Page 9 of 10


﻿Task Team Leader(s): Name: Hamoud Abdel Wedoud Kamil
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)           Date: 07-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Meskerem Mulatu (PMGR)             Date: 07-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


