                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA18127
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Haiti                             Project ID:   P154351
                            Project Name:      Haiti Modern Energy Services For All (P154351)
                            Task Team          Frederic Verdol,Dana Rysankova
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          28-Sep-2015                       Estimated   24-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEE04                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         Other Renewable Energy (75%), Transmission and Distribution of Electricity
                                               (10%), Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (10%), General energy sector (5%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural services and infrastructure (90%), Climate change (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        16.00           Total Bank Financing:   0.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              Clean Technology Fund                                                                      16.00
                              Total                                                                                      16.00
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to accelerate private sector-driven, renewable energy-
                           based off-grid electrification in rural and peri-urban areas of Haiti.
                            3. Project Description
                           This objective will be achieved primarily through assisting the Government with the creation of an

                                                                       Page 1 of 8
                         enabling regulatory framework; and providing funding and market development activities for
                         commercially viable off-grid electrification investments with a potential for replicability and scale-
                         up.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Renewable energy-based off-grid electricity services will comprise a variety of technologies and
                         business models, including individual systems, such as solar lanterns and solar home systems, and
                         village-based systems, such as mini- and micro-grids, powered by renewable energy or hybrid
                         sources (renewables with a diesel back-up and/or battery storage). Private sector is understood to
                         comprise also NGOs and cooperatives.

                         The project will have the three following components as summarized below and detailed further in
                         Annex 2:
                         i.     Enabling environment and program oversight
                         ii.    Off-grid Electricity Fund (OGEF)
                         iii.   Fund management, pipeline development and technical support

                         Component 1: Enabling environment and program oversight (US$1.5 million) – implemented by the
                         Energy Cell of the Ministry of Public Works, Transportation and Communications (MTPTC)

                         To achieve the desired off-grid electrification acceleration, it is essential to improve the business
                         environment. While minimum conditions for operating off-grid business in Haiti exist today, as
                         demonstrated by the vibrant (yet low quality) solar lantern market and emerging innovative business
                         models, their scale-up is constrained by the early market inefficiencies. Component 1 will include
                         TA activities related to improving fiscal and regulatory environment, setting quality standards and
                         promoting energy efficient solutions, improving consumer awareness of RE technologies, promoting
                         gender-sensitive approaches, strengthening capacities and carrying out knowledge exchanges. It will
                         also support the Energy Cell of MTPTC in its OGEF oversight functions.

                         Component 2: Access to finance facility (US$12 million) – implemented by the competitively
Public Disclosure Copy




                         selected Fund Manager

                         This component will establish a flexible Off-grid Electricity Fund (OGEF), consisting of equity, debt
                         and results-based financing modalities responding to different needs of the off-grid energy
                         enterprises, serving different consumer segments. OGEF will be structured according to the
                         following three business lines:

                         •        Working capital and results-based grants for premium quality solar lanterns. Experience
                         from Haiti as well as other countries shows that local distributors (mostly SMEs or NGOs) face
                         problems with access to short-term working capital, which would allow them to (i) import quality
                         products at greater quantities and (ii) provide better financing terms to their retailers and/or final
                         users. Access to working capital would therefore enable a faster market penetration for solar lanterns/
                         solar kits. In addition, this component will provide a time-based limited support in terms of results-
                         based financing (RBF) for premium quality (Lighting Global certified or equivalent) products. This
                         will be a limited and time-bound “pump priming” support aimed at further expanding the share of
                         high quality off-grid products in this crucial stage of market transformation in Haiti.
                         •        Equity and start-up results-based financing for DESCOs and village grids. The initial market
                         analysis demonstrates that the Haitian market could support 3-4 DESCO-type businesses, which
                         provide energy services to households, businesses with individual solar kits/home systems, using pre-
                         paid pay-as-you-go meters (see description in Box A1.3, Annex 1). Based on the historic

                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         development of DESCOs and smart micro-grids in other countries, early stage equity and grants will
                         be needed to launch these businesses.
                         •        Medium-term debt for DESCOs and village grids. While equity/grant combination is usually
Public Disclosure Copy




                         needed to start a new off-grid venture, the expansion of business will require debt financing, ideally
                         in the local currency, 3-6 years tenors, which will allow companies to pre-finance equipment and
                         recover investment through fees/tariffs over time. As debt financing will likely be the main source of
                         finance of companies in the expansion phase, this business line will also start creating evidence of
                         viable business opportunities for local commercial banks, which should become the main funder of
                         these companies after the closure of the proposed OGEF fund.

                         Component 3: Fund management, pipeline development and technical support (US$2.5 million) –
                         implemented by the competitively selected Fund Manager

                         This component will cover Fund Manager fees (the fee will be determined through the bidding
                         process). In addition, the component will provide funding for the market development activities;
                         monitoring, verification and evaluation; and provision of technical support to the beneficiaries.
                         Market development activities will focus on enhancing the quantity and quality of potential
                         investments presented to the OGEF fund and increasing the chances of success of businesses that
                         have received an investments.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project location is not known as the sub-project would be fully demand-driven, financed through
                         a financial intermediary. The project will not have any geographic targeting. All areas not
                         connected to the existing EDH grid will be eligible. Therefore the project will have a largely rural
                         and peri-urban distribution. All sub-projects developed on Haitian territory fulfilling eligibility
                         criteria will be eligible for financing.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Asli Gurkan (GSU04)
                         Nicolas Kotschoubey (GEN04)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The Project is expected to have a positive social impact
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     on the 500,000 direct beneficiaries of the Project.
                                                                    However, potential negative impacts from the Project
                                                                    relate to health and safety during construction, installation
                                                                    and operation of home systems and micro grids;
                                                                    production of waste in the form of batteries, possibly on a
                                                                    large scale; environmental, social, health and safety
                                                                    liabilities associated with retrofitting existing micro grids;
                                                                    impacts on soil, vegetation and/or biodiversity when
                                                                    installing infrastructure (solar panels, power transmission
                                                                    lines, biomass digesters/furnaces, wind turbines, micro-
                                                                    hydro run-of-river/turbines, etc.).

                                                                    Because a financial intermediary will implement the
                                                                    project, and because the size and location of individual



                                                                      Page 3 of 8
                                                        subprojects are not known, a “framework” approach was
                                                        adopted. The responsibility for project implementation
                                                        and E&S management will be deferred to a financial
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        intermediary (the Fund Manager). Therefore the project is
                                                        categorized as ‘FI’.The Cellule Energie prepared an “E&S
                                                        Procedure”, so called in order to be integrated seamlessly
                                                        into the overall subproject approval procedure (equivalent
                                                        to an Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                        – ESMF). It includes all potential risks and impacts, e.g.
                                                        safety risks during installation, adequate disposal of used
                                                        batteries and environmental impacts during installation
                                                        and operation, and mitigation activities required in each
                                                        case. The E&S Procedure was consulted on in Port-au
                                                        Prince and in the Artibonite region (La Chapelle) during
                                                        September 9 and 10, 2015. The document was published
                                                        on the Ministry of Public Work’s (MTPTC) and the
                                                        World Bank’s website on October 9 and 26, 2015,
                                                        respectively.

                                                        The FI will need to submit all sub-projects to the Bank’s
                                                        no-objection in the first two years of project
                                                        implementation. Following the first two years, only more
                                                        complex projects (mini-grids and beyond) will require the
                                                        Bank’s approval.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No    No sub projects affecting NHs will be eligible to ve
                         4.04                           funded under the Project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    No sub projects affecting forests will be eligible to be
                                                        funded under the Project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     No sub project utilizing herbicide or other similar
                                                        chemicals will be eligible to be funded under the project.
                         Physical Cultural        No    No subprojects affecting archeological, paleontological,
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           historical, religious or other area of unique natural value
                                                        as defined under the policy will be eligible to be funded
                                                        under the Project. However, the E&S Procedure will
                                                        include chance finds procedures as part of OP 4.01.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No    There are no indigenous people as defined under OP 4.10
                         BP 4.10                        in the project area.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   It is possible that the project activities may lead to
                         OP/BP 4.12                     resettlement (particularly squatters), land acquisition as
                                                        well as loss of economic livelihood under Component 2 –
                                                        Off-grid Electricity Fund. OP 4.12- Involuntary
                                                        Resettlement- is triggered. Activities that may result in
                                                        land acquisition and resettlement include the support of
                                                        commercial investments in village grids where the
                                                        business model is based on the municipal PPP and where
                                                        the Government would subsidize the distribution



                                                         Page 4 of 8
                                                                       infrastructure and the private sector would be granted to
                                                                       operate grids as concessions. Because the sub-projects or
                                                                       locations are currently unknown, a Resettlement Policy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       Framework (RPF), laying out the overall guidelines, was
                                                                       prepared. The consultations on the RPF took place on
                                                                       September 9-10, 2015 and the document was disclosed on
                                                                       the World Bank's and government’s website on October
                                                                       9, 2015. Special attention will be given to the eligibility of
                                                                       potentially affected persons to ensure that the rights of
                                                                       those without formal legal rights to land are recognized in
                                                                       the RPF and subsequent RAPs, per OP 4.12.
                                                                       98.      A financial intermediary (Fund Manager) will be
                                                                       responsible for site-specific screening of sub-projects for
                                                                       social impacts, and monitoring Resettlement Action Plans
                                                                       (RAPs) as needed. The RAP preparation and
                                                                       implementation (including compensation) will the
                                                                       responsibility of private companies that are implementing
                                                                       the sub-projects. The Fund Manager and the
                                                                       implementing companies of sub-projects will be provided
                                                                       with support and training during the course of the project
                                                                       to ensure adequate social impact monitoring.
                                                                       99.      Beyond resettlement aspects, social impact
                                                                       screening (a checklist) will cover labor safety and
                                                                       standards, community health and safety issues, and
                                                                       potential violence and security risks in the proposed site.
                                                                       The FI will need to submit all sub-projects to the Bank’s
                                                                       no-objection in the first two years of project
                                                                       implementation. Following the first two years, only more
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       complex projects (mini-grids and beyond) will require the
                                                                       Bank’s approval.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project will not support any construction or
                            4.37                                       rehabilitation of dams.
                            Projects on International   No             N/A
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             N/A
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Potential land acquisition, resettlement (especially squatters), loss of economic livelihood,
                              potential safety and security impacts are possible.

                             Environmental impacts include production of waste in the form of batteries, possibly on a large
                             scale; environmental, social, health and safety liabilities associated with retrofitting existing micro


                                                                         Page 5 of 8
                           grids; impacts on soil, vegetation and/or biodiversity when installing infrastructure (solar panels,
                           power transmission lines, biomass digesters/furnaces, wind turbines, run-of-river micro-hydro
                           plants, etc.)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           One group that maybe adversely affected are those who charge phones for community members
                           for a fee. When people have access to their own systems, such individuals may run out of
                           business. ESMF includes some mitigation measures targeting this group.

                           Indirect and long-term effects of the project include indiscriminate dumping of batteries, some of
                           which could be toxic (containing lead). However, increased use of solar power would reduce use
                           of kerosene, candles and disposable batteries.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Different alternatives in project setup were considered; however subprojects will be subject to
                           market demand and as such no alternatives were proposed.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Borrower hired a consultant to assess and address safeguards issues through an E&S
                           Procedure (equivalent of ESMF). The E&S Procedure includes guidelines for the production of
                           specific EIAs in the case of subprojects with significant impacts e.g., solar panel arrays, biomass,
                           wind turbines, micro-hydro, etc. These EIAs will be subject to review and approval by the Bank,
                           and will address, as needed, environmental, social, health and safety impacts.

                           To manage used batteries, which will become obsolete in the next 5-10 years, the solution adopted
                           by the Borrower was to commit to the following:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1) Include in the ESMF:
                           •       Promotion of low toxicity (Li-ion) batteries;
                           •       DESCOs will propose systems to collect used batteries as part of their business plan;

                           2) In the meantime, the MTPTC will commission a study that will cover (i) evaluation of risks
                           posed by batteries produced under the project; (ii) evaluation of options for disposal and (iii)
                           possible private sector solutions to recycling / disposal of batteries. MTPTC will solicit financing
                           to carry out the recommendations of the study once it is concluded.

                           This is in keeping with the World Bank Group/IFC’s Environmental Social Health and Safety
                           (ESHS) Guidelines, which state that: In the absence of qualified commercial or government-
                           owned waste disposal operators (taking into consideration proximity and transportation
                           requirements), project sponsors should consider (a) Installing on-site waste treatment or recycling
                           processes; or (b) As a final option, constructing facilities that will provide for the environmentally
                           sound long-term storage of wastes on-site […] or at an alternative appropriate location up until
                           external commercial options become available.

                           Furthermore, the Energy Cell and MTPTC have indicated that they are favorable to allocate land
                           for the disposal/storage of used Li-ion batteries.



                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                           Finally, the FI will have funds provided by the project to hire specialist(s) in charge of social/
                           environmental safeguards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Entrepreneurs, households, businesses, Energy cell, Ministry of Public works (MTPTC).
                           Consultations were held in Port-au-Prince targeting entrepreneurs and government agencies and in
                           the Artibonite Department targeting households and small businesses. During consultations,
                           special attention was given to understanding the gender-differentiated impacts of off-grid energy
                           options.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Oct-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                            09-Oct-2015
                           Comments: Procedure E&S and RPF
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      08-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Oct-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Haiti                                                            09-Oct-2015
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?

                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                             20 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Frederic Verdol,Dana Rysankova
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Antonio Alexandre Rodrigues                   Date: 30-Apr-2016
                            Manager:                   Barbalho (PMGR)




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
