                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Oct-2018 | Report No: ISDSC23195




                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                             Page 1 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                            Project Name                 Environmental Category   Country
                                                                 Supporting Youth Inclusive
                                                                                              B - Partial Assessment
                           P165485                               Local Development in                                  Kosovo
                                                                                              (B)
                                                                 Kosovo
                           Team Leader(s)                        Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                       Investment Project
                           Gloria La Cava, Ifeta Smajic                                       GSU03
                                                                                                                       Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                     0.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                        0.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                          0.00

                           DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                        2.79
                                  Japan Social Development Fund                                                                                  2.79


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           13. The Project Development Objective is to improve the socio-economic inclusion of at least 3,000 disadvantaged
                           youth [7] in vulnerable communities [8] in Kosovo through (i) enhanced soft skills development and volunteering
                           opportunities through youth driven community development, and by (ii) increasing access to youth community
                           infrastructure and services. [9]

                           14. The proposed project will work through local governments to effectively target vulnerable communities and
                           channel resources for sub-projects identified, prioritized, and designed by disadvantaged youth. Youth participants will
                           benefit from soft skills training and project proposal preparation, building skills that are both valuable for future
                           employers and to lead effective transformations in their communities. By activating disadvantaged youth through
                           positive youth development interventions and services, the project aims to reduce youth’s socio-economic exclusion
                           and disenfranchisement by identifying and finding solutions to youth unmet local needs.

                           [7] Disadvantaged youth refers to NEETs, minorities, persons with disabilities, rural and low-income youth, IDPs,

                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo



                           returnees, and LGBTI.

                           [8] Vulnerable communities include those with: i) high rates of youth inactivity, especially among young women, ii)
                           recent presence of foreign fighter recruits and vulnerability to violence and radicalization, and iii) legacy of ethnically-
                           motivated tensions and mistrust.

                           [9] Municipalities will be identified by Appraisal based on a combination of the following factors: i) high rates of youth
                           inactivity, especially among young women, ii) recent presence of foreign fighter recruits and vulnerability to violence
                           and radicalization, and iii) legacy of ethnically-motivated tensions and mistrust.



                           C. Project Description
                           A. Activities/Components
Public Disclosure Copy




                           16. The proposed project will complement a planned youth operation in Kosovo “Youth Inclusion and
                           Entrepreneurship” (YIEP) focused on increasing economic opportunities for inactive youth through improved
                           access to affordable finance and sustainable entrepreneurship services (see Kosovo Country Partnership
                           Framework FY17-21). YIEP provides supply side solutions intended to support youth economic inclusion in an
                           economy with limited job creation, particularly for disadvantaged youth. The proposed JSDF will complement
                           YIEP inclusion efforts by piloting demand side solutions aimed at addressing youth’s socio-economic needs at
                           community level beyond job creation. Youth activated through the proposed JSDF grant can be directed to
                           entrepreneurship opportunities offered by YEIP to enhance their chances of economic integration. The
                           proposed project is not included in the preparation of YEIP as it represents a new initiative to be piloted by the
                           Government of Kosovo (GoK) prior to scaling in subsequent interventions based on project results. The GoK has
                           expressed interest in streamlining support for youth programing through existing government systems. In
                           particular, the MoLGA will evaluate results from the pilot to integrate support for youth initiatives as part of its
                           future performance-based block grant allocation system.

                           17. The project draws on global experience supporting disadvantaged youth in FCV contexts (e.g., Youth
                           Livelihoods Development in Southern Iraq Project, Kosovo Youth Development Project). In particular, by
                           operating at a local level and employing bottom-up approaches, the proposed project will improve targeting of
                           beneficiaries and support project cost effectiveness. The project also builds on lessons learned from global
                           community driven initiatives, which show that involving beneficiaries in all stages of the project cycle results in
                           better quality service deliver, lower implementation costs, and greater community satisfaction. For example, the
                           Macedonia “Youth Empowerment through Community Development” Project (2009-2014) shows that taking a
                           proactive approach to activating vulnerable youth at the community level through specialized and grassroots
                           organizations is effective in reducing their vulnerabilities. Additionally, the Kosovo Youth Development Project,
                           which supported youth entrepreneurship and provision of business incubators at the local level, showed the
                           potential of improving sustainability of youth services by involving local governments, i.e., incubators that
                           received local government support continued to operate beyond the project duration.




                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                                          Page 3 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo




                           Description

                           Component 1: Youth Driven Community Development Initiatives (US$ 1,697,500)

                           18. This component will finance youth driven socio-economic initiatives at community level that support youth
                           inclusion and livelihoods. The Ministry of Local Government Administration (MoLGA) will allocate block grants to
                           selected municipalities earmarked for youth initiatives in two annual block grant cycles. This component expects
                           to finance 150 youth driven initiatives by engaging at least 3,000 disadvantaged youth in the identification,
                           prioritization and design of sub-projects. Participating youth will benefit from volunteering opportunities to
                           positively impact their communities and other disadvantaged youth, while also gaining valuable work
                           experience and skills that makes young people more attractive for potential employers. Youth driven
                           community initiatives will benefit about 5,000 youth through greater access to youth related services and
                           community infrastructure.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           19. Partnership with municipalities. The MoLGA will select 10 municipalities by appraisal based on a preliminary
                           needs and mapping assessment, which includes: (i) large demand and limited supply of youth infrastructure
                           services, (ii) high concentration of inactive youth, (iii) limited international donor presence, and (iv) large relative
                           presence of minority ethnic communities (Serbian, Ashkali, Bosniak, Roma, Turkish, Egyptians, Gorani, and
                           Montenegrins).Youth driven activities will be implemented in vulnerable communities within selected
                           municipalities, including those with higher levels of youth inactivity, poverty rate, and limited access to youth
                           related services.

                           20. Selected municipalities will undergo a capacity assessment to ensure they have the absorption capacity to
                           effectively manage their block grant allocation. This assessment will be based on the MoLGA’s performance-
                           based block grant allocation system, which evaluates municipal performance on a range of financial and
                           management indicators.[10] To be eligible to participate, municipalities must match 15 percent of their block
                           grant allocation in counterpart funding. In addition, municipalities will commit staff to facilitate the
                           implementation and supervision of sub-projects. Municipal contributions will ensure local ownership and
                           sustainability of youth programming by integrating activities to local development plans, and will build greater
                           cooperation and trust between youth and municipal stakeholders.

                           21. Scope of investments. Youth NGOs and CBOs will be eligible to submit sub-project proposals that address
                           youth socio-economic needs. These proposals will be identified through an inclusive and participatory process,
                           which includes focus group discussions with different youth sub-groups (ethnic minorities, persons with
                           disability, LGBT, women, IDPs and refugees) to ensure that the needs of all youth are properly reflected in sub-
                           project design. Sub-project proposals can include (i) economic services intended to improve youth employability
                           and income generating opportunities (i.e. skills building trainings, access to maker spaces, entrepreneurship
                           trainings, ICT courses, etc), (ii) youth related community infrastructure improvements (i.e. repair of youth
                           centers, parks, classrooms, youth-friendly spaces in health centers, and libraries), (iii) youth cultural and sports
                           activities, or (iv) additional youth volunteering opportunities intended to address a community need. Specific
                           youth driven initiatives cannot be determined a priori as they are demand driven and will respond to
                           disadvantaged youth’s unmet needs at community level. These are some of the activities identified by security


                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                                 Page 4 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo




                           body representatives and experts on prevention of violent extremism (PVE) as lacking in fragile
                           communities. By investing in youth skills, knowledge, and activities, the proposed project will empower
                           disadvantaged youth to become active agents in their communities and decrease their vulnerability to negative
                           influences.

                           22. Selection Criteria. Sub-project proposals will be reviewed against to-be agreed selection criteria, which
                           would assign greater weigh to sub-project that: (i) involve extensive youth participation in the identification and
                           design of the sub-project, (ii) benefit the largest number of youth, (iii) include opportunities for youth
                           employment or apprenticeships during the implementation phase of the sub-project, (iv) are aligned with
                           municipal youth plans, and (v) bring youth from different ethnic backgrounds together, so as to strengthen to
                           inter-ethnic collaborations and bridge the existing social divide. To ensure sub-projects have community
                           support, proposals must be endorsed by at least one community entity (neighborhood councils, religious
                           associations, youth centers, etc.). The size of the sub-grant shall not exceed US$ 30,000. Municipal sub-grants
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will be disbursed to youth NGOs and CBOs in several installments following a rigorous system which includes: (i)
                           call for proposals, (ii) training in proposal writing for CBOs, (iii) screening and technical assessment of proposals,
                           (iv) safeguard screening to ensure full compliance with national and World Bank requirements, (v) evaluation of
                           projects by a Grant Approval Committee, (vi) sub-grant agreement, including application of World Bank fiduciary
                           rules; and (vii) sub-grant disbursement and monitoring of eligible expenses. For newly formed youth groups,
                           funds will be managed by the Facilitating Partner NGO(s) in line with the sub-project design developed by youth
                           and approved by the project.

                           Component 2: Youth Stakeholders Training (US$ 807,500)

                           23. This component will finance: (i) community mobilization and outreach activities, (ii) soft skills training and
                           project preparation/management training for youth in target communities, (iii) technical support for youth
                           NGOs and CBOs who submitted an application pre-selected by municipalities for funding, and (iv) follow up
                           support and supervision throughout sub-project implementation. The MoLGA will competitively select an
                           experienced NGO to implement activities under this component. This component expects to directly benefit
                           3,000 youth through soft skills and project management training, and indirectly benefit about 5,000
                           disadvantaged youth by strengthening the technical specifications of sub-projects designed to improve
                           disadvantaged youth’s access to socio-economic services.

                            24. Community mobilization: the facilitating partner NGO will conduct community outreach campaigns to
                           increase awareness among disadvantaged youth, including youth NGOs and CBOs, of the project activities and
                           encourage them to apply. Outreach activities will include door to door campaigns, meetings with key
                           community stakeholders (neighborhood councils, youth groups, youth centers, local NGOs, and representatives
                           of the religious community), and placement of flyers and posters in strategic locations in the target areas (youth
                           centers, cafes, local authorities’ offices, or other locations where youth congregate). The facilitating partner
                           NGO will also prepare brief community profiles outlining youth needs and existing youth friendly infrastructure
                           services, so as to inform sub-project designs and support youth groups in the prioritization of community
                           objectives.



                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                                Page 5 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo




                           25. Soft skills and project management training: the facilitating partner NGOs will provide soft skills training to
                           3,000 disadvantaged youth focused on leadership skills, tolerance, conflict mediation, communications, and
                           team work. These trainings will increase youth employability by focusing on soft skills valued by potential
                           employer and critical to effectively manage a business, and will also facilitate collaboration in joint community
                           work. Soft skills training will be the entry point for all youth interested in elaborating sub-project proposals
                           under the project. Upon completion of soft skills training, youth beneficiaries can form groups or use existing
                           NGOs to prepare sub-project proposals. Trainings will be targeted to the specific type of organization, and will
                           be focused on community mobilization, sub-project preparation (incl. design, beneficiary targeting, budgeting)
                           and implementation (procurement, financial management, participatory monitoring and evaluation). In
                           addition, sub-projects selected for funding will receive ongoing support to ensure effective sub-project
                           implementation.

                           Component 3: Project Management and Administration, Monitoring and Evaluation, and Knowledge
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Dissemination (US$280,000)

                           Project Management

                           26. The MoLGA will establish a Project Management Unit (PMU) responsible for the overall implementation of
                           the project. The PMU will be comprised of a team of seconded staff from the MoLGA, as well as small team of
                           consultants to support key reporting, fiduciary, and safeguard functions. Specifically, seconded staff from the
                           ministry will include a Project Director, two Component Coordinators (one for each component), Capacity &
                           Performance Officer, and an M&E Officer, while the team of consultants financed by the project will include a
                           Project Coordinator, Financial Management Specialist, a Procurement Specialist, and a Safeguards consultant. In
                           addition, the MoLGA will provide working space, transportation, and cover logistical and administrative
                           expenses.

                           27. The PMU’s main responsibilities will include: project coordination, procurement, financial management,
                           safeguards, communication and knowledge management, and monitoring and evaluation. Under component 1,
                           the PMU would be responsible for: (i) assessing municipalities absorption and fiduciary capacity for project
                           implementation based on the Municipal Performance Management System, (ii) managing the allocation and
                           disbursement of project funds, (iii) supervising municipal compliance with project criteria, (iv) providing no-
                           objection for the selection of sub-projects to ensure they comply with safeguards/ fiduciary requirements. For
                           municipalities who meet the criteria outlined in the project description but demonstrate relatively low capacity,
                           the PMU may choose to initiate corrective actions, such as: (i) allocating funds but not providing block grants, (ii)
                           deploying the Capacity & Performance Officer from the MLGA to work directly with municipal officers
                           responsible for opening calls, evaluating proposals, and disbursing funds, and/or (iii) requiring additional/more
                           frequent reporting from municipal officials. For component 2, the MoLGA will procure experienced Facilitating
                           Partner NGO(s) to conduct soft skills training, sub-project proposal writing and management training, and
                           provide technical support to youth NGOs/CBOs throughout the sub-project cycle.

                           28. The MoLGA will work closely with selected municipalities throughout project implementations. To be eligible
                           to participate, municipalities will commit resource to support project activities. In particular, municipalities


                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                               Page 6 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo




                           responsibilities will include: (i) chairing the Grant Approval Committees and participating in the selection of sub-
                           projects, (ii) providing 15 percent in matching funds to support youth driven initiatives, (iii) supporting
                           community outreach activities, alongside facilitating partner NGOs, to introduce the project to potential youth
                           beneficiaries, (iii) operations and maintenance for activities related to municipal infrastructure or spaces, and
                           (iv) technical support to youth groups by facilitating municipal engineers for sub-projects requiring technical
                           specifications.

                           Monitoring and Evaluation

                           29. The PMU will put in place a robust M&E system to track progress and results leveraging existing MoLGA
                           Information and Communication Technology (ICT) tools, which allow for real time monitoring of ongoing
                           activities and to evaluate performance over time. The PMU will be backstopped by several MoLGA departments
                           with extensive experience supporting M&E activities and systems for national and donor funded projects. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Division for Project Development and Management designed a monitoring and evaluation system for municipal
                           capital investment, which includes frequent field visits, on-spot checks, and the completion of pre-payment
                           reporting in coordination with municipal officials. Similarly, the Division for the Advancement of Municipal
                           Performance established the Municipal Performance Management System to measure municipal results against
                           a list of 64 specific and measurable indicators. On the project level, the Division for Cross-Border Cooperation is
                           responsible for M&E activities under the EU-funded IPA I and IPA II cross-border cooperation programs (12.8
                           million EUR and 25.2 million EUR, respectively) with Albania, Macedonia, and Montenegro. Lastly, the Division
                           for Monitoring and Assessment of Legality recently launched an Online Reporting System, which allows for
                           electronic submission and central-level monitoring of municipal reports and legal acts, as well as a direct online
                           channel for issuing comments, approvals, and calls for revision. This platform will be leveraged in the proposed
                           project to actively monitor ongoing activities and receive monitoring reports from municipal officials regarding
                           youth activities.

                           30. The PMU will develop the detailed monitoring framework for component 1 and 2. Standard monitoring will
                           include baseline and final beneficiary satisfaction assessment. These assessments will be carried out by
                           independent consultants at critical milestones of project implementation, for example after the first year, at
                           mid-term, or when problems are detected. Students and volunteers, under the supervision of an M&E Officer
                           (seconded from the MoLGA), will also be engaged to conduct spot checks and phone calls to beneficiaries to
                           obtain their feedback on the different project activities. Participatory M&E systems will be used to ensure that
                           the proposed project activities address the needs of the target population. In the selected areas, a Youth M&E
                           Committee will be set up to monitor the beneficiary targeting mechanism for all activities, the use of sub-project
                           grants, the effectiveness of trainings on proposal writing and sub-project implementation, and the overall
                           results of component 1 and 2.

                           31. The project will also fund an Implementation Completion and Results (ICR) Report that will gather lessons
                           learned for future Bank activities within Kosovo and in other similar settings. The ICR will be developed by an
                           independent consultant with experience working on youth activities.

                           Knowledge Dissemination


                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                              Page 7 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo




                           32. Knowledge sharing will take place throughout the project. A knowledge management specialist will be
                           contracted to consolidate lessons learned throughout project implementation. Lessons learned would be
                           disseminated in annual forums, where youth stakeholders and beneficiaries will have an opportunity to present
                           sub-project results. These annual forums will also provide an opportunity for youth to interact with participants
                           from other communities in a safe and guided environment. The forums will be widely documented and the
                           media will be invited so as to strengthen the narrative of youth as positive members of their community. Kosovo
                           government officials, the Government of Japan, and other development partners will be invited in order to raise
                           awareness about the importance of investing in youth local development initiatives.



                           [10] Selected municipalities resulting from this assessment must receive no-objection from the World Bank.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          The project will target 10 municipalities in Kosovo affected by high levels of youth inactivity, inter-ethnic
                          tensions and recruitment of foreign fighters. The municipalities are likely to be spread across several regions
                          in Kosovo and will vary in size and population density.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          The MoLGA does not have previous experience implementing World Bank-funded operations. The Ministry’s
                          safeguards capacity is therefore assessed as being weak and would need to be strengthened with support of
                          the World Bank Safeguards Specialists as part of Project implementation. Safeguards-specific institutional
                          arrangements will be mainstreamed within the PMU, which will receive direct training from World Bank
                          safeguards specialists. Implementing NGOs will be assisted to fill out and submit screening forms. The PMU
                          will be responsible for reviewing and filing all screening and implementation phase monitoring forms, and
                          the MoLGA Internal Audit Division will be responsible for conducting an "spot-check" audit to ensure that the
                          M&E officer is collecting, reviewing, and filing all project selection/screening and monitoring forms. Currently
                          the MoLGA has a simple e-mail based grievance mechanism operating with legally mandated 30-day
                          response rate. The project will continue to have a central level grievance redress mechanism (GRM) under
                          the responsibility of the MoLGA. Questions/grievances related to the Project will be managed by the PMU
                          directly. The GRM will have two main functions: 1) provide clarifications on sub-project application
                          procedures (e.g., criteria interpretation, deadlines, etc.) and respond to applicants’ appeals; and 2) manage
                          feedback/complaints from primary beneficiaries (disadvantaged youth) and third parties affected by sub-
                          project civil works and externalities (e.g., noise, increased traffic, etc.). Target beneficiaries and affected


                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                             Page 8 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo




                          communities will be made aware of the GRM through communication material (including project website,
                          flyers at municipal offices), outreach activities and community meetings.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Bekim Imeri, Social Specialist
                          Esma Kreso Beslagic, Environmental Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project             Triggered?             Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                               The activities on infrastructure
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               reconstruction or construction will more
                                                                                               than likely have small-scale and easily
                                                                                               mitigatable environmental impacts of dust
                                                                                               and noise generation, health and safety,
                                                                                               access and waste management. In order to
                                                                                               adequately identify the risks and formulate
                                                                                               corresponding mitigation measures an
                                                                                               Environmental and Social Management
                                                                                               Framework (ESMF) will be prepared, that
                                                                                               will screen the activities within the
                                                                                               applications received based on their
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Yes
                                                                                               environmental and social impact and
                                                                                               develop Environmental Management Plans
                                                                                               (ESMPs) or ESMP Checklists based on the
                                                                                               scope of works and associated risks. The
                                                                                               screening will be mandatory for all
                                                                                               applications and will screen out Category A
                                                                                               projects, projects with implications that
                                                                                               may trigger additional safeguards policies
                                                                                               and will set forth a framework that meets
                                                                                               the World Bank safeguards requirements as
                                                                                               well as the Kosovar environmental
                                                                                               legislation.
                                                                                               The ESMF shall ensure that there are no
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                       No
                                                                                               activities in natural habitats.
                                                                                               The ESMF shall ensure that there are no
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                No
                                                                                               activities impacting forests.
                                                                                               The scope of activities does not imply any
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                           No
                                                                                               pest management issues.
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11            No                 No works on physical cultural resources will
                                                                                               be financed under the project.


                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                              Page 9 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo




                                                                                                  There are no indigenous peoples in the
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                       No
                                                                                                  project area.
                                                                                                  The project does not anticipate any new
                                                                                                  construction of infrastructure under
                                                                                                  component 1 that may lead to
                                                                                                  expropriation. Any land requirements
                                                                                                  (temporary or permanent) for civil works
                                                                                                  (rehabilitation of existing facilities) to be
                                                                                                  financed under the sub-projects will be met
                                                                                                  through available lands that are publicly
                                                                                                  owned and not under use, including by
                                                                                                  informal occupants. Sub-projects that may
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                 No                  trigger the World Bank Policy OP 4.12 will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  be excluded by means of a screening
                                                                                                  process defined in the ESMF. Thereby, sub-
                                                                                                  projects that involve relocation of
                                                                                                  households, temporary or permanent land
                                                                                                  take, and impacts on livelihoods that may
                                                                                                  occur through restriction of access to
                                                                                                  resources will be excluded. Given the public
                                                                                                  nature of youth infrastructure/facilities, the
                                                                                                  project does not anticipate voluntary land
                                                                                                  transactions.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                           No                  This policy is not triggered.
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50      No                  This policy is not triggered.
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60               No                  This policy is not triggered.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           14-Nov-2018
                           b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                           An ESMF will be prepared and disclosed in-country by Appraisal. The ESMF, with call for comments, will be
                           disclosed on the MoLGA website for at least 14 days, along a printed version that will be made available at
                           the Ministry’s premises. The disclosure of the document will be announced via local media channels
                           (newspapers and radio) and invitations to consultations on the document will be sent directly to relevant
                           stakeholders (e.g., Kosovo Youth Centers’ Network, environmental NGOs, DPOs). In parallel, the call for
                           public consultations meeting for the ESMF will be issued with the venue details. Upon the meeting, the ESMF
                           will address all relevant comments and will be finalized only when including minutes of the meetings. The

                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                                 Page 10 of 11
                                   The World Bank
                                   Supporting Youth Inclusive Local Development in Kosovo




                              finalized ESMF will be re-disclosed on MoLGA web site. As needed, based on the environmental risk
                              categorization (screening), ESMPs and ESMP Checklists will be prepared and consulted for sub-projects prior
                              to contract signature. The WB Environmental Specialist approved ESMPs and ESMP Checklists will become an
                              integral part of bidding and contracting documentation. The Project design and activities has been informed
                              by consultations with local governments, youth NGOs and representatives from the private sector as part of
                              a regional workshop on “Youth in Local Development” organized by the Municipality of Gjilan on July 20,
                              2017. Participants emphasized the limited budget allocations for youth programming, lack of expertise at the
                              municipality level on youth activation interventions and participation of youth in the decision-making and
                              delivery of services aimed at them. Based on these inputs, the project will incorporate a participatory
                              approach to identifying, prioritizing, designing, implementing, monitoring and evaluating youth activities. The
                              participatory process will include focus groups with youth sub-groups (minorities, disabled, women) to
                              ensure that the needs of all youth are properly reflected in sub-project design.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Gloria La Cava

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nina Chee                                         10-Oct-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Nina Bhatt                                        11-Oct-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Oct 13, 2018                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 11
