                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA13368
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Jun-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Macedonia, former Yugoslav                  P149955
                                                                          Project ID:
                                              Republic of
                            Project Name:     Road Upgrading and Development Project (P149955)
                            Task Team       Rakesh Tripathi,Liljana Sekerinska
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       10-Jun-2015                     Estimated    29-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GTIDR                            Lending      Investment Project Financing
                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (90%), General public
                                              administration sector (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Regional integration (50%), Trade facilitation and market access (50%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        91.00           Total Bank Financing:  91.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      91.00
                              Total                                                                                      91.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives are to improve transport connectivity for road users along
                           Corridor VIII between Skopje and the border with Bulgaria, and to improve asset management and
                           planning of the Public Enterprise for State Roads.



                                                                      Page 1 of 8
                          3. Project Description
                         Component 1: Construction along Corridor VIII: Rankovce - Kriva Palanka (estimated cost of EUR
                         78 million, which will be financed by IBRD loan). This component will upgrade a section of the vital
Public Disclosure Copy




                         international corridor VIII by financing the construction of the express road along the east section of
                         the corridor which connects to Bulgaria. This section of the corridor passes through the north-east
                         part of the country. North East planning region is the poorest among the eight planning (statistical)
                         regions in Macedonia. This segment is currently in poor condition. It carries around 3,000 vehicles
                         per day, is narrow (around 6.4 meters) with many places without shoulders, and passes along many
                         villages, which will make its rehabilitation with partial widening difficult. The new road is on a hilly
                         terrain, thus around 10 bridges will need to be constructed with a total length of about 1.5 km. The
                         new road sections will be 24.64 km long, one lane in each direction with a width of 11m to 12m.
                         Road design will take into account road safety considerations.

                         Component 2: Institutional and Project Implementation Support (estimated cost of EUR 5 million,
                         which will be financed by IBRD loan). Component 2 will have two sub-components:
                         (i)      Sub-component 1: Establishment of Bridge Management System (BMS): This sub-
                         component will further strengthen asset management by expanding the road asset management
                         system (RAMS) currently under implementation by PESR to include also bridge asset management.
                         The core focus of this activity would be to support PESR to introduce a bridge management system
                         (BMS) to be integrated in RAMS. This will entail: provision of equipment and software, diagnostic
                         assessment of bridge condition, creation of a national roads and bridges linear referencing system to
                         digitize roads and bridges, supporting the preparation of a bridge maintenance and investment plan
                         using BMS, and training for technical and administrative staff.
                         (ii)     Sub-component 2: Capacity Development and Project Implementation Support: This project
                         will build on earlier institutional capacity activities in road management planning, road safety,
                         resilience and other transport management areas as the need arises throughout the project
                         implementation. Supervision of works will be financed by PESR. Independent technical audits of
                         civil works will be financed from this component. It will also finance technical assistance,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         equipment, and operational costs associated with the implementation of the project. This would
                         include: beneficiary satisfaction survey, as well as mid-term and impact evaluation surveys; and
                         carrying out the annual financial audits of the Project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Environmental Safeguards: The project area includes green fields, and hilly and mountainous terrains
                         along the eastern part of Corridor VIII connecting the country with Bulgaria. Component 1 envisages
                         a new construction, and in many instances road alignment will pass through untouched natural
                         landscapes which might also be a habitat for various animals.

                         Social Safeguards: The proposed project road is passing through a lightly populated area. Until now
                         the proposed road Rankovce - Kriva Palanka has defined a preliminary route. Based on the defined
                         preliminary route, it is unlikely that the project will cause displacement of the dwellings. The most
                         probable impact will be acquisition of land, which would either be agriculture land, pastures and/or
                         forestry.

                         The proposed project could eventually be followed up by an activity to improve the pavement on the
                         existing Corridor VIII road from the capital Skopje to Rankovce. At this time there are neither
                         detailed plans nor preparatory documents for this activity.


                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bekim Imeri (GSURR)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Gulana Enar Hajiyeva (GENDR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental            Yes        This policy is triggered because the implementation of the
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Project’s Component 1 will be associated with significant
                                                             environmental impacts caused by new constructions of the
                                                             express road Rankovce - Kriva Palanka along the east
                                                             section of Corridor VIII. The construction will be carried
                                                             out mainly in untouched mountainous areas, green fields,
                                                             hilly terrains, forest areas used, inter alia, for guided
                                                             hunting, etc. The full Environmental and Social Impact
                                                             Assessment (ESIA), including Environmental and Social
                                                             Management Plan, has been conducted by the Borrower/
                                                             Implementing Agency for the proposed road. This ESIA
                                                             and ESMP has been reviewed and approved by the Bank,
                                                             and disclosed and discussed with the project stakeholders
                                                             on May 11, 2015. The ESIA and ESMP has been prepared
                                                             by an independent consultant contracted by the Borrower
                                                             (PESR). Also, Component 2 will provide Technical
                                                             Assistance for the establishment of country-wide Bridge
                                                             Management System (BMS), which will entail, inter alia,
                                                             development of bridge maintenance and investment plans.
                                                             The project will ensure (through respective Terms of
                                                             References and consultancy contracts) that the
                                                             environmental aspects of proposed investment activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             are duly considered and addressed in the framework of
                                                             those investment plans.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes        The potential impacts on natural habitats, as well as the
                         4.04                                assessment of biological and ecological value of habitats
                                                             have been addressed though the ESIA, which concluded
                                                             that no critical natural habitats exist in the project area
                                                             and will be impacted by the project activities. The
                                                             anticipated impacts are those to occur in the period of
                                                             construction in the Osogovo-German Landscape
                                                             Biocorridor, and those on the forested areas and tree
                                                             plantations due to selective vegetation clearance. The
                                                             ESMP proposed mitigation measures which include,
                                                             besides ensuring safe passes for the wildlife mentioned
                                                             above, introduction of seasonal limitations for the
                                                             implementation of civil works to avoid critical
                                                             disturbance to identified species, and compensatory
                                                             planting to be carried out in close coordination with the
                                                             Ministry of Environment and Physical Planning.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No         The potential impact on the forested area, identified by



                                                               Page 3 of 8
                                                                       ESIA, is found to be insignificant, and not causing
                                                                       degradation or conversion of forests, thus, the policy is
                                                                       not triggered. The mitigation measures have been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       identified by ESMP, as described above.
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           No             The ESIA concluded that two cultural heritage sites are
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       located within the study area but will not, however, be
                                                                       impacted by the project. Thus, this policy is not triggered,
                                                                       and the ESIA and ESMP identified the institutional
                                                                       responsibilities and procedures to be followed in case if
                                                                       any chance finds occur in the project area.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               The policy is triggered because the Project’s Component
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 1 will lead to acquisition of land. Affected land will be
                                                                       pastures, forests and agriculture land and less likely
                                                                       construction land. There is low likelihood for any kind of
                                                                       displacement, either dwellings or businesses, because the
                                                                       route for the proposed road will pass through uninhabited
                                                                       areas. Given that in the project preparation phase impacts
                                                                       pertinent to Social Safeguards are unknown, a
                                                                       Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared to guide
                                                                       land acquisition and potential displacements during the
                                                                       project implementation. Later, once the detail designs are
                                                                       ready, land surveyors will be able to determine definite
                                                                       impacts and thus Specific Land Acquisition PLan will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       prepared. LAP will be prepared during the early stage of
                                                                       project implementation.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             The project scope has been revised since the concept
                            4.37                                       stage, and does not currently include the road segment
                                                                       between Toranica and Sasa which passes the mine tailing
                                                                       dam failure site. No other dam sites exist in the project
                                                                       area. Thus, this policy is not triggered.
                            Projects on International   No             The two rivers in the project area (Kriva River and
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       Rankovce River) are local waterways, thus, the policy is
                                                                       not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The construction of the new road Rankovce - Kriva Palanka will cause environmental concerns
                              related to the original landscape, surface and ground water, flora and fauna, air quality and to the

                                                                         Page 4 of 8
                           soils in the project area. The Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environmental and
                           Social Management Plan (ESIA and ESMP) have been prepared to identify and address the
                           anticipated adverse impacts of the road construction. Those impacts include:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           -        impacts on the natural landscape and aesthetics;
                           -        impacts associated with the extraction and transportation of road construction materials,
                           and disposal of excess materials. Due to the volume of materials which will need to be extracted
                           and transported, this impact is considered to be one of the major risks by the project. Its
                           significance is mitigated by the fact that the sites identified by ESIA have all been duly licensed
                           and are regularly monitored, and both the licensing procedure and the results of monitoring are
                           found acceptable;
                           -        potential disturbance to the existing drainage systems;
                           -        increased dust and emissions, degradation of air quality;
                           -        impacts related to noise and vibration at selected sensitive sections of the roads in the
                           vicinity of identified settlements of T’lminici, Ginovce and Rankovce;
                           -        disturbance to flora and fauna species in the sensitive area of Osogovo - German
                           Landscape Biocorridor. The risk associated with this aspect is considered to be major, however,
                           proper mitigation is envisaged through providing of passes for wildlife, introduction of seasonal
                           limitation for construction works to avoid critical disturbances during the nestling and breeding
                           seasons for identified spieces, and through maximum coordination of the design of the road with
                           one of the railway which is planned to go in parallel with the preferred road alignment;
                           -        impacts on forested area at and tree plantations at selected locations. Since the impact on
                           the forested area is not found to be significant and/or causing degradation of forest ecosystem, it
                           will be mitigated though minimizing the areas to be cleared and though compensatory planting to
                           be closely monitored by MoEPP and PE “Macedonian Forests”. If properly managed, this impact
                           will not present a major risk to local biodiversity and ecosystems;
                           -        impacts related to the generation and disposal of liquid and solid wastes at the
                           construction phase. Taking into account the overall poor waste management practice in the
                           country, this impact could be significant, however, the ESIA has identified the sites that are found
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to be environmentally acceptable (landfill Zletovo and landfill Probishtip, the nearest sites with
                           low environmental risks assessed by the MoEPP), and also provided detailed and clear guidance
                           for Contractor on the management of all types of wastes expected to be generated;
                           -        impacts related to the storage and disposal materials;
                           -        potential impact on surface water (the Kriva River flowing in parallel with the road
                           alignment at a distance of 850 m to 5 km, and Rankovska River to be crossed by the proposed road
                           at one selected location);
                           -        potential impacts on ground water in the project area;
                           -        impacts on soil which might be caused by spills and leaks of hazardous liquids, as well as
                           soil compaction and erosion which might be caused by poorly managed excavation, use of
                           construction machinery and other construction activities.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The long term impacts of the future activities in the project area are assessed to be positive as will
                           significantly decrease the risks of traffic accidents and associated risks of potential spills of diesel,
                           fuel and lubricants, and, consequently contamination of soil and water. The project will also
                           provide improved drainage services to the area, which will greatly decrease the risks of seasonal
                           floods currently causing deterioration of the Kriva River water.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                        Page 5 of 8
                           impacts.
                           Three alternatives have been considered for the project. 'No Project' Alternative has been rejected
                           as it represents environmental risks specified in the section above. Among the other two
Public Disclosure Copy




                           alternatives, the alignment which allows for maximum coordination of the road design with the
                           one of the railway which is located in parallel to the designed road, and provides for greater
                           distance to the Kriva River, has been selected, as it is associated with less significant
                           environmental concerns.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The implementing agency for the project is the Public Enterprise for State Roads (PESR). The
                           PESR has undertaken the Environmental and Social Impact Assessment study and prepared the
                           Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESIA and ESMP), which identified the main
                           environmental and social impacts and determined adequate mitigation measures as well as
                           implementation mechanisms for the implementation of those measures. The PESR has also
                           established a program to monitor the implementation of the ESMP.
                           This project will be the fourth project implemented with a World Bank loan since 2008; therefore,
                           the borrower is well familiar with the World Bank procedures and requirements. More than two
                           years ago the implementing agency PESR established a department to deal with environmental and
                           social aspects related to roads construction and rehabilitation. Besides the World Bank funded
                           projects, the department also handles the projects supported by EBRD and is familiar with the
                           respective performance standards as well. The staff of the department consists of two
                           environmental specialists handling the social agenda as well. However, the staffing plan of PESR
                           envisages hiring additional staff who will be specifically assigned to the social aspects.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Two rounds of public consultations have been conducted: first one, dated May 14, 2014, was to
                           discuss the Terms of Reference for environmental and social studies required for the project; and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           second one, dated May 11, 2015, was to present and discuss the findings of the ESIA and ESMP
                           as well as RPF. The documents in the Macedonian language have been made available to wide
                           public in advance of the meeting. The detailed minutes of both consultation meetings have been
                           duly recorded and enclosed to the ESIA and ESMP. The stakeholders invited to the public
                           consultation meetings included representatives of local communities, local governments, and
                           central and local environmental authorities. The Stakeholders Engagement Plan has also been
                           developed to ensure proper involvement of all potentially affected people throughout the life of the
                           project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         18-May-2015
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-May-2015
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         26-May-2015
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of                           11-May-2015
                           Comments: The ESIA and ESMP have been disclosed and discussed with public in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         municipalities of Rankovce and Kriva Palanka, which are two location of the project
                                         area, through which the proposed road will pass.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      11-May-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   19-May-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Macedonia, former Yugoslav Republic of                           11-May-2015
                           Comments: The RPF has been disclosed and discussed with public in the municipalities of
                                         Rankovce and Kriva Palanka, which are two location of the project area, through
                                         which the proposed road will pass.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Rakesh Tripathi,Liljana Sekerinska
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                             Date: 02-Jun-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                           Date: 02-Jun-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
