INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13112
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Malawi                     Project ID:   P154185
Project Name:    Malawi Education Sector Improvement Project (MESIP) (P154185)
Task Team        Soren Nellemann,Natalia Cherevatova
Leader(s):
Estimated        20-Jul-2015                Estimated      16-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Primary education (90%), Public administration- Education (10%)
Theme(s):        Education for all (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      44.90             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                        44.90
Total                                                            44.90
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        Yes
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The overall Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the equity and quality of primary
education service delivery in early grade levels with an emphasis on improved accountability and
functioning at the school level.
C. Project Description
The project will consist of three components to support enhanced quality and equity of education
service delivery through improved accountability and system functioning at the school level. A


﻿fourth component will support project implementation in Malawi's fragile implementation
environment characterized by weak capacity and fiduciary risks made apparent by the recent
'Cashgate' scandal.
O
Component 1: Performance-Based School Improvement Grants.
This component will be a pilot to improve school performance through strengthened school
management and accountability for results in the delivery of primary education. It will build on the
previous two school grant programs initiated by the World Bank and other development partners and
institutionalized by MoEST.
The performance-based school improvement grants program will (i) include entry requirements with
a focus on the most needy but well performing schools; (ii) have specified eligible items/activities
which can be supported by the program over successive years; (iii) include a defined duration for
schools participation with a subsequent graduation; (iv) include impact evaluations, including around
processes, to support improved project implementation and guide course corrections. The
interventions to be provided under this component will include (i) TA on modifying the current
funding formula by introducing performance measures for determining school improvement grant
allocations to individual schools; (ii) support and capacity building for school improvement planning
with enhanced participation of the community stakeholders; (iii) enhanced financing to schools
linked to achievement of management and accountability milestones; (iv) monitoring of pilot results.
Component 2: School Physical Facilities.
This Component will support improvement of the learning environment, including the rehabilitation
and construction of classrooms, provision of water and sanitation facilities, and provision of school
furnishings, especially for girls.
It will commence with an updated school mapping exercise (i) to identify areas where inadequate
classroom availability hinders school attendance and where repetition and dropout rates in the lower
primary grades are above already elevated national averages; and (ii) to clearly identify equity
challenges associated with school physical facilities. Technical assistance will be provided to (i)
assess current classroom construction practices and lessons drawn from the community model
managed by the Local Development Fund under the current GPE- and IDA-funded operation and, (ii)
based on a review of innovative approaches used elsewhere and in similar contexts, propose a new
a       model for construction of school physical facilities and provision of school furnishings. This model
will prioritize the ability to scale up, employ a simple and replicable design and use decentralized
procurement and construction methods that can be monitored by communities.
Component 3: Education Management and Information System.
This component will focus on strengthening the EMIS to ensure more efficient education service
delivery. In particular, it aims to yield more efficient implementation of decentralized school services
and school-based management of education planning and implementation, capacity building of staff
at various levels and strengthened monitoring and evaluation systems, particularly of learning
outcomes.
This component will finance: (a) the collection of education statistics through district and zonal
EMIS teams, including usage of the school report cards as part of school-level EMIS for improved
school management; (b) the introduction of new indicators related to ESIP II, such as surveying time
spent learning, correcting errors in dropout numbers and ensuring that school reporting of student
flows and efficiency is checked for consistency; (c) development of a more robust teacher


﻿management information system; and (d) institutional capacity building at the school, community,
district and central levels to monitor the achievement of indicators under the variable part of the
grant.
O
U       Component 4: Project Management and Coordination.
In the wake of the 'Cashgate' scandal of 2013, a number of development partners which are party to
the GPE have requested that any new GPE-financed project be overseen by a project management
unit (PMU). In particular, they would like that all funds flows be outside of government strutures and
fiduciary management be handled through a separate entity responsible for project management and
implementation. This component will finance the establishment and functioning of a PMU. It will
also include capacity building at the national, district and local (i.e. school, community) levels to
support project implementation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Malawi Education Sector Improvement Project (MESIP) will cover public primary schools
throughout Malawi. The specific locations, sizes of pieces of lands needed for classroom
construction are not known at this stage. Some of the information on the above aspects will be
gathered during the ongoing project preparation phases. Classroom construction will be done at
existing primary schools. Some schools will potentially be located in areas with high population
density, which have implications for involuntary resettlement, as more land would be required for
expansion of the existing facilities.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Government of Malawi has a Ministry of Climate Change and Environment which, through its
Environmental Affairs Department, is responsible for coordination of environmental planning, policy
implementation, management of environmental considerations, including environmental assessment
work in development programs, while the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development
coordinates resettlement planning.
Staffing levels within Environmental Affairs Department and Department of Lands and Valuation are
satisfactory. At District level, technical staff includes District Environmental Officers, District
Environmental Inspectors and District Lands Officers with training in environmental management
issues. A District Environmental Sub Committee (DESCO), which coordinates natural resource
management issues, will have an active role in the implementation and monitoring of environmental
and social safeguards at local level. Recently, government has recruited Environmental Inspectors to
strengthen the environmental inspectorate and advisory management services in all parts of the
country. These Environmental Inspectors are expected to play a key role in mainstreaming
environmental and social consideration of project activities under GEP. While the staffing is
adequate, capacity building and technical hand-holding will be required to ensure that the
environmental and social management aspects are mainstreamed and internalized into existing
procedures and systems.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Boyenge Isasi Dieng (GSURR)
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)


﻿II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental Assessment  Yes         The environmental footprint of the project is
OP/BP 4.01                               expected to be small, since the project will finance
rehabilitation and construction of new classrooms in
existing school facilities. There is scope for
environmental enhancements, where needed and
possible, such as improvement of water supply and
sanitation facilities, ventilation and lighting of
classrooms and accessibility and safety. The project
is classified as Category B.
Constructed related impacts will need to be
addressed including waste and rubble management,
mitigation of noise and dust, and occupational safety
of workers. Safety of children and teachers during
civil works needs to be well managed (barricades,
fencing, lighting, signage) along with lack of
disruption of regular school activities. In congested
areas, construction activities will need to ensure that
there is minimal disruption to neighboring
communities with adequate safety precautions and
signage. In case, vegetation/trees have to be cut,
replacement tree planning in appropriate locations is
recommended, if possible.
Since the actual site locations for civil works will not
be known by project appraisal, the borrower will
prepare an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) that will provide a uniform
approach for addressing all potential impacts in all
sub-projects. The ESMF will establish clear
procedures and methodologies for site-specific
environmental and social assessment and review,
approval and implementation of the sub-projects,
including roles and responsibilities and reporting
procedures. The ESMF will also clarify the
institutional mechanism for incorporating the
environmental mitigation actions into site-specific
designs and contractor documents.
The ESMF will be consulted with stakeholders and
disclosed both in-country and at the Bank's InfoShop
prior to project appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No          Project activities will not affect Natural Habitats
since the project will be implemented within the
footprint of existing schools. New land acquisitions
for expansion will not be in close proximity to
natural or critical habitats.


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36            No           Project activities will not affect forests or plantations,
as the scale of land required, if at all, will be
minimal.
Pest Management OP 4.09       No           The project activities will not support or fund
procurement of pesticides, or its usage.
O
Physical Cultural Resources   No           Since the project activities are within existing
OP/BP 4.11                                 structures, the probability of known physical cultural
resources (PCR) may be minimal. In case of
culturally sensitive PCRs such as graves, shrines, etc,
appropriate measures will be taken to prevent or
mitigate damage or impact. These measures will be
detailed in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The construction of new classrooms might require
BP 4.12                                    additional land acquisitions. The acquisition of land
may generate social and economic losses; affect
access to land or assets to some people.
The borrower will prepare a Resettlement Policy
Framework -which will outline a guideline for
standards to be followed addressing incidences of
land acquisitions and compensations whenever such
cases occur.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No            The project will not involve construction of dams.
Projects on International     No           The project will not be located on, or impact on any
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       international waterway.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No          The project will not be located on land in disputed
BP 7.60                                    areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The appraisal mission is tentatively scheduled for February 2016. Launching of the safeguards
documents will be done in September 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Soren Nellemann,Natalia Cherevatova
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Alexandra C. Bezeredi (SA)                Date: 15-May-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Andreas Blom (PMGR)                       Date: 18-May-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


