INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR12488
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P118597
Project Name: CN Integrated Economic Development of Small Towns (P118597)
Task Team       Wendao Cao
Leader(s):
Estimated       12-Dec-2011                Estimated    24-May-2012
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU08                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (32%), Water supply (32%),
Irrigation and drainage (16%), Wastewater Collection and Transpo rtation
(16%), Sub-national government administration (4%)
Theme:          Rural policies and institutions (17%), Infrastructure services for private sector
development (27%), City-wide Infrastructure and Se rvice Delivery (28%), Rural
services and infrastructure (28%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
U        Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     296.64            Total Bank Financing:  150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                       146.64
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          150.00
Total                                                         296.64
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
Page 1 of 11


﻿The Project Development Objective is to improve priority public infrastructure and services to
contribute to economic development and environmental protection for the residents and businesses in
selected small towns in Guangdong, Hunan and Gansu Provinces.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The Project Development Objective is to improve priority public infrastructure and services to
contribute to economic development and environmental protection for the residents and businesses in
selected small towns in Guangdong, Hunan and Gansu Provinces.
3. Project Description
In order to achieve the above objective, the Project will finance subprojects proposed by 28 small
towns in the participating provinces and comprising the following components and main activities:
Component A: Infrastructure Development (total cost US$ 244.66 million). This component seeks to
improve rural towns' infrastructure by financing sustainable and high priority public investments
aimed at expanding, rehabilitating, and modernizing infrastructure facilities or increasing their
operational efficiency. The subprojects are designed in response to the diverse needs of small towns
in the project. To be eligible, towns have demonstrated adequate financial capacity to invest, operate
and maintain these facilities. Activities are part of the towns' Master Plans and contribute to the
overall development strategy of provinces. They aim at improving the overall investment climate in
the towns, and facilitate backward and forward linkages across supply chains to increase market
access, enhance productivity and quality, create employment, add value and increase incomes.
The component includes investments in: (i) urban and rural roads; (ii) water supply and distribution;
(iii) wastewater management and sewage connection; (iv) creek rehabilitation and embankment; (v)
rural irrigation systems; (vi) agro-industrial and commercial infrastructure support.
There are a total of approximately 60 subprojects under this component; on average two per town.
Most subprojects are to construct new facilities; a few are for the upgrade and rehabilitation of
existing facilities. Subproject combine investments in different types of activities, often to support
an industrial or agricultural base. There are approximately 25 subprojects that include road
construction, 20 subprojects that include water supply (most often built in association with the
roads), 9 that include waste water management and sewage connections, 1 creek rehabilitation
subproject, 7 that include rural irrigation systems, and 18 that support agro-industrial and commercial
infrastructure support. The Rucheng town of Ruyuan County, Fucheng town of Luoding city, and the
Xiantang town of Dongyuan County will add new components of the roads: the total length of the
road in each town is 1.55 km, 2.18km, and 5.27 km respectively.
Component B: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Enhancement (total cost US$ 15.64 million).
This component seeks to improve the institutional capacity for managing modern and efficient
infrastructure, and to support services delivery. It includes supporting: (a) policy, technology and
marketing studies; (b) technical, managerial and financial training, workshops and study tours for
stakeholders involved (Government, Cooperatives, Water Users' Associations, private entrepreneurs,
etc.); (c) equipment for testing, grading and real time monitoring to be used in parallel with
infrastructure development to improve the quality and safety of marketable products, and monitor
environmental aspects of infrastructure subprojects; (d) training and extension services for rural
migrants and farmers.
Component C: Project managements and M&E (total cost US$ 8.17 million). The objective of this
Page 2 of 11


﻿component is to support project management and coordination efforts. In particular it will support the
PMOs at the various levels in managing, monitoring, evaluating and effectively reporting on project
implementation. It would include the strengthening of the institutions in charge of project
implementation (incremental project staff, training and workshops) as well as investments and
O
U         incremental operating costs derived from their operations during implementation. An essential part of
this component is the implementation of the M&E system.
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed project is expected to cover a total of 28 towns of 28 counties (one county each) in
Guangdong, Hunan and Gansu Provinces.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Yiren Feng (GENDR)
Zongcheng Lin (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Based on the review of the sub-projects, the project is
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               rated a Category B due to the type, location and scale,
nature and magnitude of the potential impacts during the
construction and operating phase and the expected
positive environmental impact of the project.
As per requirements of the Bank and Chinese domestic
regulations, an environmental assessment (EA) has been
carried out for the project, which includes the following
documents:
(a) A set of standard Environmental Code of Practices
(ECOP) prepared for each type of investment, and
included as part of the Operational Manual;
(b) Environmental Impact Assessment/Environmental
Management Plan (EIA/EMP) prepared for the WWTP
(3000t/d) in Hunan Province, and three new added road
components in Guangdong province.
(c) Pest Management Plan (PMP) prepared for each
province
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The EA process confirms that this project will be carried
4.04                                out in urban and suburban areas with long histories of
human activities and without any natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          OP4.36 is not triggered because the project will not
involve any logging or planting activities in forest areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes         The proposed project will not finance procurement of
pesticides, but support to the value chain services may
result in the increased use of pesticides. A PMP was
prepared for each Province for the towns and sub projects
for which the OP 4.09 will be triggered.
Physical Cultural       No          The EA process confirms that the project will not affect
Resources OP/BP 4.11                any physical cultural resources. However, some
Page 3 of 11


﻿subprojects in Hunan will affect some rural households??
graves, of which might be viewed connecting to local
tradition. In this light, this policy could be triggered,
while all the compensation and relocation measures for
those graves are formally planned and designed in the
Hunan provincial level RAP, based on detailed survey and
extensive consultation among the owners.
 Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes      The Bank's social development specialists conducted the
BP 4.10                            primary screening of Indigenous Peoples presence in the
project areas. It was found that some Yugu and Tibetan
ethnic minority groups are present in project townships in
Gansu Province. Yugu and Tibetan ethnic minorities
have unique cultures, traditional methods of production,
and their own language. They are therefore considered to
fit the definition of IP as per OP4.10, and the Policy is
triggered by this project. A Social Assessment was
conducted and an EMDP was developed to guide the
project activities within these communities. No new IP is
present in the newly added components at the project
restructuring. The old EMDP will continue to guide
project activities in relation to Yugu and Tibetan people in
Hongwansi Town of Gansu subproject.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes       The project identification mission conducted a
OP/BP 4.12                         preliminary screening of subprojects and concluded that a
number of the 26 subprojects in Guangdong, Gansu,
Hunan provinces may unavoidably result in land
acquisition and structure demolition. Thus, Bank policy
OP4.12 is triggered. Since all sub-projects have been
identified, a Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) has been
prepared for each province separately. At project
restructuring, the previous RAP was satisfactorily
implemented under the whole project. As restructuring,
Rucheng Town of Ruyuan County, Fucheng Town of
Luoding city, and the Xiantang Town of Dongyuan
County will add new components of roads construction,
including pipelines of sewage and drainage along the
roads. Similar to the original roads component of the
project, these newly proposed road subcomponents are all
typical small size infrastructure in rural areas. Both Gansu
and Hunan subprojects do not require for additional land
acquisition. In Guangdong subproject, new civil work
construction in Rucheng and Fucheng will be built on
existing land. Only Xiantang Town of Dongyuan County
needs to acquire less than 20 ha land for construction of
three roads. It will affect 34 households with 66 people in
this subproject. A new RAP was prepared and disclosed
to the public for this subproject.
Page 4 of 11


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                of any dams as defined under this policy. The water
source for irrigation sub-projects in Gansu Province will
Q)                                            be groundwater and there are no dams involved.
Therefore, OP4.37 is not triggered.
 Projects on International  No     No sub-project will be located in international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                The policy is not triggered and no actions are required.
Projects in Disputed    No          No project area will be located in disputed areas. The
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    policy is not triggered and no actions are required.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Some negative short-term construction and long-term operational impacts may result from
project implementation. The main environmental issues are the construction related impacts during
the construction phase and potential pesticide issues (if not well managed) during the operational
phase. These include limited negative impacts during construction on soil erosion, air, water,
acoustic environments, waste, worker safety, and social and traffic disturbance. Due to the small
scale of the project, these impacts will be of a temporary nature and localized and will be
effectively mitigated by standard measures and engineering codes of practice.
The Rucheng town of Ruyuan County, Fucheng town of Luoding city, and the Xiantang town of
Dongyuan County will add new components of the roads, including pipelines of sewage and
drainage along the road. Same to the original roads component of the project, these proposed road
subcomponents are all typical small size infrastructure in rural areas. The impacts are very limited
and localized, and can be easily mitigated.
0
Presence of Ethnic Minority Groups: Project activities will take place in one township, Hongwansi
o          in Gansu Province, where Yugu, Tibetan, and Hui minorities live. The Qilian Jade Processing
Base, a Trading Market and related infrastructure will be built and these project activities will
o          influence about 2731 Yugu,1758 Tibetan and 268 Hui farmers and herders. They are all the project
primary stakeholders. The old EMDP will continue to guide project activities in relation to Yugu
and Tibetan people in Hongwansi Town of Gansu subproject. No new IP is present in the newly
added components at the project restructuring.
Involuntary Resettlement: Infrastructure construction in a total of 26 subprojects has resulted in
land acquisition and resettlement in one township in Guangdong Province, five townships in
Gansu Province and ten townships in Hunan Province. In total, 1419 mu of land would be
requisitioned from 40 rural villages and this will affect 5941 farmers in 1344 households. 613
people in 162 households will be relocated due to house demolition, and 74 shops and 9
enterprises will also be affected. 1223 farmers in 306 households will be impacted by temporary
land occupation.
At restructuring, both Gansu and Hunan subprojects do not require for additional land acquisition.
Rucheng Town of Ruyuan County, Fucheng Town of Luoding city, and the Xiantang Town of
Page 5 of 11


﻿Dongyuan County will add new components of roads construction, including pipelines of sewage
and drainage along the roads. Similar to the original roads component of the project, these newly
proposed road subcomponents are all typical small size infrastructure in rural areas. Rucheng and
Fucheng roads will be built on existing land. Only Xiantang Town of Dongyuan County needs to
O
acquire less than 20 ha land for construction of three roads. It will affect 34 households with 66
people in this subproject. A new RAP was prepared and disclosed to the public for this subproject.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
It is expected that the long term impacts of the project area will be sustainable economic
development in selected towns of Gansu, Hunan and Guangdong provinces. Employment
opportunities and income will be increased, and the quality of life will also be
improvedsignificantly due to public infrastructure development and the strengthened capacity of
related institutions.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
During project preparation, alternative locations and alternative technical processes and designs
were explored and considered for the WWTP in Hunan province, and new roads construction was
chosen on existing land to minimize additional land acquisition. The EIA identified, evaluated and
compared various options for sewage network system layout, WWTP location, WWTP treatment
process, and sludge disposal etc., with the objective to avoid or otherwise minimize potential
adverse environmental and social impacts and to maximize environmental benefits.
The EA team has worked closely with the project planners/ owners and the feasibility study teams
to compare and evaluate alternatives. Optimal alternatives were selected to minimize or avoid
social and environmental impacts while taking into account economic, technical, and financial
considerations. A "no project" scenario was also considered as an alternative.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
O
Environment Assessment (EA) reports were prepared in accordance with national requirements
and the Bank's OP/BP/GP 4.01. The reports include (a) a set of standard Environmental Code of
Practice (ECOP), (b) EIA/EMP for a small size WWTP in Hunan Province, (c) PMP for each
province.
To enhance the environmental benefits of the project, mitigation measures have been integrated
into the project design, construction and operational phases. Preventive and mitigation measures to
be implemented during the construction and operation phases were prepared and are noted in the
EIA/EMP, ECOPs and PMP respectively.
For the WWTP in Hunan province, EIA/EMP was prepared for the project. Preventive measures
including EHS requirements during the construction and operation phases were prepared and are
noted in the EIA/EMP. Proper implementation of the mitigation measures during the construction
and operation period can minimize the impacts to an acceptable level or even eliminate the
negative impacts. In addition, all mitigation measures related to contractors will be included in the
bid documents and contracts.
A set of ECOPs were prepared for each type of investment, including ECOPs for roads, dredging
activity, irrigation facilities, pipelines network, and small civil works. These will be included as
Page 6 of 11


﻿part of the Operational Manual. The ECOPs specify each aspect of environmental management
during the project cycle, including but not limited to, project planning & design, site preparation,
construction camps, borrow areas, topsoil salvage, storage and replacement, erosion control,
construction dust management, air pollution control, noise impact control, water pollution control,
waste management, drainage, construction plants & equipment management, public and workers
health and safety, consultation for environmental aspects, etc. They also include the monitoring,
reporting and supervision arrangements for the implementation phase of the project.
A Pest Management Plan (PMP) was prepared for the project. The PMP describes major pest
issues, pesticide management methods, pesticide management organizations and their respective
responsibilities in the project areas, environmental, occupational and safety risk assessment,
monitoring, evaluation activities, and capacity building, etc. It describes a range of methods and
their application, and provides recommendations for different situations. It lists all chemicals that
may be needed for project activities. These chemicals fulfill the Banks requirement and World
Health Organizations recommendations.
For the three new road components in Guangdong province, the EIA (including EMP as one
chapter of the EIA) was prepared for each road according to the domestic and Bank requirements.
The EIA includes the ECOP of road which has been approved by the Bank, and the site specific
mitigation measures which was summarized in the EMP, including capacity building,
environmental monitoring, cost estimate etc.
Project social assessment (SA) was conducted by social scientists from Hohai University in
cooperation with local practitioners in the Yugu, Tibetan and Hui communities. The process
involved free, prior and informed consultation among the ethnic minority groups and included 251
individual/ household interviews, 26 focus group meetings, 33 village meetings, and 364 farmer
questionnaires. The SA resulted in the development of the project Ethnic Minority Development
Plan (EMDP).
The EMDP guided the adjustment of subproject components in the Hongwansi township to reflect
the consultation with the Yugu and Tibetan minorities and their stated preferences. Also, a
participatory framework for project implementation and the Yugu and Tibetan Community Action
Plans were established. The Action Plan specifies a series of steps to be taken in project
o           implementation, including training for capacity building, organizing craft artists association,
organizing livestock professional associations and training, ethnic minority traditional jade
processing skill protection and development, and participatory monitoring and evaluation of these
actions. These steps are budgeted in the project investment costs or will continue to be funded by
specified government resources and special funds. The fund flow for these actions is planned to
be in parallel with the subproject implementation schedule.
At the project restructuring, no new IP is present in the newly added components. The old EMDP
will continue to guide project activities in relation to Yugu and Tibetan people in Hongwansi
Town of Gansu subproject.
Because land acquisition and resettlement is unavoidable in a range of project towns of the project
provinces, each of the provinces invited resettlement experts from Hohai University and China
Agricultural University to help the PIUs prepare social safeguard instrument-RAP. The RAP
preparation process also disseminated project information and carried out consultation among the
villages and households to be affected. A consolidated provincial level RAP was developed for
Page 7 of 11


﻿each project province respectively. The RAPs stipulated the compensation measures including the
replacement costs for asset losses and assistance for relocation and transition, and set up
appropriate approaches for livelihood restoration and development of the affected villages,
households and enterprises.
o
By project restructuring, the previous RAPs have been satisfactorily implemented under the whole
project. For the new components of roads construction only in Guangdong subproject, new civil
work construction in Rucheng and Fucheng will be built on existing land. Only Xiantang Town of
Dongyuan County needs to acquire less than 20 ha land for construction of three roads which will
affect 34 households with 66 people. A new RAP was prepared and disclosed to the public for this
subproj ect.
Many of the town PMOs are inexperienced in implementing Bank supported project. To ensure
they are prepared to implement safeguards activities, the Bank task team and expert consultants
have provided training from the beginning of the project proposal stage throughout the project life
cycle. The towns and entities operating the subprojects now have ownership of the safeguard
instruments including the EIA/EMP, ECOPs, PMPs, RAPs and EMDP, and are committed to
carrying out project implementation in accordance with these instruments. The Bank will continue
to provide training in using the safeguard instruments to ensure project implementation in
compliance with the safeguards requirements.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
During the preparation of EIA/EMP, two rounds of public consultation were undertaken, , the
new added roads component also strictly followed the same approach and procedures. The first
round took place at the beginning of EA preparation. The second round was carried out after the
draft EA was completed. Public consultation of the EA was undertaken following each round of
information disclosure. These consultations took various forms including questionnaires,
interviews and meetings with project affected people and experts. The EA and EMP incorporated
countermeasures to address the concerns of the people consulted. In addition, the public
consultation mechanism during construction was also included into the ECOPs.
Information about the project, as well as the location and timing for public access to the draft EAs
was disclosed through major local newspapers, official websites and bulletins in local
communities. The EAs were posted at the World Bank InfoShop on Nov 21, 2011,, and the EIA
and RAP for new roads were disclosed at the Infoshop on 21 July, 2015.
All the peoples and communities in project areas in Gansu, Guangdong and Hunan provinces who
will participate in project activities with positive or negative impacts are key stakeholders. Those
affected by land acquisition and resettlement are considered particularly important. During project
preparation, social scientists were invited by project entities, and together with the project staff
and local practitioners, they conducted resettlement information and consultation campaigns
among all the affected groups and communities. These campaigns included a two-way flow of
communication on the nature of the project stakeholders' needs and expectations, as well as
national and the Bank safeguard policies. Based on these consultations and field surveys, RAPs
have been developed for appropriate impact compensation and livelihood rehabilitation. An
external resettlement monitoring mechanism has also been set up to insure the RAP provisions are
fulfilled.
Page 8 of 11


﻿The Yugu, Hui and Tibetan, ethnic minority groups are participating in the preparation and
implementation of project activities in Hongwansi township of Gansu Province. The Yugu,
Tibetan and Hui people are key stakeholders, and the Gansu PMO and the invited social experts
conducted fieldwork to consult with them about how to design project activities and the best ways
O
to participate and carry out the project activities. As a result, an EMDP was developed and
implemented in the related project towns. The EMDP included an action plan to ensure project
activities are compatible with local ethnic cultures, and a framework for further consultation and
participation during project implementation. It will continue to guide project activities in
Hongwansi Town of Gansu subproject.
During the preparation and finalization of the RAPs and the EMDP local communities were
closely consulted. The documents were disclosed to the public in county libraries and PIU offices
(or websites) on November 30, 2011. They were also sent to the InfoShop on December 21, 2011.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              25-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           21-Jul-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    03-Feb-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Nov-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                           21-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
O
China                                                    20-May-2015
Comments:
O
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Nov-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                           21-Dec-2011
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    30-Nov-201 1
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Nov-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                           21-Dec-2011
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    30-Nov-201 1
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 9 of 11


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
The EA process confirms that the project will not affect any physical cultural resources. However,
some subprojects in Hunan will affect some rural households?? graves, of which might be viewed
connecting to local tradition. In this light, this policy could be triggered, while all the compensation
and relocation measures for those graves are formally planned and designed in the Hunan provincial
level RAP, based on detailed survey and extensive consultation among the owners.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes [ X ] No [   ]   NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [ X ] No [   ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Page 10 of 1I


﻿Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ]  No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
O
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Wendao Cao
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)               Date: 10-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


