INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA16143
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jan-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                      Project ID:  P151744
Project Name: Himachal Pradesh Horticulture Development Project (P151744)
Task Team       Manivannan Pathy
Leader(s):
Estimated       04-Feb-2016                Estimated    25-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFA12                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Agricultural extension and research (15%), Crops (15%), Irrigation and drainage
(30%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sec tor (5%), Agro-industry,
marketing, and trade (35%)
Theme(s):       Trade facilitation and market access (20%), Rural markets (40%), Rural services
and infrastructure (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     171.50            Total Bank Financing:  135.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         33.70
International Development Association (IDA)                               135.00
LOCAL BENEFICIARIES                                                         2.80
Total                                                                     171.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is: "to support small farmers and agro-entrepreneurs to
Page 1 of 10


﻿increase the productivity, quality, and market access of selected horticulture commodities in
Himachal Pradesh."
The project beneficiaries will include farmers and entrepreneurs especially in the micro-small
O
U         medium enterprises (MSME) segment, farmer producer organizations, and other value chain
participants. The project will contribute to inclusive growth by prioritizing support to small and
marginal farmers in the state, with specific focus on fruit tree crops. The project will benefit about
150,000 producers. Of these beneficiaries at least 33 percent are expected to be women. Indirect
beneficiaries will include those who benefit from technologies demonstrated by the project, farmers
whose produce goes through rehabilitated markets, and farmers accessing Negotiable Warehouse
Receipt financing, etc. Rules, procedures, and guidelines will be employed to prevent possible elite
capture.
3. Project Description
The project will support interventions designed to help the horticulture sector improve productivity
and build resilience against weather-related shocks, while improving market access to provide
incentives for growers to produce as per the market need. Project activities will focus on resolving
the binding constraints on productivity, quality, value-addition and market linkages. In so doing it
will contribute to the key aspects of the Gol's, GoHP's and the Bank's CPS strategic objectives
related to faster and broader agriculture sector growth and inclusive development. The project will
achieve the PDO by: (i) improving producer's access to knowledge and horticulture production
technologies (including climate resilient technologies ), and access to financial services so that they
are able to better respond to climate variability and emerging market opportunities; (ii) promoting
investments in agribusiness, fostering backward and forward linkages in the value chains for
horticulture products, piloting negotiable warehouse receipts for horticulture commodities, and
facilitating access to financial services for agribusiness enterprises, including collectives such as
producer companies; and (iii) supporting the development of an improved platform for market-
related information and intelligence, developing new e-market channels outside of regulated markets,
and improved services provided by modernizing the promising traditional wholesale markets. All
supply chain infrastructure supported under the project would be subject to the provisions under the
ESMF.
O
The project will support gender inclusive strategies especially in the project intervention areas of (i)
sustainable increase in productivity of fruit tree crops through technical training on grafting
techniques, management of orchards, soil, nutrients, pests and diseases, extension approaches that are
designed to target women; and (ii) entrepreneurial development through training, skill development
and market linkages with specific focus on fruit processing (on job work to large processers),
indigenous beekeeping for managed pollination services, etc. Project will also actively support
participation of women in the decision making structure of farmer producer organizations and water
user associations.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project would cover the entire state (12 districts), the intensity of activities in each district would
depend on the existing production potential. Though, the exact project locations and boundaries are
yet to be established as this is a demand driven project, however, it is expected that the project will
cover the select fruit and vegetable growing areas in the State, which implies that majority of the
project investments would be made on existing orchards and nurseries. Locations, particularly for
apple orchards could be adjacent to forests. Overall, a good altitudinal gradient is expected with
Page 2 of 10


﻿respect to project investment locations. The project areas receive moderate rains and experience cold
weather that is necessary for a healthy crop of apples and similar fruits. Project areas would include
presence of forests (temperate and broad leaved) and sub-alpine pastures. These areas mostly have
shallow soils. OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is applicable as several project intervention areas
O
U         would be covering tribal areas and communities. While tribal communities are dispersed throughout
the state, they are particularly concentrated in more remote, backward areas in Kinnaur, Chamba,
Lahaul-Spiti and Bharmour districts.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Anupam Joshi (GENO6)
Varun Singh (GSU06)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Some of the activities and approaches that the project
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                would finance have the potential to influence both the
environmental setting and social fabric within a given
landscape and, therefore, an assessment is required
triggering this policy. The potential impacts need to be
identified and mitigated for ensuring sustainability of
investments. The project has provisions of introduction of
cultivars of foreign origin and their demonstration trial in
the nurseries may have environmental concerns, which
may need to be looked upon. The Environmental and
Social Assessment and Management Framework will be
developed to identify and assess the impacts besides
developing the appropriated action to mitigate the
potential impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          Even though the project will not take up any activities
4.04                                 inside critical natural habitats and protected areas, some
of the proposed investments, particularly expanding area
under horticulture increases the risk of encroachment into
natural areas. Other planned infrastructure and agro-
marketing infrastructure could be located in the proximity
of natural areas and if not developed appropriately, could
adversely impact these. The ESMF specifically requires
protected areas of National Parks, Wildlife Sanctuaries to
be excluded from the project. All infrastructure supported
under the project would be subject to the provisions under
the ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Proposed investments are unlikely to result in any
changes in forest management practices and will not
finance clear felling of forestlands.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          This policy is triggered as the use of chemical fertilizers
and pesticides is prevalent at various stages of apple and
vegetable cultivation in the State. Since the project is
primarily intended to enhance productivity through
technological and managerial interventions, there are
Page 3 of 10


﻿chances of increased use of chemical fertilizer and
pesticides resulting in significant impact on the local
environment including implications for the quality of soil
and moisture regime, water environment, public health as
well as livestock population. To prevent and control the
chances of increased use of pesticides by farmers, there is
a need of greater public awareness and understanding in
the areas of interventions, besides change in existing
practices entailing extensive use of chemical and
pesticides. An Integrated Pest Management Strategy is
developed for proposed interventions. No banned
pesticides (formulated products that fall in WHO classes
IA and IB, or formulations of products in Class II) would
be procured under the project.
Physical Cultural        No            There is no excavation planned and investments will not
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  impact existing Physical Cultural Resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes           Project interventions specifically target small and
BP 4.10                               marginal farmers, a category that includes Scheduled
Tribe (ST) families, particularly in Kinnaur, Chamba,
Lahaul and Bharmour districts. The project will ensure the
meaningful consultations, community support and
participation, inclusion of tribal families, taking into
account their special socioeconomic and cultural needs.
Involuntary Resettlement No            OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is not triggered as
OP/BP 4.12                            the project does not anticipate any private land acquisition
for market yards, processing infrastructure, common
service centers, nursery development and community
water schemes. For market yards and processing
infrastructure, land is already available with HPMC or
other government departments and all proposed
infrastructure is planned to be located on these existing
government land. For community irrigation schemes and
common service centers, land is expected to be accessed
either through voluntary donation, purchase or lease (from
private individuals or panchayats) and for which
principles, procedures documentation requirements, and
the verification approach .are detailed in ESMF.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           There are no investments on new and/or existing dams.
4.37
Projects on International  Yes         This policy is triggered as the project is supporting
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   development of minor irrigation systems in about 19,500
ha out of a total of 30,000 ha for sustainable increase in
productivity of the fruit tree crops. The irrigation
activities under the project will cover all the 12 districts of
the state, however, the intensity of the irrigation activities
in each district will primarily depend on the beneficiary
Page 4 of 10


﻿demand for improved seedling of the targeted fruit tree
crops, and on the production potential of the district.
Investments in the development of new minor irrigation
systems in all of the 12,608 ha to be supported under the
project will fall entirely in the catchments of the Sutlej,
Ravi and Beas basins, which as per the Indus river treaty
are for India's exclusive use only. The riparian states were
notified on January 15, 2016 about the project activities.
Projects in Disputed     No            There are no disputed areas in the project areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
All proposed infrastructure is planned to be sited on existing government land that is available
with the project implementing agencies or would be on land taken from communities voluntarily i.
e. either on lease or on donation basis. Project interventions in tribal areas - some identified and
others to be identified based on demand, will have negligible or no adverse impacts and impacts
are anticipated to be wholly positive.
No significant adverse or irreversible impacts are foreseen under the project, and impacts are
manageable within the existing institutional and technical framework. Expansion of orchard areas
onto forestland or felling of trees is unlikely but cannot be ruled out. Improper construction
management, discharge and disposal of solid and liquid waste, increase use of chemical pesticides,
improper storage of the crop are expected to be the chief environmental impacts.
The main social safeguard issues are: (i) ensuring meaningful and beneficial participation of tribal
communities in project planning, investment benefits and institutions; and (ii) ensuring that
government, panchayat or donated/purchased land needed for small scale water schemes, market
yards, nurseries infrastructure does not result in any adverse impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Two potentially long term impacts are possible against which adequate mitigation measures have
been developed. First, introduction of horticultural cultivars of foreign origin may impact native
varieties or species of horticultural values. For this adequate quarantine measures have been put in
place. Second, given the low awareness among horticultural practitioners, use of pesticides and
other agrochemicals may increase to boost productivity, which could increase overall pollution
load. An integrated pest management (IPM) strategy has been prepared to mitigate such impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The project considered and accepted the strategy for providing assured irrigation on limited basis
as against traditional reliance on only rain-fed irrigation. For this, the project would promote use
of efficient irrigation systems as an alternative to traditional irrigation practices. Adoption of this
alternative will significantly improve water efficiency in the horticulture sector and result in
conservation of water resources.
Page 5 of 10


﻿The project considered and rejected the alternative of land acquisition. Project interventions such
as cold storages, market yards would be set up on existing government land.
The project considered and accepted the alternative of introduction of new farm management
practices over conventional practices that would improve productivity of orchards without
O
Q)         increasing the reliance on use of pesticides and fertilizers. In fact, some of the modern farm
management practices could result in reduce use of agrochemicals.
The project considered and accepted the sub-program of indigenous bee breeding and
multiplication of bee colonies for improving the pollination efficiency. This would ensure that
exotic pollinators are not introduced in the ecosystem.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Project has prepared an Environment and Social Management Framework (ESMF), Integrated
Pest Management Strategy, and Tribal Development Framework (TDF) to address the likely
environment and social safeguard impacts, specifically related to indigenous peoples, land,
environmental assessment, pest management, natural habitats
As the exact locations of project interventions in tribal areas, the beneficiary profile and technical
specifications of project interventions are not yet identified and would happen during project
implementation site specific IPP/TDPs would be undertaken during implementation. Also, in order
to mainstream gender and participation issues, an Environment and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) is prepared. In terms of institutional arrangements, preparation and
implementation of social mitigation instruments would be the responsibility of the Social
Development Coordinator at the PCU level. In this, s/he would be supported by a Social
Development Specialist at the District Implementation Unit (DIU) who in turn would be supported
by Horticulture Extension Officer (HEO) and Subject Matter Specialist (SMS) at the Block
Implementation Unit (BIU), besides community mobilizers/facilitators.
The ESMF will be used for planning, designing and execution of each sub project. An appropriate
site specific environmental management plan (EMP) for each subproject would be incorporated
into the bidding documents and construction contracts prior to commencement of works. This
measure is expected to be for sub projects with moderate to high impact on the environment (such
O
as market yards, processing plants and cold chain infrastructure). An IPM and nutrient
management (NM) strategy has been integrated into the ESMF which seeks to reduce dependence
on chemical pesticides through alternative means, and also addresses soil nutrient management.
The PCU and PIUs and the district and block level are new entities requiring additional skills in
management of social and environmental aspects, including safeguards management. The PIUs are
likely to be HPMC, the university, marketing board and horticulture department; which have
limited capacity in safeguards. Hence, the project will support appointment of environmental and
social specialists in the PCUs, to monitor implementation of the ESMF and other social and
environment related activities. At the sub-project level, the PIUs of HPMC and HPSAPMB will
have dedicated environment specialists to ensure that individual ESAs, EMPs, are prepared and
implemented, with support from qualified firms. For the Horticulture department, three
environmental specialists at the district level will be appointed for implementation of the ESMF
activities pertaining to the department. Additionally, two Social Development Coordinators and
one Tribal Development Consultant, hired at the PCU level for the entire project duration would
be responsible for overall implementation of the SMF and TDF. At the district level, they would
be supported by six Social Development Specialists (SDS) who would cover all the project
Page 6 of 10


﻿districts. These SDS, contracted for the entire project duration would be responsible for all
safeguard aspects besides institutional development aspects of bodies such as WUAs, and FPOs.
They would derive support from Horticulture Extension Officer (HEO) and Subject Matter
Specialist (SMS) at the Block Implementation Unit (BIU), besides community facilitators.
Additional resource persons and consultants would be contracted as deemed necessary during
project implementation. The project will support safeguard training for all the specialists at the
state level (PCU, PIUs), district and block level implementation units. The PCU would also
provide resource persons and personnel for training on IPNM related activities.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders include small and marginal farmers, women and tribal, community
mobilizers engaged in formation of Farmer Interest Groups, Water User Associations, existing
SHGs, Producer Organizations besides institutional stakeholders such as line departments
including Horticulture, Irrigation, University, HPMC and Marketing Board. The project under
took an Environment and Social Assessment (ESA) exercise to identify the key environment and
social impacts, risks, opportunities and necessary mitigation strategies related to the proposed
project interventions and investments. The ESA involved review of project implementation plan,
existing studies and reports, and extensive discussions with the project preparation teams and
implementation agencies. Field consultations were held with farmers cooperatives and
associations, fruit growers associations, women's groups, government departments (agriculture,
horticulture, HPMC, forests, tribal development), as well as local NGOs. The consultations
included institutional stakeholder such as: Directorate of Horticulture, Regional Horticulture
Research and Training Station at Mashobara, HPMC center at Jarol Tikkar, Shimla district, etc.
Stakeholder consultations organized at field level (Block and Village) included representatives
such as Horticulture Development Officer (HDO), Horticulture Extension Officer (HEO), Subject
Mater Specialist (SMS), Block Development Officer (BDO), besides Farmers Producer
Organization (FPOs), Non-Government Organization(NGOs), women members of Self Help
Groups (SHGs), tribal farmers, elected PRI leaders, members of Water User Associations (WUA),
Farmer Interest Groups (FIG), cooperative societies. The purpose of these interactions were to
ascertain likely social and environmental issues that need to be addressed during project
preparation; understand current practices from production to marketing, validate findings from
desk reviews, understand perceived benefits of the various interventions, awareness regarding
government schemes, constraints faced, prevalent government schemes, etc. The borrower
disclosed the completed ESMF and translated version of the executive summary on its website on
January 11, 2016, besides disclosing at district level. The document as requested by the borrower
was also disclosed at the Bank's Infoshop on January 18, 2016 Further an in-country disclosure
workshop with representatives from relevant departments, NGOs, FPOs, WUAs and PRIs etc.,
was held on January 21, 2016 in project area.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                06-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                             18-Jan-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 7 of 10


﻿"In country" Disclosure
India                                                    11-Jan-2016
Comments:
O
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Jan-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                           18-Jan-2016
"In country" Disclosure
India                                                    11-Jan-2016
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          NA
Date of receipt by the Bank                              //
Date of submission to InfoShop                           //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[   ] No[X]      NA [   ]
Page 8 of 10


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
a          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [ X] No [ ]      NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [  ] No [ ]      NA [ X ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
O
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Manivannan Pathy
Approved By
Page 9 of 10


﻿Practice Manager/     Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (PMGR)       Date: 29-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


