                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC20699

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Tajikistan                     Project ID:      P162733
                            Project Name:        CASA-1000 Community Support Project (Tajikistan)
                            Team Leader(s):      Robert Wrobel,Takhmina Mukhamedova
                            Estimated Date       15-Jan-2018
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSU03                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 10                             Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      8
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Community and Capacity Development Support Program                                             2
                            Environment       B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The overall objective of the CSP is to increase access to social and economic infrastructure services
                           to communities in the project area to strengthen community support for the CASA-1000 transmission
                           line.
                           C. Project Description


                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The CSP will target villages that fall within the CASA-1000 footprint. Where necessary, it will
                           include adjacent villages to eliminate localized inequity and reduce the risk of inter-communal
                           tension. A minimum of 13 villages in two districts (Sogd and Khatlon) are affected with a total of
                           35,089 people. The list of target villages is as follows: Khitoy, Taghoyak, Kalakhona, Kurkat,
                           Andarsoy, Guliston, Ergash, Navabad (jamoat Guliston), Tosh-Rabot (jamoat Mashal), Mashal
                           (jamoat Mashal), Oktyabr (jamoat Panj), 1 May (jamoat Panj), Panji Poyon (Lower Panj).
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The PIU under Barki Tajik has experience working on Bank-financed projects and on World Bank
                           safeguards policies. Moving forward, however, it is envisioned that staff resources will need to be
                           strengthened both in terms of numbers and capacity. This assessment will be updated during
                           preparation and decisions made regarding the choice of implementing agency.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Arcadii Capcelea (GEN03)
                           Gulru Azamova (GPSJB)
                           Rebecca Emilie Anne Lacroix (GSU03)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The proposed grant would support micro-
                           BP 4.01                                            projects for in socio-economic infrastructure,
                                                                              including thermal insulation of public facilities,
                                                                              energy efficient individual heating technologies,
                                                                              inputs to produce eco-fuels from farming bi-
                                                                              products, solar panels, and micro-hydro power
                                                                              units, as well as other demand driven and
                                                                              socially justifiable local investments in service
                                                                              delivery, which might generate environmental
                                                                              and social impacts. While the environmental
                                                                              issues associated with their implementation in
                                                                              most cases will be minor, short-lived, and
                                                                              primarily limited to the project sites (except for
                                                                              movement of equipment and materials to/from
                                                                              the site), it is possible they might be also
                                                                              significant and would affect the environment
                                                                              and health of population. These issues are
                                                                              primarily: dust, noise, water pollution, disposal
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              of waste material and/or older equipment, some
                                                                              traffic disruption (depending upon specific
                                                                              location), worker safety (e.g. welding
                                                                              operations) etc. All these impacts can be
                                                                              addressed with good engineering and
                                                                              construction practices as well as with preparing
                                                                              and implementing adequate mitigation
                                                                              measures. The project will also bring positive
                                                                              social impacts as the proposed activities would
                                                                              improve social conditions for the population and
                                                                              would contribute to improving local population
                                                                              livelihoods.

                                                                              To address potential environmental and social
                                                                              issues the borrower will prepare an
                                                                              Environmental and Social Management
                                                                              Framework (ESMF) which would guide the EA
                                                                              process, providing: (a) the national and WB EA
                                                                              rules and procedures; (b) potential
                                                                 environmental and social impacts associated
                                                                 with the proposed investments: (c) guidelines on
                                                                 conducting sub projects EIA including
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 mitigation measures and monitoring activities
                                                                 for different types of activities; roles and
                                                                 responsibilities in EA process and in
                                                                 supervision and reporting; (d) EMP and EMP
                                                                 Checklist to be applied within the EA process;
                                                                 and (e) capacity building activities to ensure an
                                                                 efficient EMF implementation. Category A-type
                                                                 sub-projects will be excluded through the ESMF
                                                                 screening mechanism. Using the ESMF, for
                                                                 each proposed sub project an EMP will be
                                                                 prepared and/or an EMP Checklist will be
                                                                 prepared and disclosed in the selected localities
                                                                 as well as submitted to the State Ecological
                                                                 Expertise for its approval. Before appraisal the
                                                                 ESMF will be disclosed and consulted in the
                                                                 country and in selected participating localities.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04       TBD   The intention at initiation stage is that proposed
                                                                 activities such as inputs to produce eco-fuels
                                                                 from farming bi-products, installation of solar
                                                                 panels, and micro-hydro power units would
                                                                 complement existing infrastructure/modified
                                                                 habitat, e.g. rooftop PV solar panels, and that
                                                                 impacts to natural habitats would be excluded
                                                                 through the ESMF screening mechanism.
                                                                 However, this will be confirmed during
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 preparation.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36                No    No, as the project will be implemented within
                                                                 the localities➢❨ boundaries.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No    N/A
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No    All proposed investments will be screened out
                         BP 4.11                                 and if any such resources will be involved ➢❨
                                                                 they will be excluded.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No    N/A
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No    Involuntary land acquisition will be screened
                         4.12                                    out for the sub-projects through the ESMF. If
                                                                 voluntary land donation will be needed for
                                                                 certain sub-projects, detailed guidelines on
                                                                 voluntary land donation will be included in the
                                                                 ESMF.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         No    Investments that would trigger this policy will
                                                                 be screened out through the ESMF.
                           Projects on International        No                               Investments that would trigger this policy will
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              be screened out through the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               N/A
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                                i. Explanation
                                   Additional work is required in-country to finalize design parameters, develop the ESMF
                                   accordingly, and reach decisions regarding OP/BP 4.04.
                                ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                   01-Dec-2017
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              The draft ESMF will be disclosed and consulted in the country and in selected participating
                              districts prior to appraisal. Any safeguards-related studies will be identified during a January 2017
                              design mission.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Robert Wrobel,Takhmina Mukhamedova
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                    Date: 22-Dec-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Nina Bhatt (PMGR)                                            Date: 22-Dec-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
