                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA15473
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          India                              Project ID:   P150576
                            Project Name:     Tejaswini: Socioeconomic Empowerment of Adolescent Girls & Young Women
                                              (P150576)
                            Task Team         Pravesh Kumar,Matthew H. Morton
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       23-Nov-2015                          Estimated   28-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSP06                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Improving labor markets (50%), Gender (30%), Education for the knowledge
                                              economy (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      90.00           Total Bank Financing:                 63.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        27.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                               63.00
                              Total                                                                                     90.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To improve completion of market-driven skills training and secondary education for adolescent girls
                           and young women in select districts of Jharkhand.
                            3. Project Description


                                                                       Page 1 of 7
                         The Tejaswini project focuses on the socio-economic empowerment of adolescent girls and young
                         women in the state of Jharkhand. It will support the Department of Women & Child Development
                         and Social Security (DWCDSS) in both developing new service infrastructure and programs that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         facilitate this empowerment where there are critical gaps and leveraging existing systems and
                         services through girl-friendly enhancements and improving girls’ access. In particular, project
                         emphasizes two basic levels of intervention. The first is the community-level: developing
                         community-based platforms for young women and girls to come together for regular activities and
                         supports, learn transferable life skills, receive localized business skills training and assistance, and
                         gain information and access to broader services and opportunities. The second is the institution-level:
                         working with partner institutions to deliver non-formal education and vocational training to a subset
                         of young women and girls, and making it easier for them to participate by addressing major
                         constraints.. The proposed project consists of three main components:

                         Component 1: Expanding social, educational and economic opportunities (US$ 43 million). This
                         component aims to support the adolescent girls and young women of 15 districts in Jharkhand to
                         achieve greater social, educational and economic empowerment. This will be achieved by financing
                         two major interventions at the community and institutional levels. At the community level the project
                         will focus on: (a) formation and capacity building of community-level young women’s groups
                         (Tejaswini Clubs) with a modest annual participatory budget allocation of approximately US$300 for
                         social and productive activities planned and implemented by the club members. One club will be
                         established for every two Anganwadi Centres. Led by project-financed and trained youth facilitators,
                         these clubs will form the backbone of the project and serve as the entry point for young women and
                         girls into the Tejaswini Program; (b) life skills education delivered by trained youth facilitators and
                         peer leaders through clubs over multiple months based on an evidence-based curriculum comprised
                         of four key topic areas: resilience and soft skills, financial literacy, health and nutrition, and young
                         women’s rights and protections; (c) community-level business skills training for increasing young
                         women’s capacity to generate income through self-employment and micro-enterprise. This will be
                         delivered by qualified providers with an emphasis on combining standardized business skills
Public Disclosure Copy




                         modules and vocation-specific skills training catering to trainees’ clustered around common types of
                         self-employment or micro-enterprise; and (d) community mobilization and communications with an
                         emphasis on engaging families and community leaders (especially men) in support of girls’ program
                         participation and broader access to educational and economic opportunities.

                         At the institution-level the project will support two key interventions: (a) financing non-formal
                         education and vocational skills training for a subset of project beneficiaries through qualified service
                         providers. The focus will be on linking beneficiaries (ages 14-20) to enhanced bridge and non-formal
                         education (through the open schooling system) and beneficiaries (ages 16-24) to vocational skills
                         training (through performance-based contracts with select qualified providers); and (b) cash transfers
                         to the beneficiaries participating in these courses for incentivizing regular participation in, and
                         completion of, courses. All girls and young women partaking in non-formal education or vocational
                         training courses through the proposed project (an estimated 15% of the overall beneficiaries) will be
                         eligible for receiving this cash transfer. Cash transfers will total approximately US$150 per
                         beneficiary and be paid over three installments: first on enrolment in educational or vocational
                         training courses; second on maintaining attendance (70%) to be monitored at mid-term; and third on
                         successful completion (obtaining a certificate). All transfers will be to the beneficiary's bank account,
                         which will be established with assistance from the project as needed.

                         Component 2: Intensive service delivery (US$14 million). This component aims to pilot and evaluate


                                                                       Page 2 of 7
                         more intensive community-level service delivery models focused on increasing young women’s
                         access to educational interventions, training, and employment opportunities. The aim will be to
                         enhance the last mile service delivery in terms of increase program enrollment, participation in
Public Disclosure Copy




                         educational and training interventions, and overall effect sizes of the project. This will be achieved
                         by financing an additional youth facilitators for every Tejaswini club, compared to one facilitator for
                         every two clubs in the other 15 districts as well as a local full-time designated safe space (“cluster
                         center”) leased and operated by the NGO provider in approximately 200 sites. With a dedicated
                         space, contracted business or vocational training and non-formal education providers will be able to
                         deliver courses more locally through the venue at no facility cost to the provider, at different times
                         (thus increasing the program’s flexibility to accommodate differential needs).

                         The project will also finance interventions for enhanced outreach to hard-to-reach populations by
                         financing: (a) service contracts to pilot mobile training and resource units and other need-based
                         innovative implementation arrangements to deliver training and business support services in remote
                         and rural areas; and (b) a top-up group cash grants pilot to clubs of young women that apply (with
                         facilitator support) for the purpose of establishing local revolving funds that counter liquidity
                         constraints productive activities.

                         Component 3: State capacity building and implementation support (US$6.00 million). This
                         component aims to support strengthening of institutional capacity and outreach of the Department of
                         Women & Child Development and Social Security (DWCDSS) and the Jharkhand Women
                         Development Society (JWDS) to ensure effective and efficient delivery of services for adolescent
                         girls and young women in the state. This will be achieved by financing: (i) operating cost of a state
                         level resource centre for empowerment of adolescent girls and young women that will provide
                         ongoing support to DWCDSS in evidence-based policy and program development, process and
                         impact evaluations, knowledge management and need-based program augmentation; (ii) formulation
                         of a state strategy and plan of action for convergent action on the empowerment of adolescent girls
                         and young women; (iii) design, development and operation of program management information
                         system (MIS) for improved monitoring, evaluation and financial management; (iv) development of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         relevant manuals and guidelines for project implementation, partnerships and human resource
                         management led by JWDS; (v) project implementation including day-to-day operational support,
                         development of capacity building strategy, training of service providers and stakeholders along with
                         monitoring and impact evaluations.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be delivered in 17 of the 24 districts of the state. The remaining districts are covered
                         by a Government of India pilot scheme for adolescent AGYW, SABLA*, and the state therefore
                         made a decision to implement Tejaswini during this project period only in non-SABLA districts so as
                         to avoid possible duplication. In the 17 project districts, there are approximately 2.1 million AGYW
                         in the 14-24 age group, of which 13% belong to scheduled castes and 25% belong to scheduled
                         tribes. Several of the districts in the State are dominated by tribal communities, which would require
                         careful identification to benefit from the project. Amongst the Project districts, Lohardaga (57%),
                         Simdega (71%) and Khunti (73%) are tribal dominant districts with more than 55%of the tribal
                         population. Chatra district has the highest (33%) SC population followed by Palamu (28%) and
                         Latehar (21%) districts. If cumulative population of SC and ST is observed, Simdega, Khunti,
                         Latehar and Lohardaga are the districts with more than 60% of vulnerable population.

                         The project will be implemented in several districts of Jharkhand, which lie on the Chhota Nagpur


                                                                       Page 3 of 7
                         plateau and are rich in mineral resources with good forest cover, including biodiversity. While there
                         are a few large steel and other mineral-based industrial townships in the State, several villages and
                         smaller towns are remotely located.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         * SABLA districts include: Giridih, Sahibganj, Garhwa, Hazaribagh, Gumla, Paschimi Singhbhum
                         and Ranchi.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Anupam Joshi (GEN06)
                         Sangeeta Kumari (GSU06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            This policy is triggered to assess whether there are
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      possibilities for any significant adverse environmental
                                                                    and/or social impact. An environmental and social
                                                                    assessment of the activities planned for the project area
                                                                    has been undertaken. No significant adverse impacts on
                                                                    the environment or people are anticipated. The primary
                                                                    project beneficiaries are Adolescent Girls and Young
                                                                    Women in the age group of 14-24 in 17 districts of the
                                                                    state of Jharkhand of which 13% belong to scheduled
                                                                    castes and 25% belong to scheduled tribes. Focus Group
                                                                    Discussions at village level and Stakeholder consultations
                                                                    district and state levels with deemed beneficiaries and
                                                                    other stakeholders have also been undertaken as part of
                                                                    this assessment for ensuring that the project responds to
                                                                    beneficiary needs. Based on the findings of the
                                                                    assessment, an Environment and Social Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Framework (ESMF) has been prepared. The
                                                                    implementing agency will allocate responsibility of
                                                                    overseeing implementation of the ESMF on a particular
                                                                    staff member, who will be trained for the purpose.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             No natural habitat would be impacted.
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             Forest management will not be impacted.

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 No support for procuring pesticides or spraying
                                                                    equipment etc.
                         Physical Cultural           No             No physical and cultural properties/resources will be
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                       impacted.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes            Project will be implemented in areas with significant
                         BP 4.10                                    tribal populations so this policy is triggered. A Social
                                                                    assessment has been carried out to identify the key
                                                                    challenges and opportunities for including tribals and
                                                                    other socially vulnerable groups as beneficiaries. A Tribal
                                                                    Plan based on findings of the social assessment has been
                                                                    prepared and free prior and informed consultations in a


                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                                                                        culturally appropriate way has been organized to ensure
                                                                        their inclusion in the project benefits.
                            Involuntary Resettlement     No             No land acquisition and displacement of people is
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12                                  involved.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP         No             No dams are involved.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International    No             Not on any international waterway.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed         No             No disputed areas are involved.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No significant and/or irreversible negative impacts are identified. The project is expected to
                              benefit approximately 68000 adolescent girls and young women through enrollment in community
                              based clubs across 17 project districts. Off these different members are expected to benefit from
                              training in foundational skills, market driven skills and educational intervention for out of school
                              girls. The project is designed to specifically focus its outreach in hard to reach areas to ensure
                              inclusion of vulnerable groups like tribal population which constitute about 25percent of the target
                              beneficiaries.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              No potential indirect and/or long-term adverse impacts are anticipated. The project will provide
                              and facilitate young women’s access to market relevant skills which will catalyze their transition
Public Disclosure Copy




                              into productive adulthood. However, one of the major reasons of exclusion of potential
                              beneficiaries under any scheme/ intervention is the result of certain implementation gaps. Holding
                              6th rank in the abundance of ST population within India out of which 91% are residing in rural
                              areas having difficult terrain, the outreach of various state government interventions for socio-
                              economic development of tribal/ vulnerable population is limited.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              Analysis of alternatives is not relevant for this case. Detailed assessment of current status of target
                              beneficiaries were undertaken including the Tribal groups, constraints and barriers specific to
                              vulnerable and tribal groups were identified to inform the project design.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The borrower has conducted a detailed Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of the
                              proposed project interventions and has been guided and oriented by the Bank in preparation of
                              Environment management Plan and Social Inclusion and Tribal Plan in a diligent manner. The
                              borrower will allocate responsibilities pertaining to implementation of the EMP and SITP to
                              appropriate project staff, who will also be provided with all necessary training, guidance and
                              support. A Tribal Plan based on findings of the social assessment and Free prior and Informed
                              consultations in a culturally appropriate way has been prepared to ensure their inclusion in the


                                                                          Page 5 of 7
                           project benefits. The borrower shall prepare Social Inclusion Action Plan on yearly basis for
                           activities to be undertaken in the specific year. Project Implementation Plan shall reflect the same
                           accordingly. A separate project sub component 2.2 has also been carved out to enhance outreach in
Public Disclosure Copy




                           hard to reach areas through innovation window.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           A state level consultation workshop was organized with an objective to understand the needs,
                           challenges and expectations of stakeholders in the context of Project’s interventions. Participants
                           included representatives of NGOs/INGOs, KGBVs, ITIs, VTPs, DWCDSS, JWDS and other
                           government line departments together discussed the Project interventions with an objective to
                           provide inputs for strategy to ensure maximum community participation. This consultation has
                           brought out significant issues and challenges to serve as a basis for the preparation of Social
                           Inclusion and Tribal Plan. Consultation with district level functionaries and stakeholders was done
                           at 3 districts namely, Chatra, Ramgarh and Dumka. Participants included District collector,
                           District Social Welfare Officer, CDPOs, KGBV, ITI, VTPs, NGOs/ CBOs, AGs from community,
                           AWW and AWH. In addition a total of 509 participants were interacted in the 38 FGDs conducted
                           across three districts of Jharkhand. FGDs were carried out with men and boys and guardians of the
                           target beneficiaries too. The Draft EMP and SITP prepared by the borrower shall be disclosed and
                           shared with the bank for necessary clearance. Upon incorporation of comments if any, the
                           documents will be finalized and re-disclosed both in country and Bank Website. A translated
                           version of the EMP and SITP both in Hindi and Santhali shall also be publically disclosed at the
                           District and Block level.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            23-Feb-2016
                           Comments: Disclosed on the website of the Department of Women & Child Development and
                                         Social Security
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      23-Feb-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   29-Feb-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                            23-Feb-2016
                           Comments: Disclosed on the website of the Department of Women & Child Development and
                                         Social Security
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pravesh Kumar,Matthew H. Morton
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Pablo Gottret (PMGR)                             Date: 05-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 7 of 7
