                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)




                                                    Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                  Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                               Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Sep-2018 | Report No: ISDSC20939




                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                            Page 1 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category    Country
                                                             BOUGAINVILLE PNG:
                                                             Capacity Building for the
                                                                                          A - Full Assessment (A)   Papua New Guinea
                                                             Sustainable Management
                                                             of Mineral Resources (RE)
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit             Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                    Investment Project
                           Bryan Christopher Land            01-Jun-2017                  GEEXI
                                                                                                                    Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                  2.60
                           Total Financing                                                                                                     2.60
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                       0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                     2.60
                                 Extractives Global Programmatic Support                                                                      2.60


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to strengthen the capacity of the Autonomous Bougainville Government to
                           implement the Bougainville Mining Act 2015 in a way that can assure sustainable and conflict-free mining development
                           in the Autonomous Region of Bougainville.

                           C. Project Description
                           Component A: Capacity building of ABG institutions to implement the Bougainville Mining Act

                           A program of activities to support capacity building of ABG-DOMER and other ABG institutions that play a
                           critical role in implementing the Bougainville Mining Act, with an emphasis on core regulatory functions
                           consisting of:



                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                                    Page 2 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)




                           A1. Build capacity of ABG-DOMER and other relevant regulatory agencies in core functional areas:

                                  Prepare a staff development plan for DOMER: The approved establishment of DOMER includes 39
                                   positions when at full strength. Presently only 16 positions are filled. To enhance the performance of
                                   DOMER it will be necessary to develop a staff development plan to meet short, medium and long-
                                   term training and skills development needs. The project will finance preparation of such a plan which
                                   would form the basis for obtaining financial commitments, in addition to those available through the
                                   project grant.
                                  Prepare a modernization plan for the mineral rights management system: Since mineral rights
                                   management conducted by MRA for PNG is carried out using a modern GIS based system with digital
                                   record keeping, which ABG no longer benefits from, there is an urgent need for ABG to establish its
                                   own system drawing on the experience of the MRA system. The project will finance design of a plan
                                   and a budget for establishing such a system which would form the basis for obtaining financial
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   commitments, in addition to those available through the project grant.
                                  Support performance of duties of the Mining Registrar, Bougainville Warden and related mineral
                                   licensing functions: Mineral licensing relies upon the provisions of the Act relating to receipt of
                                   applications and deciding tenement awards. Performance of the statutory duties of the Mining
                                   Registrar, Bougainville Wardens and other officers in DOMER is crucial and will benefit from the
                                   availability of support in the form of coaching and guidance from suitably experienced persons
                                   assigned for this purpose. The project will arrange for MRA to assign members of its staff to provide
                                   such support for an agreed period. If MRA personnel are not available to deliver the level of support
                                   needed, the project will finance recruitment of suitable advisers to perform such roles.
                                  Support the review and monitoring of licensee work programs and budgets: To assure orderly
                                   conduct of mineral activities, including exploration programs, mine evaluation work and construction
                                   and mine operation, DOMER staff needs support to conduct reviews of licensee work programs and
                                   budgets, examine statutory reports received and evaluate compliance. In addition, implementation of
                                   the transparency provisions of the Act needs support. The project will arrange for MRA to assign
                                   members of its staff to provide such support for an agreed period. If MRA personnel are not available
                                   to deliver the level of support needed, the project will finance recruitment of suitable advisers to
                                   perform such roles.
                                  Support implementation of related regulatory processes to include inter alia, environmental, land and
                                   fiscal regulation: Although the Act is comprehensive in regulatory scope certain functions necessary
                                   for the implementation of the Act belong to regulatory institutions that operate under separate laws,
                                   including PNG laws where no transfer of jurisdiction has taken place. For example, environmental
                                   certification of mineral related activities is under the jurisdiction of CEPA while only certain
                                   administrative functions are able to be performed by the Environment Department in the ABG
                                   Ministry of Land and Natural Resources. The project will support identification of practical ways to
                                   ensure that these jurisdictional challenges do not hamper the implementation of the Bougainville
                                   Mining Act, including the development of working agreements (e.g. MOUs) between DOMER and
                                   other agencies. Where necessary, the project will arrange for MRA to assign members of its staff to



                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                            Page 3 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)




                                   provide such support for an agreed period. If MRA personnel are not available to deliver the level of
                                   support needed, the project will finance recruitment of suitable advisers to perform such roles.
                                  Conduct selected training to reinforce the support listed above: To reinforce the direct support set
                                   out above the project will finance formal training for the staff of DOMER and selected other
                                   regulatory agencies in ABG. Initially this training will be planned to correspond to the highest priority
                                   tasks of those already in post. Once the staff development plan listed above has been produced, it
                                   will serve as the basis for training plans which can be financed by the project and from other sources.

                           A.2. Complete preparation of other essential mining related legislation:

                           Proper implementation of the Bougainville Mining Act by ABG regulatory institutions will depend on suitable
                           arrangements for implementation of related legislation, some of which has yet to be transferred from the
                           National Government to ABG. This is especially important in relation to mines safety and environmental, land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and fiscal regulation. The proposed activities to be financed by the project are to:

                                  Identify and prepare suitable Mines Safety legislative and administrative instruments: The compliance
                                   functions of DOMER rely on there being strong Mines Safety legislation and administrative measures,
                                   as in PNG. This provides the Chief Mines Inspector powers to take actions to assure safety in the
                                   interest of the workforce and other affected persons. The project will finance an adviser to support
                                   ABG to prepare suitable legislative and administrative instruments.
                                  Identify and prepare environmental, land and fiscal legislative and administrative instruments
                                   necessary for the proper implementation of the Bougainville Mining Act: There may be a need for
                                   suitable legislative and administrative instruments to be prepared in conjunction with the
                                   institutional support provided under component A.1. The project will finance advisers to support ABG
                                   to do this.

                           A.3. Conduct a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment of mining sector development in
                           Bougainville:

                           Decisions on the types, scale and timing of mining developments in Bougainville will be better informed once
                           a comprehensive Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) has been conducted by ABG. The
                           SESA will, inter alia, assess cumulative impacts of mining development and identify suitable regulatory and
                           institutional measures needed to assure development consistent with environmental and social priorities,
                           drawing on previous work done in 2012. The SESA would be carried out by a consulting firm that can
                           demonstrate on-the-ground knowledge and experience of the environmental and social challenges
                           associated with mining development in Bougainville.

                           A.4 Strengthen Regulation and Practices of Alluvial Small-Scale Mining:

                           The project aims to support administration and practice of artisanal and small-scale alluvial mining in at least
                           three (3) pilot sites to better inform the development of a long-term strategy for the orderly development
                           and administration of small scale alluvial mining including community-based artisanal mining in
                           Bougainville. The legislation provides that ABG-DOMER must provide training to Council of Elders and Village

                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                               Page 4 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)




                           Assemblies to perform a regulatory role on community mining. The project will support training and capacity
                           building of selected Council of Elders and Village Assemblies around mining areas. The training will
                           emphasize: (i) best-practice procedures for the granting, administration and policing of community mining
                           licenses, artisanal mining licenses and small scale mining leases; (ii) instruction on practices to be followed or
                           avoided when mercury or any other prescribed chemical is used to recover minerals; (iii) instruction on
                           appropriate mining methods and geological controls of mineralization, and (iv) data collection and reporting,
                           including production and license compliance reports.

                           The project will also assist ABG-DOMER identify and offer support and training to at least three (3) model
                           local community based alluvial and small-scale mining businesses which are now permitted under the
                           Bougainville Mining Act 2015 to operate in Bougainville. This pilot support for model local alluvial miner
                           candidates will be co-delivered with training and capacity building of Council of Elders and Village Assemblies
                           so the community regulators and miners can operate in compliance with mining and safety regulations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Special emphasis would also be placed on how these operators can procure, safely store, use and reuse
                           mercury.

                           Component B: Sustain engagement by ABG with citizens, communities and landowner groups

                           This component of the project will consist of activities to help sustain a high level of engagement by ABG
                           with citizens, communities and landowner groups in order that they may better benefit from mineral sector
                           development. It will build on consultative processes employed during previous Development Forums and the
                           later consultations on the Bougainville Mining Act and complementary environmental and land legislation.
                           Activities will comprise an outreach program and institutional arrangements to enable such groups to access
                           relevant information and participate in the benefits of mineral development, based on rights and obligations
                           set out in the Bougainville Mining Act.

                           The past conflict in Bougainville was inextricably linked to the grievances generated around the allocation of
                           benefits from and impact on the environment and communities by the Panguna mine. Ensuring that the
                           people of Bougainville – including the voices of all disadvantaged groups, landowners and non-landowners,
                           women, elderly, youths and any other marginalized groups – are heard and accounted for in decisions
                           concerning mining development, whether at Panguna itself or elsewhere in Bougainville, will be critical to a
                           peaceful and sustainable growth and development of ARoB. The support will be designed to complement
                           existing frameworks set up to address the specific issues around the Panguna mine, but will address issues of
                           mining development in all of Bougainville.

                           Specific activities to be financed in Component B will include:

                           B.1. Develop an ABG stakeholder engagement strategy

                           Supporting ABG to sustain a high level of engagement with citizens, communities and landowner groups on
                           mineral sector development by preparing a stakeholder engagement strategy. This will identify institutional



                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                               Page 5 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)




                           arrangements and methods of engagement, as well as the resources required, to implement the strategy.
                           The proposed process for developing the strategy is set out below:

                                  Initial stakeholder mapping and fragility assessment: The mapping would involve the key stakeholder
                                   groups and interests, as well as potential sources and intensity of conflict and violence in the mining
                                   sector in ARoB, including a ‘state of the sector’ assessment with regards to civil society stakeholders
                                   (for example, identifying any potential or perceived gaps in recent or previous consultative processes,
                                   and identifying how this may impact the sector moving forward), and conducting ex ante assessments
                                   on stakeholder positions regarding the resumption of mining operations, and/or other future mining
                                   engagement. These assessments should include a focus on women, elderly, ex-combatants, and other
                                   vulnerable or marginalized groups to identify concerns, involvement in recent or negotiations, and
                                   their level of preparation and capacity to engage in these processes. The mapping exercise will inform
                                   the preparation of a stakeholder engagement strategy for ABG, to ensure that subsequent activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                                   are proactively inclusive.
                                  Preparation of a stakeholder engagement strategy and implementation plan: The project will finance
                                   the preparation of a stakeholder engagement strategy that articulates the principles of engagement
                                   and institutional arrangements for engagement, as well as a time-bound implementation plan that
                                   identifies the resources needed to carry out the strategy effectively. The strategy should draw on
                                   lessons of the past, take advantage of a rich body of relevant analysis and experience and be
                                   developed in close consultation with the stakeholders who stand to benefit from ABG engagement.
                                   Among the principles of engagement that will need to apply to the strategy are the following:
                                         o engagement should take place at all levels including the district and village level;
                                         o there should be a forum for citizens, communities and landowner groups to provide feedback
                                            on their own understanding of the legislation, on the engagement conducted by ABG and to
                                            express their expectations and perceptions of ABG institutions;
                                         o outreach provided should address both the positive and negative impacts of mining sector
                                            development and perceptions thereof among a range of affected stakeholders, including at
                                            risk and marginalized groups;
                                         o attention should be given to ensuring that women are sufficiently represented in any
                                            consultations, decision-making, and benefit sharing arrangements. Due to the matrilineal
                                            nature of land ownership in most of Bougainville, women have theoretical rights to the land
                                            according to tradition, but their interests are seldom reflected in landowner negotiations,
                                            since men are often the ones culturally tasked with representing them in consultations and
                                            public forums. The environmental and social issues around Panguna that contributed to the
                                            conflict had significant impacts on women, and women’s groups in Bougainville have had
                                            critical roles in pushing for peace during the conflict, but they have been largely marginalized
                                            in the formal peace and subsequent political processes.
                                  Evaluate and conduct consultations on a permanent institutional basis for stakeholder
                                   empowerment: Drawing on examples from elsewhere in PNG (e.g. Ok Tedi, Lihir) and other
                                   Melanesian societies, the project will finance evaluation of and consultations on establishment of a
                                   permanent institutional arrangement through which citizens, communities and landowner groups can


                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                              Page 6 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)




                                   obtain support to better exercise their rights and be equipped to fulfill obligations arising under the
                                   Bougainville Mining Act and related legislation.
                                  Skills development for DOMER project coordination and community engagement staff: In preparation
                                   for implementation of the ABG stakeholder engagement strategy the project will finance formal
                                   training and organize knowledge exchanges through suitable study tours and short-term secondment
                                   for relevant DOMER staff.

                           B.2. Technical support to mine-affected landowners and communities

                           Landowner groups are entitled to exercise rights conferred by the Bougainville Mining Act and take on
                           obligations as well, under surface access agreements, community development agreements and possibly
                           agreements made to engage directly in mineral activities (e.g. joint venture agreements between landowners
                           and investors). Accordingly, the project will finance a short series of seminars / workshops on a range of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           pertinent technical, commercial and financial arrangements found in the mining industry. The delivery of
                           such seminars / workshops will be procured from professional trainers by ABG and be designed to be of
                           general relevance and not related to any specific area, transaction or interested party.

                           Component C: Project Management

                           C.1. Implementation of Recipient-executed activities financed by the Grant: MRA will be the Implementing
                           Agency continuing the same implementation arrangements as the World Bank’s Second Mining Sector
                           Technical Assistance Project. It will manage the project in collaboration with, and on behalf of ABG as part of
                           the MoU it signed to provide mining technical support to ABG-DOMER. The Special Projects Unit of MRA will
                           execute project activities financed by the grant based on the agreed implementation manual and handle
                           procurement and financial management responsibilities.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          Since the project will deliver sector-wide policy advice and technical assistance there are no physical
                          locations and salient characteristics directly associated with the project. However, the project may have
                          downstream effects, in so far as it contributes to formalized mineral exploration and mining development in
                          certain areas of Bougainville under the Bougainville Mining Act and such activities could have the potential to
                          impact communities and environments across Bougainville. As of December 2017, ABG has imposed an
                          indefinite moratorium over the resumption of such activities at the Panguna Mine. The project will finance
                          capacity building of ABG institutions to license and regulate mineral exploration and mining development in
                          accordance with the social safeguards built into the Bougainville Mining Act 2015 and its Regulations 2016
                          and environmental safeguards built into PNG environmental legislation enforced by CEPA. In order to assess


                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                             Page 7 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)




                          the potential impact of resuming mining development in Bougainville in general, ABG prepared a study
                          “Terrestrial Minerals: Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment Scoping Study (SESASS), Including
                          Bougainville” in 2014 and this project will finance a full mineral development SESA for Bougainville.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          MRA, the implementing agency for the project, has previous experience of managing World Bank funded
                          projects and has built up requisite capacity to comply with safeguard requirements. This capacity will be
                          available to support ABG DOMER in project procurement and oversight of activities financed by the project.
                          ABG DOMER's own capacity in this area will need strengthening, for which the support of MRA and the
                          World Bank will be provided. Component B of the project includes support to ABG to engage with
                          stakeholders using a stakeholder engagement strategy that will be informed by World Bank safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                          policies and instruments for citizen engagement.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Ross James Butler, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Nicholas John Valentine, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?               Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes                  The project will not involve any activities
                                                                                                  promoting and engaging in mining directly,
                                                                                                  but is likely to shape environmental
                                                                                                  outcomes through future mining activities
                                                                                                  arising from the advice provided. Given the
                                                                                                  scale of mining in Bougainville in the past
                                                                                                  and the impacts it has had on the physical
                                                                                                  and social environments (both positive and
                                                                                                  negative) over an extended period, it is
                                                                                                  proposed that this project be Category A.
                                                                                                  The E&S risks, though manageable, are
                                                                                                  cross cutting and include long term
                                                                                                  environmental damage, land and resource
                                                                                                  based conflicts, impacts of unmanaged
                                                                                                  artisanal mining, livelihood impacts, issues
                                                                                                  around social inclusion and benefit sharing
                                                                                                  and other aspects common in the resources
                                                                                                  sector. Category A will improve the ability
                                                                                                  of the Bank to support DOMER in early


                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                                 Page 8 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)



                                                                                                  identification and management of the
                                                                                                  various interrelated risks can be fully
                                                                                                  managed. Although no instruments will
                                                                                                  need to be prepared so as to manage these
                                                                                                  risks, the World Bank will need to approve
                                                                                                  any Terms of References for consultants (or
                                                                                                  staff) involved in the capacity building
                                                                                                  activities to ensure that the requirements
                                                                                                  of OP4.01 are satisfied.

                                                                                                  The previous TA project in PNG supported
                                                                                                  the government in preparing social and
                                                                                                  environmental management frameworks, a
                                                                                                  strategic environmental and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  assessment, monitoring and evaluation
                                                                                                  framework for social outcomes, and
                                                                                                  resettlement policy. In the specific case of
                                                                                                  Bougainville, the TA project supported the
                                                                                                  preparation of a SESA as well as
                                                                                                  environmental and social baselines. The TA
                                                                                                  was also the subject of a safeguard review
                                                                                                  which provided recommendations that this
                                                                                                  project will build on. The World Bank will
                                                                                                  need to approve any Terms of References
                                                                                                  for consultants (or staff) involved in the
                                                                                                  capacity building activities to ensure that
                                                                                                  the requirements of OP4.01 are satisfied.

                                                                                                  The capacity development work will have
                                                                                                  the potential to have future impacts upon
                                                                                                  natural habitats. Accordingly, the OP is
                                                                                                  proposed to be triggered. The World Bank
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                      Yes                    will need to approve any Terms of
                                                                                                  References for consultants (or staff)
                                                                                                  involved in the capacity building activities
                                                                                                  to ensure that the requirements of OP4.04
                                                                                                  are satisfied
                                                                                                  The capacity development work will have
                                                                                                  the potential to have future impacts upon
                                                                                                  forests. Accordingly, the OP is proposed to
                                                                                                  be triggered. The World Bank will need to
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                               Yes
                                                                                                  approve any Terms of References for
                                                                                                  consultants (or staff) involved in the
                                                                                                  capacity building activities to ensure that
                                                                                                  the requirements of OP4.36 are satisfied


                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                                  Page 9 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)



                                                                                                  Given the nature of the sector, pest
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                          No
                                                                                                  management will not be a safeguard issue
                                                                                                  The capacity development work will have
                                                                                                  the potential to have future impacts upon
                                                                                                  PCR. Accordingly, the OP is proposed to be
                                                                                                  triggered. The World Bank will need to
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11           Yes
                                                                                                  approve any Terms of References for
                                                                                                  consultants (or staff) involved in the
                                                                                                  capacity building activities to ensure that
                                                                                                  the requirements of OP4.11 are satisfied
                                                                                                  The capacity development work will have
                                                                                                  the potential to have future impacts upon
                                                                                                  indigenous peoples. Accordingly, the OP is
                                                                                                  proposed to be triggered. The project will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                  finance the preparation of a stakeholder
                                                                                                  engagement plan to be employed by ABG
                                                                                                  in its engagements with local communities,
                                                                                                  a study on institutionalizing support for
                                                                                                  communities to exercise rights and
                                                                                                  participate in benefit-sharing and train
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                    Yes                    DOMER community development staff. The
                                                                                                  Citizen engagement activities will include
                                                                                                  free, prior and informed consultations with
                                                                                                  IP communities and representatives and
                                                                                                  assessment of particular concerns and
                                                                                                  circumstances of indigenous peoples. The
                                                                                                  World Bank will need to approve any Terms
                                                                                                  of References for consultants (or staff)
                                                                                                  involved in the capacity building activities
                                                                                                  to ensure that the requirements of OP4.10
                                                                                                  are satisfied.
                                                                                                  The capacity development work will have
                                                                                                  the potential to have future impacts upon
                                                                                                  land and resettlement issues. Accordingly,
                                                                                                  the OP is proposed to be triggered. The
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12              Yes                    World Bank will need to approve any Terms
                                                                                                  of References for consultants (or staff)
                                                                                                  involved in the capacity building activities
                                                                                                  to ensure that the requirements of OP4.12
                                                                                                  are satisfied
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                        Yes                    The capacity development work will have
                                                                                                  the potential to have future impacts upon
                                                                                                  dam safety (particularly those relating to
                                                                                                  the resources sector). Accordingly, the OP
                                                                                                  is proposed to be triggered. The World


                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                                Page 10 of 11
                                   The World Bank
                                   BOUGAINVILLE PNG: Capacity Building for the Sustainable Management of Mineral Resources (RE)



                                                                                                                      Bank will need to approve any Terms of
                                                                                                                      References for consultants (or staff)
                                                                                                                      involved in the capacity building activities
                                                                                                                      to ensure that the requirements of OP4.37
                                                                                                                      are satisfied
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No                            No international waterways involved
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No                            No disputed areas proposed


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           28-Sep-2018
                              b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The launch of safeguards related studies is expected to take place as soon as the grant becomes effective
                              with expected completion TBD


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Bryan Christopher Land

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Svend E. Jensby                                   13-Sep-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Christopher Gilbert Sheldon                       19-Sep-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Sep 23, 2018                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 11
