                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA14898
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Timor-Leste                       Project ID:   P155541
                            Project Name:      Sustainable Agriculture Productivity Improvement Project (P155541)
                            Task Team          Gayatri Acharya
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          31-Mar-2016                       Estimated   30-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GFA02                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (30%), Crops (30%), Irrigation and drainage
                                              (20%), Animal production (10%), General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector
                                              (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Global food crisis response (40%), Water resource management (20%), Other
                                              rural development (10%), Poverty strategy, analysis and mo nitoring (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      22.00           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  1.00
                              Trust Funds                                                                              21.00
                              Total                                                                                    22.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase the productivity and marketed production
                           of smallholder agriculture in selected geographical locations in Timor-Leste.



                                                                      Page 1 of 10
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project aims to assist MAF to modernize and reform its systems of providing agricultural and
                         environmental support services. The project will support (i) participatory district and community
Public Disclosure Copy




                         plans; (ii) farmer group formation and training; (iii) support for agriculture and small-scale rural
                         investments aimed at promoting livelihoods and sustainable watersheds; (iv) strengthening
                         MAF➢❨ s capacity to deliver advisory services; and (v) and improving planning, programming, and
                         evaluation capacity.

                         The program comprises the following components:
                         Component 1: Integrated watershed agriculture development planning. The objective of this
                         component is to improve agriculture development planning within targeted watersheds. Watershed
                         Management Councils will be formed, and Watershed Agriculture Development Plans will be
                         prepared to guide planning at the watershed level. More detailed Sustainable Community Agriculture
                         Development Plans will also be developed to guide investment at the community level.

                         Component 2: Smallholder organization, advisory support and training. Development and
                         strengthening of farmer groups to improve farm productivity and marketability is a priority area
                         under the MAFSP. Component 2 will therefore facilitate the formation of farmer groups where
                         needed, building on cohesion developed during the SCADP preparation process, and strengthen
                         existing groups formed for other purposes by NGOs, and other relevant programs. These farmer
                         groups will be supported by complementary investments in sustainable agricultural production and
                         environmental protection (see Component 3) to implement SCADPs.

                         Component 3: Sustainable watershed management and support to farmer groups. The objective of
                         this component is to support the implementation of SCADPs through the provision of targeted on-
                         farm investments. The support will include equipment and technologies promoting reduction of post-
                         harvest losses, increasing value addition, addressing soil erosion and promoting climate resilience.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 4: Strengthening MAF➢❨ s Services, Planning, Programming, Coordination and
                         Monitoring and Evaluation Functions. This component will support MAF to strengthen its
                         institutional capacity to reflect the latest organizational changes in the Ministry. The SAPIP support
                         will focus on: (i) improved corporate services (including extension); (ii) planning; (iii) more efficient
                         budget programming with the objective of increasing sectoral investment returns and achieving
                         corporate targets and objectives; (iv) better coordination with development partners➢❨ projects and
                         programs, and improved focusing of development partner expenditure on the Ministry➢❨ s annual
                         action plan objectives; and (v) improved monitoring and evaluation, and subsequent reporting to
                         Government. Component 4 will include support for the Timor-Leste Agriculture Advisory Council
                         (TLAAC) and the Timor-Leste Agriculture Research and Development Institute (TLARDI), which
                         are initiatives from the national Strategic Development Plan.

                         Component 5: Project management and monitoring. The Government is in the process of creating a
                         unified Project Management Unit (PMU) within MAF to manage and coordinate the implementation
                         of all projects and programs in the agricultural sector. The SAPIP PMU will be responsible for: (i)
                         annual planning and budgeting in compliance with Government requirements and guidelines, and
                         with SAPIP➢❨ s final design; (ii) coordination across Components and other Donor-funded projects/
                         programmes to drive complementarity; (iii) support for field-level technical and natural resource
                         planning staff; (iv) support for a governance framework to manage the disbursement of grants to
                         farmer groups; (v) communications, and knowledge management and distribution; (vi) maintenance

                                                                       Page 2 of 10
                         of a mapping and planning database in ALGIS to record WADPs and SCADPs; (vii) a special focus
                         on gender and vulnerable group inclusiveness in Project-support ed activities; and (viii) monitoring
                         of and reporting on the SAPIP results framework. The project will develop and apply accountability
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mechanisms through citizen engagement, monitoring and grievance redress.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be implemented in four watersheds, located in the municipalities of Lautem
                         (Raumoco watershed), Ainaro (Be Luic watershed), Liquica (North Loes watershed), and Oecusse
                         (Ekat-Tono watershed). These watersheds have been selected on the basis of: (i) food and nutrition
                         insecurity criteria; (ii) complementarity with other development partners and Government programs;
                         and (iii) potential for small-scale agriculture development. The characteristics of each watershed will
                         be detailed through community participatory planning in the design of watershed-scale management
                         plan.

                         The majority of Timor-Leste➢❨ s population resides in rural areas predominately dependent on
                         subsistence agriculture dependent on rainfall, where land and soil is largely degraded. As a result of a
                         rapidly growing population, food insecurity is also evident. Some parts of the country are irrigated
                         which provide greater food security and better ecosystem health, but overall infrastructure is
                         inadequate and natural resources are coming under increasing pressure. The Project will assist
                         approximately 16,500 households in four municipalities. There will be about 100,000 direct and
                         indirect beneficiaries of persons indigenous to Timor. The presence of ethnic minorities and scale of
                         forest cover in targeted watersheds will be identified during screening.

                         The Ekat-Tono watershed in Timor-Leste shares a boundary with Indonesia for which an MOU was
                         signed in 2010. The Government of Indonesia was formally notified in writing of the project and its
                         potential activities in April 2016 as a requirement of OP7.50.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Claire Marion Forbes (GSURR)
                         Nicholas John Valentine (GENDR)
                         Ross James Butler (GSU02)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            This Project will finance activities to improve agricultural
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      production and watershed management. This may involve
                                                                     policy reform, formation of management councils, new
                                                                     management strategies and technologies, community
                                                                     grants, etc. A participatory planning process involving
                                                                     key stakeholders at national, municipal and local levels
                                                                     will facilitate a ➢❨ bottom up➢❨ approach to watershed
                                                                     management. Community grants will be delivered through
                                                                     community-driven development, and farmer groups may
                                                                     elect to construct small-scale infrastructure or equipment
                                                                     to support land/agriculture or water management such as
                                                                     water pumps, maize storage drums, small ponds, etc. Site-
                                                                     specific environmental impacts may result but are
                                                                     expected to be minor or negligible and readily


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                                                        manageable.
                                                        The Project has been initially assigned a category "B"
                                                        consistent with the nature of these impacts and the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        requirements of OP4.01. An Environmental and Social
                                                        Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared for
                                                        guidance.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Program activities are expected to take place in areas
                         4.04                           already under cultivation, and thus not involve significant
                                                        loss or degradation of natural habitats. However this
                                                        policy has been triggered as a precaution since exact
                                                        subprojects sites are not yet known and could potentially
                                                        occur in highland areas, sensitive riparian areas and other
                                                        natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   Integrated watershed management will ensure forest areas
                                                        are protected, and activities will only occur on cultivated
                                                        lands and non-forested areas as guiding by the screening
                                                        process. However this policy has been triggered as a
                                                        precaution since exact subprojects sites are not yet known,
                                                        and watershed-level planning includes forest areas.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    Although the project will not directly finance pesticides
                                                        (as per Annex A), OP 4.09 applies where farmers may use
                                                        pesticides as part of agricultural pest management. While
                                                        it is unlikely that project activities will require pest
                                                        management or fund pesticides for agricultural use or
                                                        crop protection, this policy has been triggered as a
                                                        precaution in case watershed planning requires integrated
                                                        pest management.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Participatory planning process with local communities
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           will ensure sites of archaeological, paleontological,
                                                        historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic or other
                                                        cultural significance are avoided. A Chance Finds
                                                        Procedure is included in the ESMF as a precaution.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   This policy is triggered in Timor-Leste in accordance to
                         BP 4.10                        the Environment and Social Safeguards Guidelines for
                                                        Pacific Island Countries (ESSIP). The project is designed
                                                        to maximize the benefits and opportunities of Indigenous
                                                        People through a participatory process with communities
                                                        in target areas of Timor-Leste. It will involve the
                                                        formation of farmer groups, watershed councils and
                                                        management plans to guide the management of natural
                                                        resources for resource owners and users under customary
                                                        tenure arrangements. Communities will also identify
                                                        priority agricultural activities to enhance livelihoods and
                                                        have an opportunity to build their capacity on
                                                        commercialization of produce. To ensure the participatory
                                                        process for each Component is inclusive and benefits are



                                                         Page 4 of 10
                                                                        culturally appropriate, a Beneficiaries Participation
                                                                        Framework has been developed to provide guidance on
                                                                        integrating key principles of OP4.10 into overall project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        design. A Consultation Strategy will outline methods to
                                                                        enable a process for free, prior and informed consultation
                                                                        (FPIC) to ensure broad community support for the
                                                                        Project, and a Social Assessment (SA) will identify
                                                                        potential socio-cultural impacts.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes                Activities likely to result in physical and economic
                            OP/BP 4.12                                  displacement, will not be funded under SAPIP. Project
                                                                        activities will be undertaken voluntarily on either
                                                                        customary, government or private land and should not
                                                                        involve involuntary restriction or change of land/natural
                                                                        resource use. A Land Access and Resettlement Policy
                                                                        Framework (LARPF) has been prepared and includes
                                                                        Voluntary Donation Protocol for instances where
                                                                        landowners may wish to donate specific land for project
                                                                        purposes to directly benefit their community, or Land Use
                                                                        Agreements when temporary or permanent access to
                                                                        customary/private land is required under the Project.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes             In order to sustain watersheds and support agricultural
                            4.37                                        development, the Project may finance small-scale works
                                                                        including small ponds, weirs, small-scale irrigation,
                                                                        small-scale terracing to collect surface runoff and prevent
                                                                        siltation and erosion, among others, under Component 3.
                            Projects on International   Yes             The project➢❨ s targeted watershed includes the Ekat-
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        Tono watershed in Oecusse which shares an international
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                        border with Indonesia. A MoU on watersheds between
                                                                        Timorese and Indonesian Governments was signed
                                                                        regarding watershed management in Oecusse. Although
                                                                        project activities are unlikely to have an adverse effect on
                                                                        the watershed, the downstream riparian (Indonesia) was
                                                                        formally notified in writing of the proposed project in
                                                                        April 2016.
                            Projects in Disputed        No              Project activities will be screened at the scoping phase to
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                            ensure activities do not take place in disputed territories or
                                                                        international boundaries.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The overall social and environmental impact of the SAPIP is expected to be positive and none of
                              the eligible activities that would generate significant risk or irreversible adverse environmental or
                              social impacts if carried out in compliance with the project ESMF.



                                                                         Page 5 of 10
                          The following have been identified as potential issues that can be easily mitigated or managed
                          through the consultative and community driven design of the project
                          ➢❨¢ Exclusion of key stakeholders in focus groups and consultation activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          ➢❨¢ Disagreement on the membership of WMC or content of Agricultural Development Plan.
                          ➢❨¢ Agriculture and rural infrastructure development priorities are not based on community
                          need as agreed by target beneficiaries.
                          ➢❨¢ Potential land use change for agricultural purposes based on land suitability analysis.
                          ➢❨¢ Insufficient understanding about the customary access rights to land and natural resources.
                          ➢❨¢ Poor consideration of upstream or downstream impacts or users.
                          ➢❨¢ Impacts to water courses, water quality and quantity (siltation, contamination, up/
                          downstream impacts)
                          ➢❨¢ Unsuitable seed varieties and seedlings or plants for erosion control and buffers.
                          ➢❨¢ Increased fertilizer and pesticide use as a by-product of intensified agricultural activity
                          leading to environmental (e.g. water contamination) and social (e.g. health risks) impacts if used
                          without training and control measures
                          ➢❨¢ Agriculture and rural infrastructure development priorities are not based on community
                          need as agreed by target beneficiaries.
                          ➢❨¢ Localised temporary impacts of civil works for village water supplies, etc.
                          ➢❨¢ Lack of supervision and poor quality of construction for small-scale infrastructure.
                          ➢❨¢ Conflict due to restriction of access to natural resources or infringement of customary
                          rights (e.g. firewood harvesting).

                           These impacts and issues can be mitigated through safeguard instruments contained in the ESMF.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No long-term or indirect impacts of an adverse nature are anticipated. The overall objective of
                           SAPIP is to benefit environmental health at the watershed-scale as a result of improved farming
Public Disclosure Copy




                           practices and agricultural technologies.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project activities and alternative modalities have already been trialled and piloted successfully in
                           Timor-Leste. SAPIP will upscale those proven to be successful and modifies in specific regions
                           and watersheds as appropriate.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Timor-Leste has limited institutional capacity for safeguards. Technical assistance is being
                           provided to the road sector through the establishment of a Project Implementation Unit (PIU) in
                           the MPWTC, which houses an Environmental and Social Unit. The MAF Institutional Reform and
                           Transformation Project (P148698) [MIRT] provided capacity building and support on safeguards
                           for the agriculture sector, prior to implementation of SAPIP. Safeguards training was provided to
                           MAF staff (including NDPP) on 27 January 2016. The DPMSU have capacity to screen
                           subprojects for impacts, however may require additional assistance for preparation of safeguard
                           instruments. The project design includes capacity building at the national and municipal levels for
                           project delivery, which will incorporate safeguards. Technical assistance and NGOs will be
                           engaged to support this function.
                           The CDD approach will enhance environmental and social benefits in participating communities
                           in a respectful and inclusive manner that suits local socio-cultural realities. In this way, most

                                                                     Page 6 of 10
                           adverse impacts will be avoided or mitigated in the design phase by beneficiaries themselves, with
                           support from NGOs/CSOs and consultants.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include MAF, municipality offices, sub-district level facilitators, farmers,
                           resource users, and Suco leaders. A Consultation Strategy will be completed by the implementing
                           agency in accordance with the principles and process set out in the Beneficiaries Participation
                           Framework. The Consultation Strategy will detail methods for engaging project beneficiaries in
                           the different project activities including the formation of farmer groups, watershed management
                           strategies and priorities, amongst others.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          07-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       08-Mar-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Timor-Leste                                                          08-Mar-2016
                           Comments: Agricultural Development Plans will be developed and include characterisation of
                                         watershed areas and landscape values that will be enhanced by project activities and
                                         improved management regimes. Social assessments will also be undertaken to
                                         understand resource users, traditional rights or access and use, and identify
                                         vulnerable persons (all Timorese are classified as Indigenous People and OP4.10
                                         applies).
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          07-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       08-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Timor-Leste                                                          08-Mar-2016
                           Comments: All activities will be undertaken in a voluntary and participatory manner and not
                                         include physical or economic displacement.
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          07-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                       08-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Timor-Leste                                                          08-Mar-2016
                           Comments: A Beneficiaries Participation Framework has been developed for this project in lieu
                                         of an IPPF since this is a CDD modality and is more appropriate to the needs of the
                                         project and its stakeholders. The BPF incorporates key elements of an IPPF and IPP.
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                       NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                          NA


                                                                    Page 7 of 10
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    NA
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Timor-Leste                                                       08-Mar-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: Agriculture Development Plans or Watershed Management Plans may include
                                         integrated pest management and training will be provided.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement


                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [     ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
                          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          and constraints been carried out?
                          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          overcome these constraints?
                          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          does it include provisions for certification system?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?



                                                                    Page 9 of 10
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Gayatri Acharya
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 24-May-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                     Date: 27-May-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    Page 10 of 10
