                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA18920
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-Dec-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Swaziland                         Project ID:    P152528
                            Project Name:      IMPROVING PUBLIC SECTOR PERFORMANCE PROJECT (P152528)
                            Task Team          Barbara Kasura Magezi Ndamira,Yoko Kagawa
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          12-Oct-2016              Estimated     12-Jan-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GGO27                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        25.00           Total Bank Financing:     25.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      25.00
                              Total                                                                                      25.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve public sector performance in selected ministries,
                           departments and agencies through the strengthening of human and public resources management and
                           use of data.
                            3. Project Description
                           The modality for project implementation will consist of TA in the form of knowledge sharing on best
                           practices as well capacity building and the introduction of IT systems to enhance operations. In line
                           with the Government➢❨ s Program of Action 2013➢❨ 2018, the project will focus on interventions


                                                                       Page 1 of 6
                         related to HR and FM to contribute to prudent fiscal management. The project will also support the
                         GoS in developing a better M&E system, with stronger statistical capacity and policy coordination,
                         to expedite the achievement of Vision 2022. The project consists of the following three components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1: Improved Human Resource Management and Skills (US$5.6 million)
                         The objective of this component is to strengthen the HRM function and capacities to improve the
                         abilities of civil servants in delivering public services.

                         Subcomponent 1.1 - Strengthened Human Resources Management (US$2.1 million)
                         This subcomponent focuses on the policy and institutional strengthening for effective HRM. The
                         GoS has embarked on developing a new HR policy to make HRM more efficient and effective. The
                         Government has also started eliminating the anomalies identified by the Public Service Payroll and
                         Skills Audit (June 2015). This subcomponent will support the (a) finalization of HR policy and an
                         assessment of the HRMIS for the entire Government; (b) the development and upgrade of an
                         efficient HRMIS; (c) strengthening of establishment controls; and (d) review of essential HRD
                         functions, training, and capacity-building policy and rollout of the performance-based management
                         system.

                         Subcomponent 1.2 - Strengthened Skills and Knowledge for Public Administration (US$3.5 million)
                         This subcomponent focuses on capacity-building programs to improve and maintain core skills
                         required for civil servants. The subcomponent will support an assessment of SIMPA to examine its
                         or+ganizational structure and current function in relation to the training needs for the entire Public
                         Administration of Swaziland. This will be followed by a capacity-building program for the institute.
                         Together with IDM and UNISWA, SIMPA will (a) undertake a training needs assessment of the
                         Government MDAs focusing on generic and cross-cutting leadership and management development
                         skills; (b) conduct training for the MDAs arising out of the training needs assessment; and (c) support
                         specific training programs envisaged by the project under the Ministry of Public Works, the Auditor
                         General➢❨ s Office, the MOF, the SPPRA, and the CSO.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 2: Strengthened Public Resource Management, Procurement Performance, and Financial
                         Accountability (US$10.1 million)
                         The objective of this component is twofold: first, to improve the management of public resources by
                         supporting capacity building for PFM in conjunction with the IFMIS implementation and reforms for
                         PIM and second, to improve financial accountability by strengthening procurement and oversight
                         functions.

                         Subcomponent 2.1 - Improved Public Resource Management (US$2.6 million)
                         2.1.1 Improved PFM Capacity
                         Under this subcomponent, the project will support PFM capacity building. The main activities will
                         include (a) development of capacity-building programs focusing on weaknesses to be identified by a
                         Public Expenditure and Financial Accountability Framework (PEFA) assessment; these programs
                         will also factor in the implementation of the new IFMIS and behavioral changes to align with the
                         new PFM law; (b) delivery of the capacity-building program, including through national institutions
                         SIMPA, IDM, and UNISWA; (c) re-engineering of the function and structure of the Accountant
                         General➢❨ s office in lieu of the implementation of IFMIS and International Public Sector
                         Accounting Standards.

                         2.1.2 Improved PIM


                                                                      Page 2 of 6
                         This subcomponent will support improved PIM processes and strengthen the Government➢❨ s PPP
                         program. The main activities will include (a) conducting a PIM diagnostic and development of PIM
                         guidelines for effective policies, processes, and systems and related capacity-building activities; (b)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development of a Public Investment Program (PIP), as an inventory or project database containing
                         projects that have been duly appraised and whose economic returns have been thoroughly analyzed;
                         and (c) conducting a PPP diagnostic in the context of PIM, upgrading the existing PPP policy note as
                         a guidance for PPP policies, processes, and systems and supporting related capacity-building
                         activities.

                         Subcomponent 2.2 - Strengthened Procurement Performance and Financial Accountability (US$7.5
                         million)
                         2.2.1 Strengthened Public Procurement
                         This subcomponent aims at increasing transparency and integrity of the procurement system through
                         development of an e-Government procurement (e-GP) system and the professionalization of
                         procurement staff. Activities include (a) strengthening the regulatory capacity of the SPPRA and the
                         authorization and quality assurance function of the GTB, including through the implementation of e-
                         GP systems; (b) establishment of procurement cadre and professionalization of public procurement
                         functions; (c) strengthening the procurement planning, processing, and contracting function in the
                         selected ministries; and (d) developing training materials for public procurement with a sustainable
                         delivery in cooperation with national institutions, including SIMPA, IDM, and UNISWA.

                         2.2.2. Strengthened Oversight Functions
                         This subcomponent will support improved risk management, internal audit, and oversight. The main
                         activities will include (a) development and implementation of a risk management framework and
                         system, including setting up an Audit Committee and capacity building (in close collaboration with
                         the EU) to implement an internal audit framework consistent with the international standards for the
                         professional practice of internal auditing; (b) completion of an African Organization of English-
                         speaking Supreme Audit Institutions (AFROSAI-e) capability maturity assessment of the Office of
                         the Auditor General (SAI) and the development and implementation of a sustainable capacity-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         building plan; (c) support to the SAI in the automation of their audit approach and processes; and (d)
                         strengthening the oversight function exercised by the PAC, through a capacity assessment and
                         implementation of a sustainable capacity-building plan.

                         Component 3: Improved Accountability for Better Service Delivery (US$9.3 million)
                         The objective of this component is threefold: first, to establish mechanisms for assessing
                         achievement of results in service delivery; second, to facilitate innovations in service delivery that
                         affect the majority of citizens in Swaziland; and third, to provide strategic implementation support to
                         ensure that the project will function as a catalyst for overall public service reforms.

                         Subcomponent 3.1 - Evidence-based Policy Making and Coordination (US$5.1 million)
                         This subcomponent will address three areas (a) improving policy planning, coordination, and
                         implementation, (b) strengthening M&E functions for better planning, budgeting, and long-term
                         projections for national development; and (c) strengthening statistical capacity for the monitoring of
                         SDG indicators, poverty and welfare, social assistance programs, labor market, and service delivery
                         outcomes.

                         3.1.1 Strengthened Policy Planning, Coordination, and Implementation
                         This subcomponent will support enhancing capacity of the PPCU in the PMO that is in charge of
                         monitoring policy development, planning, analysis, inter-ministerial coordination, and evaluation of

                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                         policy implementation. The project will (a) support functional review of the Cabinet Secretariat and
                         the PPCU to identify both capacity and structural gaps that undermine their ability to coordinate
                         Government policy planning, formulation, and implementation; (b) build capacity of the PPCU to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         undertake its mandate; and (c) build capacity of the policy and planning units in the three selected
                         institutions. Support will be provided on the basis of an incremental approach, starting with
                         development and introduction of key policy development and monitoring tools. Tailor-made capacity
                         strengthening and change management will accompany these efforts and will also proceed
                         incrementally, aligned with client needs and capacities.

                         3.1.2 M&E for Service Delivery
                         This subcomponent will lay the foundations for an effective government wide M&E system,
                         coordinated by the Ministry of Economic Planning and Development. The project will provide
                         support to strengthen (a) the design and implementation of the M&E framework and its institutional
                         architecture to inform the M&E policy to be adopted by the cabinet, aligned with the planning,
                         budgeting, and public service management functions; (b) strengthening of M&E functions, systems,
                         and tools in pilot ministries at the policy, program, and project levels, building on the current system
                         in preparation, starting with monitoring tools (including a simple electronic tool, manuals, and
                         guidelines) and to be complemented later with evaluation tools, and the promotion of the use of these
                         M&E tools and findings for policy making; (c) design and implementation of basic participatory
                         M&E tools for use by citizens, civil society, and the private sector; (d) capacity strengthening and
                         change management, risk management and communications, and the design of an M&E incentives
                         framework, aligned with the current political context and technical capacities on the ground.

                         3.1.3 Strengthened Statistical Capacities
                         This subcomponent will specifically support the CSO to regularly produce reliable, quality statistics
                         and will provide support to design and conduct two SHIES for the next five years, focusing on best-
                         practice examples of survey design and implementation and securing detailed baseline information
                         on demographic, poverty, social protection, labor market, health, education, and labor market
                         indicators. The project will further support a capacity-building program of CSO staff and the data-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sharing platform needed to enhance and sustain statistics production for capacity building and
                         management.

                         Subcomponent 3.2 - Service Delivery Innovation and Citizen Engagement (US$2.3million)
                         This subcomponent will support a mechanism to foster citizens➢❨ feedback to improve public
                         service delivery. Through the international Smart Partnership dialogue process adopted by the GoS,
                         the Government performance is subject to citizens➢❨ feedback and reports are shared with sector
                         ministries and cabinet for necessary action. The subcomponent will focus on key service delivery in
                         the Ministries of Health, Education, Public Works and Transport, and Home Affairs. Additionally,
                         the project will provide support to the MOHA to improve civic and immigration services and to
                         operationalize one-stop service-delivery center and immigration border posts. Under this
                         subcomponent, the project will support (a) implementation of citizen dialog processes under
                         Government Smart Partnership Program focusing on three selected ministries and the MOHA; (b)
                         organizational review of the MOHA focusing on civic and immigration services; (c)
                         operationalization of services at five border posts and five one-stop service centers; and (d) feedback
                         mechanism of service users through customer satisfaction surveys.

                         Subcomponent 3.3 - Strategic Implementation Support (US$1.9 million)
                         The PMO being the project implementation lead to ensure oversight of the GoS➢❨ s actions and the


                                                                       Page 4 of 6
                           coordination of those actions with Government stakeholders, this subcomponent will provide
                           strategic implementation support to facilitate management and coordination. The component will
                           finance (a) a Project Support Team (PST) to coordinate the implementing ministries and agencies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and ensure a coherent approach to public sector performance improvement and (b) development and
                           implementation of the overall public service reform and communication strategy at a strategic level
                           to strengthen concerted and coherent reform within the GoS.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           Swaziland

                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               No
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              No associated safeguard issues and impacts.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              None envisaged
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.


                                                                       Page 5 of 6
                              None.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                              None
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              None
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            There are no documents.
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Barbara Kasura Magezi Ndamira,Yoko Kagawa
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Hisham Ahmed Waly (PMGR)            Date: 05-Dec-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
