                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA15338
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Belarus                           Project ID:   P152276
                            Project Name:     Belarus Competitiveness Enhancement Project (P152276)
                            Task Team         Karen Grigorian,Johanna Jaeger
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         18-Jul-2016               Estimated     27-Oct-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTC10                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        80.00           Total Bank Financing:     80.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    80.00
                              Total                                                                                    80.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The PDO is to strengthen conditions for private sector led growth by: improving the business
                           environment, upgrading innovation capacity of SMEs, strengthening institutional capacity to promote
                           private investment and improving MSME access to finance.
                            3. Project Description
                           The proposed components and subcomponents are as follows:

                           Component 1. Improving Business Environment and FDI Support


                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         The objective of this component is to accelerate implementation of activities that support and
                         complement the GoB➢❨ s Strategic Action Plan to improve investment climate and advance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         deregulation. The basis for this plan is provided by Presidential Directive #4 ➢❨ On Developing
                         Business Initiative and Stimulating Business Activity in the Republic of Belarus➢❨ , the Set of
                         Measures to Reach Social and Economic Development Goals in the Republic of Belarus in 2016 and
                         Provide for Macroeconomic Balance, approved by Resolution #28/2 of the Council of Ministers of
                         the Republic of Belarus of January 18, 2016, and the SME Support Strategy for 2016-2020 approved
                         by Resolution #149 of the Council of Ministers of the Republic of Belarus of February 23, 2016.

                         1.1 Launching e-Registry of Administrative Procedures.

                         Encouraging new market entrants and the growth of MSMEs requires facilitating administrative
                         procedures for private businesses. ERAP is the GoB➢❨ s initiative to move administrative
                         procedures for businesses online. This sub-component➢❨ s support for ERAP will help to reduce
                         administrative burden for firms by increasing clarity and reducing compliance cost and time through
                         online processing. Moving respective administrative procedures online will follow a review of the
                         current procedures by an inter-agency working group, followed by a comprehensive redesign and
                         simplification of business processes. ERAP will provide enhanced information services with respect
                         to various business regulations and administrative procedures and it is expected to expand
                         significantly the scope of online services provided to businesses.

                         This Project component will assist the GoB in implementing the next phase of the information
                         resource, which will provide more full-featured information services and an online transactional
                         system for getting necessary permits and approvals online. The development of the software for the
                         information resource, acquiring hosting facilities, and integration with the National Automated
                         Information System (AIS) are the immediate anticipated expenses. Costs related to the redesign of
                         current business processes within the regulatory system to accept applications from an online
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transactional system, training of officials and outreach (publicizing the online mechanism) will also
                         be covered. The first stage of ERAP creation (an informational portal) is currently being prepared
                         with the advisory and technical assistance of IFC Advisory Project and should be implemented by
                         the beginning of 2018.

                         1.2 Strengthening Institutional Arrangements for FDI Support and Capacity-building for PPPs

                         In terms of FDI support, the main objective of this subcomponent is the transformation of the NAIP
                         into a private sector focused agency capable of providing a wide range of services required by
                         existing and potential private investors to complete successfully the investment development process.
                         This subcomponent will support the NAIP➢❨ s capacity-building in investment promotion services
                         aimed at retaining and generating additional investor interest, primarily in strategically important
                         sectors, including PPPs.

                         The subcomponent will address the NAIP➢❨ s institutional weaknesses, identified during its
                         institutional needs assessment, in the key areas of strategic planning and implementation of FDI
                         promotion activities. Specifically, it will support intensive staff training and coaching in various
                         promotional techniques and mechanisms including country image building, demand-driven
                         marketing, client servicing capacity both within and outside the country, improved marketing reach
                         through local and international fora and online promotion techniques. The NAIP➢❨ s management


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         and internal systems will also be strengthened (e.g. staff recruitment and training, investor tracking).
                         A digital database portal of investment projects and properties, including brownfield and greenfield,
                         is contemplated to provide information on current business opportunities. In addition, the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         subcomponent will finance the development of target sector-relevant studies and marketing materials
                         for promotion missions and participation in relevant trade shows/events. Capacity building activities
                         will complement and build on the experience of the Privatization Trust Fund.

                         Overall, this subcomponent will lend support to the implementation of a clear FDI attraction strategy
                         with targets based on competitive sectors for FDI promotion. It will strengthen the operational
                         capacities of the NAIP in investor targeting, facilitation, and aftercare. This activity will aim at
                         developing a more proactive approach to investment promotion and provide the NAIP with an
                         effective outreach capacity. Based on specific sector targeting studies, NAIP staff will receive
                         comprehensive investment promotion guidance, including in lead generation, marketing and follow-
                         up techniques. N AIP staff will also be coached and trained in the planning and execution of outward
                         promotion missions to selected target markets.

                         The NAIP➢❨ s investor aftercare mandate represents an excellent opportunity to retain and build on
                         existing investments by nurturing investors. Enhancing these services and taking actions to improve
                         the investment environment through the proper functioning of the Foreign Investment Advisory
                         Council (and the planned Investment Ombudsman➢❨ s Office) is contemplated as the key
                         mechanism for investment retention and confidence (MIRC). FIAC➢❨ s mixed public-private board
                         is already mandated to identify obstacles in the investment environment and recommend reforms.
                         However, the NAIP can improve FIAC➢❨ s effectiveness by implementing a fully resourced FIAC
                         secretariat unit made up of legal and market professionals. The Project, therefore, supports the NAIP
                         to become a private sector champion and play an advocacy role for further reforms aimed at
                         strengthening public-private dialogue and improving the investment climate.

                         The overall approach for institutional strengthening in the PPP area will focus on the following four
Public Disclosure Copy




                         inter-related activities: methodological support, PPP Unit technical support, capacity-building and
                         staff training, and project pipeline development.

                         A.       Methodological Support: Methodological support will include mainly assistance to develop
                         the following processes and models: (i) the Value for Money Model, taking account of domestic
                         regulations; (ii) the Cost-Benefit Analysis and Model; (iii) the Financial Risk Assessment Model for
                         PPPs (P-FRAM), a tool developed jointly by the World Bank and IMF; and (iv) Public Investment
                         Management (PIM) arrangements applicable to PPP projects (PIM4PPP). The PIM4PPP diagnostic
                         tool, developed by the World Bank, is based on a list of key performance indicators and involves
                         assessing the public framework for developing and tendering PPP projects. Capabilities of relevant
                         institutions and overall government are assessed with respect to a number of key performance
                         indicators. In the initial assessment, performance indicators are graded to establish a baseline against
                         which improvements can be measured as a capability building program is implemented. These
                         composite indicators (constituents of which are a rich set of sub-indicators evaluating various
                         dimensions of PIM framework) help inform capacity-building efforts.

                         B.      PPP Unit Technical Support will include website modernization and upgrading, assistance
                         with PPP project and National Investment Plan databases, project management software, assistance
                         with using the International Infrastructure Support System, and assistance with private sector liaison.




                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                         C.       Capability Building and Staff Training will include workshops for line ministries, the PPP
                         Unit and regional authorities in basic PPP training and specific issues related to pilot PPPs to be
                         selected for further preparation. It is envisioned that a suitable pilot PPP project will be chosen as a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         live case study for practical training. Practical training linked to live projects is significantly more
                         effective in achieving sustainable capacity improvements than theoretical courses alone.
                         ➢❨ Learning by doing➢❨ is the best way to build staff capability. The case study pilot project will
                         be further developed as part of capability building and training.

                         D.       PPP Project Pipeline Development: Further PPP project pipeline development is needed to
                         build on the work already done by the GoB and other donors. This activity will develop a balanced
                         pipeline of viable PPP projects reflecting the country➢❨ s infrastructure needs. This step will: (i)
                         review the work already done by line ministries, the PPP Unit, and international partners such as
                         UNDP to compile the long list of prospects; (ii) explore any new proposals for PPPs coming from the
                         private sector and government departments; (iii) prepare road maps for further development of the
                         most promising projects, with assistance from consultants if needed; and (iv) identify one or two
                         pilot projects that will be used as case studies for staff training. The road maps will prioritize and
                         develop budgets for: (i) a pre-feasibility study; (ii) a full technical feasibility study; (iii)
                         environmental and social impact assessments; (iv) legal costs for legal due diligence and drafting
                         project contracts and financing agreements; (v) expenses for transaction advisors and arrangers; (vi)
                         costs for financial modeling and tax advice; (vii) licensing and permitting fees.

                         Component 2. Supporting SME, Innovation and Entrepreneurship Development

                         2.1 Roll out of Business Development Services(BDS) Instruments using a Matching Grant
                         Mechanism

                         The sub-component will support implementation of the GoB➢❨ s plans to strengthen state support to
                         innovation activities of Belarusian SMEs, to enhance capacity and effectiveness of the Belarusian
                         Innovation Fund (BIF) to support SMEs through matching grants. The BIF is the GoB➢❨ s private
Public Disclosure Copy




                         equity arm specializing in investments in innovation industries, with a focus on science and
                         technology. This sub-component will finance a matching grant program to encourage both demand
                         for and supply of BDS. The BDS market remains underdeveloped in Belarus and presents a major
                         constraint to strengthening the SME sector, including in areas of technology upgrade, know-how
                         adoption and monetization of intellectual property. The focus is on promoting productivity
                         improvements of SMEs.

                         This sub-component will provide two types of matching grants. The first type, commercialization
                         grants, will support all stages of research commercialization with assistance for business plan
                         creation, market assessment, IP analysis, prototype development and scaling up of capacity. The
                         second type, SME development grants, will support SMEs, including start-ups, to obtain BDS
                         through technoparks and other intermediaries. The priority for business development services will be
                         given to business entities engaged in the development and commercialization of scientific and
                         technical products. Project design will provide equal opportunities for female-headed businesses. The
                         existing regulatory framework allows for adoption of good international practices recommended by
                         WBG to be incorporated in the Operations Manual that will govern the grant program. All types of
                         SMEs engaged in the development and commercialization of scientific and technical products would
                         be eligible for the program.




                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                         Component 3. Line of Credit and Institutional Strengthening of DBB

                         3.1 Line of Credit (LoC)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This subcomponent will facilitate increased access and availability of finance for MSMEs by
                         financing wholesale lending by the DBB for its MSME business line. Funding will be made available
                         to PFIs for eligible sub-borrowers and sub-projects on market terms. An initial appraisal of interested
                         financial intermediaries will be undertaken by the World Bank, while the DBB will subsequently
                         assume this role with the support of the NBRB, in line with World Bank requirements for financial
                         intermediary financing. The LoC will be open for participation by all banks meeting eligibility
                         criteria, on a first come-first serve basis, with an initial set ceiling per institution that may be
                         expanded and/or re-allocated as necessary.

                         The interest rates to final borrowers will be market-based. The DBB will on-lend funds to PFIs at
                         interest rates that take into account, at minimum, DBB➢❨ s cost of funding, operating costs and
                         appropriate credit risk margin. The PFIs will on-lend the funds to final borrowers at market rates
                         based on their own credit risk assessment. Subsidiary finance to PFIs will be denominated in USD
                         with the currency risk being borne by PFIs and final borrowers.

                         Sub-borrowers will be creditworthy private sector MSMEs. The proposed criteria for final borrowers
                         will be in line with the DBB➢❨ s MSME pilot program criteria and Project-specific criteria. The
                         following criteria for MSMEs have been agreed upon during Project preparation: (i) privately owned
                         (more than 50 percent) and independent; (ii) domestic (more than 50 percent) (iii) duly licensed and
                         registered with the tax authorities; (iv) creditworthy and in sound financial condition; (v) with prior
                         operating experience in the activity to be financed; and (vi) having the requisite organizational,
                         management, staff and financial and other capacity.

                         Consistent with good practice in other World Bank credit lines, the DBB will be the borrower and
                         implementing agency for this component through a separate loan agreement with the World Bank
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and supported by a GoB guarantee.

                         3.2 Institutional Strengthening of the DBB

                         The objective of this subcomponent is the provision of operational support and capacity-building to
                         the DBB as well as knowledge and awareness-raising activities targeting banks and MSMEs. The
                         technical assistance to be provided under this sub-component builds on an assessment conducted by
                         the World Bank under the 2014 Development Module Financial Sector Assessment Program (FSAP)
                         related to i nstitutional, regulatory and supervisory strengthening of the DBB. Areas of technical
                         assistance include (i) strengthening of the functioning of the DBB including establishing robust
                         operating principles, policies, procedures, and governance, design and roll outof new finance
                         instruments, setting up and implementing monitoring, disclosure, and evaluation practices and impact
                         assessment methodologies, (ii) implementation of the DBB➢❨ s IT strategy to enhance internal
                         systems and ICT processes, (iii) knowledge and awareness raising activities targeting banks and
                         MSMEs, and (iv) project management and monitoring.

                         Component 4. Project Implementation

                         This component will fund the day-to-day PMU functions for Components 1 and 2 (Project
                         administration, procurement, financial management, disbursement, M&E, safeguards, and public


                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                         awareness), legal and regulatory compliance, and related operational costs, including staff and
                         consulting services. Under this component some additional technical assistance might be provided to
                         the MoE in order to facilitate compliance with Project implementation requirements, such as
Public Disclosure Copy




                         preparation of the Project Operational Manual.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)


                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GEN03)
                         Esma Kreso (GEN03)
                         Jennifer Shkabatur (GSU03)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes          Support to SMEs under Component 2 through provision
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    of matching grants, the line of credit under Component 3
                                                                   and other support may include activities that have an
                                                                   environmental impact associated with their undertaking.
                                                                   Since the precise nature of such activities is not known
                                                                   prior to project Appraisal, the Environmental
                                                                   Management Framework (EMF) has been developed for
                                                                   screening. The screening would categorize project
                                                                   activities by their potential impact and further guide the
                                                                   development of adequate due diligence documentation. It
                                                                   would screen out potential higher risk activities,
                                                                   corresponding to a World Bank category A, and activities
                                                                   that might trigger additional safeguards policies. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   EMF also includes a project-specific exclusion list.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                          Physical Cultural           No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                          BP 4.10
                          Involuntary Resettlement    No
                          OP/BP 4.12
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                          4.37
                          Projects on International   No
                          Waterways OP/BP 7.50



                                                                     Page 6 of 9
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Since majority of the activities to be financed under the project are not known at this stage, there
                              are no determined and associated environmental impacts that could be identified. The EMF in
                              place does include provisions to avoid financing activities that can have a large-scale and
                              irreversible environmental impact, corresponding to a Category A or triggering additional
                              safeguards policies.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              There are no long-term negative impacts that can be associated with the operations. Experience
                              from similar operations in the region provides evidence of improved environmental consciousness
                              of the MSME entrepreneurs, in particular for those environmental protection measures that may
                              lead to savings and economic benefits (rational use of water in a production line for example).
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              n/a
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The EMPs for subprojects shall be developed by qualified specialist(s) as contracted by the final
                              beneficiary and approved by the two Project Management Units (PMUs) - DBB (in case of the
                              MSME line of credit sub-project) and NAIP (in the case of the state-owned enterprises➢❨
Public Disclosure Copy




                              privatization) which each has an Environmental and Social Specialist. EMPs should be agreed
                              with the World Bank, and if it is necessary, should be corrected.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The draft Environmental Management Framework along with an announcement of the Public
                              consultations workshop has been disclosed on the websites of the Ministry of Economy (MoE) and
                              the Development Bank of the Republic of Belarus (DBB) on July 7, 2016. The comments to the
                              EMF were received from two DBB➢❨ s bank-partners, which will be taking into account in the
                              final version of the EMF.
                              The Public consultations workshop was held in the office of the National Investment and
                              Privatization Agency of the MoE in Minsk, on July 14, 2016 starting at 11:00 and lasting until
                              13:00. The Minutes of Meeting and a list of attendees was prepared and attached to the EMF. In
                              general, 14 participants attended the Public consultations workshop, which presented the Ministry
                              of Economy, Ministry of Natural Resources, NAIP, DBB and bank-partners.
                              Main discussion and comments during the Public consultations workshop was related to the
                              updating of the EMF and developing the Methodological Guidelines for the bank-partners in order
                              to give them a clear explanation how to use the screening procedure and checklist in determining
                              the category of the sub-projects and which of them are needed a preparation of the EMPs in the
                              future.


                                                                        Page 7 of 9
                           The Ministry of Natural Resources expressed their concern that EMF, in particular, a chapter
                           ➢❨ Environmental Assessment Procedure in Belarus➢❨ did not take into account all comments
                           which were given from the Ministry➢❨ s side last year. The Ministry emphasized that a chapter
Public Disclosure Copy




                           needs to be updated, because there are also new changes to the current legislation regarding the
                           environmental impact assessment, state expertise and public hearing in Belarus, which were made
                           in January 2016. At this moment, a new law and changes are under the final review and signing by
                           the President of the Republic of Belarus. The representatives of the Ministry of Natural Resources
                           asked the MoE to send to them a draft EMF for agreement and comments with official letter. In
                           such case, the MoE can receive the official responses and comments from the Ministry of Natural
                           Resources. In other case, the Ministry of Natural Resources will relieve of its responsibility
                           regarding this document. The Ministry also asked to clarify in the EMF a legal base of the
                           Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which should be prepared at the later stage, because
                           there is no such definition and term under the Belarusian legislation. The Ministry also stated that
                           the EMF should have more detail information about the procedure of EMP➢❨ s preparation and its
                           deadlines.
                           Based on the results of the Public consultations and the fact that new national legislation will
                           become effective after the signing by the President of the Republic of Belarus this year, the EMF
                           will need to be updated as soon as the Ministry of Natural Resources provides its official
                           comments, and new legislation enter into the force this year.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      22-Jul-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   22-Jul-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Belarus                                                          07-Jul-2016
                           Comments: "In- country" Disclosure took place on July 7, 2016
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information




                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Karen Grigorian,Johanna Jaeger
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Lisa A. Kaestner (PMGR)                       Date: 01-Aug-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
