                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC19865

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Uzbekistan                     Project ID:      P161618
                            Project Name:   Support to the Land Administration and Geospatial System Modernization
                                            Project
                            Team Leader(s): Anna Corsi
                            Estimated Date 01-Nov-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSULN                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.557                         Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Korea WB Partnership Facility                                                               1.557
                            Environment       C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed Development Objective is to build the capacity of the State Committee for Land
                           Resources, Geodesy, Cartography and State Cadastre (GKZGDK) to manage the development and
                           maintenance of the computerized systems for land administration and geospatial information
                           management.

                           The TA project would accomplish this through the training of GKZGDK staff in the digitization of
                           land administration records and the adoption of modern fit-for-purpose ICT and geospatial
                           technologies.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed TA project would finance the delivery of a comprehensive capacity building program
                           that will allow Uzbekistan to develop the necessary skills and knowledge to establish a digital
                           geospatial information system, in particular through the MRPRC Project, according to the country's
                           needs. More importantly, such support will ensure the sustainability of the new electronic system,
                           including maintenance, management, expansion and upgrade. It will also be critical to enable the
                           country to take the lead on parallel or subsequent reforms in support of eGovernment initiatives and
                           private sector development that are based on the use of digital land and geospatial information and
                           for which reliance only on foreign technology transfer is not realistic.
                         The core elements of the capacity building program will be: (i) provision of continuous, on the
                         ground technical assistance to support GKZGDK in the implementation of the MRPRC project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         components; and (ii) design and implementation of a targeted training program.

                         Component 1: Technical Assistance

                         1.A Real Property Registration and Cadastre System Development. This sub-component would
                         support GKZGDK in managing the incremental development and roll-out of a new ICT-based
                         Integrated Information System for Real Property Registration and Cadastre (IISRPRC), including the
                         development of IISRPRC's infrastructure and improved operational environment, procedures, service
                         standards and applications. In particular, the TA will provide advice and transfer of knowledge on:
                         (i) the development and maintenance of a reliable e-system for the management of geospatial data
                         and property rights, including the development of technical specifications; (ii) quality control over
                         the products delivered by the contractors, as per technical specifications, including technical support
                         for auditing, evaluating, and testing of the e-system and ensuring quality technical documentation;
                         (iii) the establishment of an ICT Competence Center (domain and system analysts, software
                         developers, database and Geographic Information System (GIS) specialists, system and network
                         administrators), including a mechanism for the continuous knowledge transfer from the ICT system
                         developer to the Center.

                         Expected outputs:
                         In-country technical assistance including:
                          -      Business process review manual;
                            -    Technical specifications for IISRPRC system development and upgrade guidance;
                          -      Quality Control manuals;
                            -    ICT training and knowledge transfer;
                            -    ICT Competence Center business plan; and
                         -       Identification of legal changes for the operationalization of the new web-based IISRPRC.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         1.B Real Property Registration and Cadastre Data Development. This sub-component would support
                         GKZGDK in the digitization of current manual property registration and cadastre records (including
                         both attribute and geospatial data) for the new IISRPRC. The TA will focus on (i) supporting the
                         planning, management, monitoring, and implementation of the mass digitization process. In
                         particular, the TA will provide advice and recommendation on the development of technical
                         specifications and the methodology for the digitization process, as well as quality control and
                         acceptance activities for the digitization of geospatial data. It will also support GKZGDK's in-house
                         campaign for integration and conversion of digital textual and graphic data into IISRPRC, and the
                         migration, harmonization and population of the uniform IISRPRC database.

                         Expected outputs:

                         -       Data assessment guidelines;
                         -       Mass digitization methodology development and manual;
                         -       Quality Control development and manual;
                         -       Mass digitization training.

                         1.C Use of Real Property Registry and Cadastre Data. The TA would provide support for enhancing
                         public on-line use of IISRPRC data and the development of a modern framework and technological
                           platform in compliance with the country's eGovernment Master Plan. In particular, the TA would
                           support: (i) the preparation of a strategy that will define the infrastructure, data formats, standards
                           and initial services to provide on-line access and sharing of geospatial data for authorities, business
Public Disclosure Copy




                           entities, organizations and citizens; and (ii) the development of necessary legislation, institutional
                           agreements and guidelines for the establishment of a National Spatial Data Infrastructure (NSDI),
                           including a national Geoportal to access land and spatial information.

                           Expected outputs:

                           -       Input into and revision of the draft spatial data sharing strategy, standards, specifications,
                           guidelines, services, and interaction and data sharing arrangements;
                           -       Input into the preparation and revision of the technical specifications for the development of
                           a national Geoportal.

                           Component 2: Training.

                           This component would focus on the design of a targeted training and knowledge transfer program for
                           the benefit of both institutional and private sector stakeholders. This program would include, among
                           other, training on:

                           -       ICT project and contract management;
                           -       Development and maintenance of the electronic integrated registry and cadastre system;
                           -       Project management;
                           -       Raising the awareness on advantages of the digital work;
                           -       Customer-orientation;
                           -       Use of the new registration system by staff, surveyors, and notaries;
                           -       Strategic and business planning;
                           -       Digitization, quality control of spatial and land administration data.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Expected outputs:

                           -       Training needs assessment;
                           -       Training plan; and
                           -       Study tours.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed TA project is only funding capacity building work of a State institution with no works
                           on the ground. The project does not trigger any environmental or social safeguards, as there is no
                           land acquisition involved or other activities resulting in changes to land ownership, access or tenure.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Not applicable

                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                           Triggered?           Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/                 No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                           No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09                      No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/              No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP               No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No
                           Projects on International                    No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP             No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Anna Corsi
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                               Date: 19-Sep-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Practice Manager/                Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                                        Date: 19-Sep-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
