INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA12731
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Indonesia                   Project ID:  P154780
Parent        P085375
Project ID:
Project Name: The National Rural Water Supply and Sanitation Project (PAMSIMAS AF)
(P154780)
Parent Project Third Water Supply and Sanitation for Low Income Communities Project
Name:           (P085375)
Task Team       George Soraya
Leader(s):
Estimated        15-Oct-2015                Estimated     14-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO2                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Water supply (50%), Sanitation (25%), Sub-national government administration
(10%), Central government administration (15%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (35%), Other human development (25%),
Participation and civic engagement (20%), Other communicable diseases (10%),
Other social development (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    1069.44             Total Bank Financing:   300.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                    769.44
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                       300.00
Total                                                                      1069.44
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 15


﻿Is this a        Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
To increase the low-income rural and peri-urban populations accessing improved water and
sanitation facilities and practicing improved hygiene behaviors, through programmatic
mainstreaming and scaling-up of a nation wide community-driven approach to WSS-MDGs.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
To increase the number of under-served and low income rural and peri-urban populations
accessing improved and sustained water and sanitation services and practicing improved hygiene
behaviors as part of the Borrower's efforts to achieve WSS-MDG Targets, through programmactic
mainstreaming and scaling-up of a nationwide community-driven approach.
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
To increase the number of under-served rural and peri-urban populations accessing sustainable
water supply and sanitation services
3. Project Description
PAMSIMAS currently covers 32 out of 34 provinces in Indonesia. By the end of 2016, the project
will cover 11,833 villages out of the total of 72,999 villages in the country, and will reach a total of
11.6 million people with improved water supply and 7.4 million people with improved sanitation
facilities. The components remained unchanged during project implementation, but their scope was
expanded, and costs and financing increased by additional financing. The project is comprised of the
following components:
Component 1: Community Empowerment, Local and Village Institutional Development (US$ 140.7
m)
Sub-component 1.1: Implementation of CDD processes at community level. Provision of technical
advisory services, recruitment of community facilitators and training for both governmental and non-
governmental organizations, facilitators and participating communities to support the preparation and
implementation of Community Action Plans (CAPs) for universal access, focusing on informed
choice, design and costs of community and school water supply and peri-urban sanitation services,
community and school hygiene behavior change activities, school sanitation facilities and post-
construction management and sustainability. Provision through project financing of technical
advisory services, facilitators and training for participating communities, baseline data collection and
verification of outputs as qualification for the output based grant.
Sub-component 1.2: Development of mechanisms and capacities of provincial, district and sub-
district institutions for quality program management. Provision of technical advisory services and
training to strengthen inter-agency cooperation at the Province and District-level and to develop the
institutional capacity of the units, teams and related personnel involved in the implementation of the
Project, including development and revision of guidelines and manuals, and training materials to
ensure compliance with the relevant rules and procedures, and integration of critical operations for
post-construction management into existing Gol functions.
Page 2 of 15


﻿Subcomponent 1.3: Development of mechanisms and capacities of provincial and district institutions
for scaling up and mainstreaming community driven water supply and sanitation. Provision of
training, through the recruitment of a Training and Development Service team at the national level to
provide support to PPMUs and DPMUs, including strategic planning, preparation and quality
assurance for training and capacity building activities. Implementation of a program of activities
designed to support capacity building and advocacy activities for government and civil society to
improve overall water and sanitation delivery, encourage reallocations in overall local government
budgets in favor of community driven development for water supply and sanitation service delivery
and promote post-construction innovations to enhance sustainability of services.
Subcomponent 1.4: Development of mechanisms and capacities of village government for
maintaining and expanding water supply and sanitation services. Provides capacity building and
advocacy activities for village governments to maintain and expand water and sanitation services,
encourage allocation of village government budgets to promote post-construction activities to
enhance sustainability of PAMSIMAS-supported water supply and sanitation services. The activities
will include: integration of water and sanitation expenditure into the mid-term and annual
development plans of village government, and facilitation to increase village government's
expenditure to maintain and expand the existing water supply facilities.
Component 2: Improving Hygiene and Sanitation Behavior and Services (US$29.43 m)
Sub-component 2.1: Total Sanitation Program. Provision of technical advisory services and training
to support implementation of a phased program of community behavior change, consisting of the
promotion of the community-led total sanitation (CLTS) approach to safe excreta management,
hand-washing and other locally relevant environmental sanitation practices, including water storing
and handling, food hygiene, solid waste and wastewater management and water quality surveillance.
Enhancement of sanitation progress and ODF status monitoring, including the introduction of
incentive mechanisms for sanitation data collection by field sanitation officials at sub-district level,
improvement of monitoring of improved hygiene behaviors and increasing sanitation data use for
program planning.
Sub-component 2.2: Sanitation & Hygiene Marketing Program. Provision of technical advisory
services and training and carrying out of studies to support a sanitation and hygiene marketing
program designed to generate consumer demand for improved sanitation, facilitate the ability of local
markets to respond to this demand, and promote improved hygiene behavior.
Sub-component 2.3: School Hygiene and Sanitation Program. Provision of support to beneficiary
communities for school sanitation and hygiene promotion through the CAP process funded under
Component 3.
Sub-component 2.4: Strengthening Local Sanitation and Hygiene Units. Provision of technical
advisory services and training to strengthen the capacity of units responsible for environmental
health and hygiene promotion in participating provinces and districts to monitor progress in meeting
their water supply and sanitation targets, assess performance of their sanitation and hygiene programs
and evaluate their impact on hygiene behavior.
Component 3: Water Supply and Public Sanitation Infrastructure (US$62.97 m)
Provision of community block grants for participating communities with a menu of technical options
Page 3 of 15


﻿for rural water supply and public sanitation infrastructure. Block grants to support water supply
infrastructure under community action plans include (i) water supply system for new villages; (ii)
scaling up and expansion of existing village water supply systems (iii) optimization of existing
underperforming village water supply systems. These are conducted through the design, construction
and commissioning and operation of water supply infrastructure at the community level based on a
menu technical options, including rapid technical assessments and community water supply and
sanitation situation analysis to determine water demand and system options, informed water system
technology choice, technical surveys and development of the detailed engineering designs,
construction, supervision and quality control, and operations and maintenance training. The
community will be fully responsible for operation and maintenance costs. In addition, each
participating district government will agree to implement a sharing program, fully funded from the
local government budget for a number of additional communities. The block grant per participating
communities is constituted by funding contributions as follows: Central government 70%,
Community 20% (4% cash, 16% in kind) and Village fund 10%, and for sharing program is District
government 70%, Community 20% (4% cash, 16% in kind) and Village fund 10%. This component
will finance the costs for implementation of the physical WSS facilities, school and community
hygiene promotion, capacity building for community management, procurement of materials and
equipment needed for construction, and development of a construction schedule and labor
management plan (including identification of external skilled labor and civil works contractors, if
required, to be contracted and supervised by the community). Technical assistance to determine
water demand and system options, engineering design options, operational and maintenance training,
and water source assessment will be financed under Component 1.1.
Component 4: District and Village Incentive Grants (US$6 m)
Sub-component 4.1: Incentives Grant to Districts. Provision of incentive grants through counterpart
financing to participating districts that meet or exceed predetermined project performance criteria.
Districts that have demonstrated good practice in their support of CDD WSS, have exceeded
implementation targets, and management information system performance will be rewarded with
incentive grants to further expand and sustain the program in their District.
Sub-component 4.2: Incentives Grant to Villages. Provision of incentive grants through counterpart
financing to participating villages that meet or exceed predetermined project performance criteria,
including achievement of component specific objectives of hygiene, community mobilization and
contribution, and water supply and sanitation coverage to support complementary activities in view
of scaling up and expansion of existing water supply and sanitation services. Provision of incentive
grants through counterpart financing from the Rural Water Grant Program to villages on an output
basis where community block grants are pre-financed by district governments.
Sub-component 4.3 Grants for under-performing villages. Provision of grants through counterpart
financing to participating districts in order to improve system and institutional performance of under-
performing villages under strict criteria and selection mechanism.
Sub-component 4.4 Grants to associations of BPSPAMS. Provision of support to district associations
of BPSPAMS to provide: (i) technical assistance for preventive and corrective maintenance of water
supply and sanitation systems operated by BPSPAMS; (ii) facilitation support for major technical
maintenance; (iii) training to systems operators; (iv) promotion of health and hygiene education in
the communities in cooperation with local health agencies; (v) improved management competencies
in BPSPAMS, and (vi) establishment of partnerships with various stakeholders to facilitate service
Page 4 of 15


﻿expansion of BSPAMS. The grant amount will be based on: (a) work program and performance, (b)
geographical spread, (c) ability to facilitate issues to improve service performance, and (d)
partnership with local government or other parties.
Component 5: Implementation Support and Project Management (US$61.53 m)
Sub-component 5.1: Central Management Advisory Consultant to the Central Project Management
Unit. Provision of technical advisory services through the recruitment of Central Management and
Advisory Consultants (CMAC) and individual advisory consultants to provide support, for the
benefit of CPMU and CPIUs, in terms of overall project management, monitoring of implementation
and outcomes, expansion of the national water supply and sanitation program, and technical and
financial reporting, as well as in the fields of sustainable water supply and sanitation, hygiene
promotion, capacity building, institutional strengthening, social and environmental safeguards and
community empowerment, including improved project monitoring using the latest ICT technologies
for (i) data collection, data verification, and data use; (ii) enhanced grievance redressal mechanism to
improve community feedback and response mechanisms. Provision of technical advisory services
and training through a Training Development Services (TDS) team to deliver training for
management and implementation of the project.
Sub-component 5.2: Regional Management Advisory Consultants to the PPMUs and DPMUs.
Provision of technical advisory services and training , through the recruitment 18 Regional Oversight
Management Services (ROMS) teams for the benefit of PPMUs and DPMUs, in terms of day-to-day
project management, technical matters, implementation of community-driven processes, institutional
capacity building social inclusion and environmental safeguards, monitoring of implementation and
sustainability of outcomes through well-established MIS, and technical and financial reporting at the
province, district and village level.
Sub-component 5.3: Independent Project Evaluation. Provision of advisory consultant team for
planning and programming at the national level and a Project Benefit Monitoring and Evaluation
Team to assist the CPMU for baseline and impact evaluation for the project.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The additional financing will cover about 15,000 new villages in 412 districts, with the provision of
further geographic expansion in 33 provinces (DKI Jakarta is not part of PAMSIMAS AF II). As in
the ongoing PAMSIMAS project, the majority of the villages covered by the PAMSIMAS AF II will
be in rural areas where household density in settlement areas is relatively low compared to that in
urban areas. Infrastructure subprojects are small in size, generally comprising of intake structures,
wells, a water reservoir, transmission/distribution pipes, public taps and household connections.
Grants under Component 4 are commonly used to expand or optimize the existing underperforming
water system, and the types of investments are similar to Component 3. The amount of village grants
varies according to the needs, on average would be between USD 27,000 and USD 35,000. As is the
case of the ongoing PAMSIMAS project, average investment size for subprojects is relatively small.
For instance, water reservoirs/tanks USD 3,000; deep wells USD 5,300; shallow wells USD 2,300;
school toilets and hand washing facility up to USD 2,300; transmission and distribution pipes up to
USD 8,500, and public hydrants/taps up to USD 380. Experiences in PAMSIMAS projects showed
that the land area needed for a subproject is relatively small. Average land size needed for
subprojects ranged between 3 - 277 m2. Maximum land size needed for transmission/distribution
Page 5 of 15


﻿pipes is 1,410 m2. The common practice is that the needed land is obtained either through land
donation, permit to use or permit for passage.
The PAMSIMAS AF II target groups are: (i) under-served households; (ii) the poor; and (iii) areas
that do not have access to water supply, have a very limited access to water supply, or have non-
continuous access to water throughout the year, especially during the dry season. As is the case with
PAMSIMAS, it is anticipated that acceptable quality and quantity of water resources (surface and
spring water) are generally available but are located very far from the target groups. In many cases,
water resources are located in mountainous areas and therefore difficult to access. In limited areas, in
few districts in Kalimantan and southern part of Sumatera, peat areas will require treatment using
appropriate technologies. PAMSIMAS AF II will provide technology options for areas with peat and
brackish water.
As is the case with PAMSIMAS, there is a possibility that some villages covered by the AF II project
have IPs communities. Initial screening in reference to the World Bank's IP Study (2010) indicates
the presence of IPs communities in 217 out of 412 districts covered by the PAMSIMAS AF II.
Verification and confirmation on the presence of the IPs communities as defined in OP/BP 4.10 and
their involvement in the targeted villages will have to be carried out during project implementation,
as at this stage the participating villages have not been determined. The list of districts with identified
IPs present is included in the Technical Guidelines for the Environmental and Social Safeguards.
Indonesia legally recognizes the existence of "Masyarakat Hukum Adat" (MHA) which refers to a
group of peoples with distinct characteristics from the rest of the nation, both economically, socially,
culturally and institutionally. This group can be generally categorized as IPs communities. However,
further identification to validate their presence should be done in more detail at the district and
village levels.
Field supervisions from the ongoing PAMSIMAS Project confirmed that where there were IPs/
MHA, in most cases they were project beneficiaries or main beneficiaries and they have been
included in the Project cycle and an IPP was not required. Their needs, aspirations and concerns are
part of the "Rencana Kerja Masyarakat" (RKM-Community Work Plan).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Indira Dharmapatni (GSURR)
Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies    Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental            Yes          This project is a continuation and expansion of the
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                 ongoing PAMSIMAS project and will finance similar
types of water supply and sanitation (WSS) infrastructure,
namely piping system, public tap/standpipe, public
hydrant, tube well/borehole/deep well, protected dug well,
reservoirs, protected spring, rainwater collection, water
intake from rivers, and school sanitation through
community-based approach during planning,
implementation, operation and maintenance stage. The
implementation scheme of this project will be the same as
those of the ongoing PAMSIMAS project. Therefore, it is
expected that the potential environmental and social
Page 6 of 15


﻿impacts will be similar. The impacts will be minor, non-
irreversible, and can be managed locally through proper
design and operations and maintenance.
The likely impacts, as determined from PAMSIMAS
experience, are: (i) construction impacts (covered in
PAMSIMAS Safeguards Guidelines section 2.3).
Specifically, the construction of deep wells or surface
water intakes that are conducted without sufficient
hydrological information to ensure sustainable water
availability and to prevent downstream impact to other
users (Safeguards Guidelines section 2.2); (ii) water
resource quality, requiring the community to check the
water quality in the laboratory prior to finalizing the water
source and during operations (at least once a year, as
stated in the guidelines); (iii) improper sanitation facilities
or poor drainage systems close to the public hydrant could
become the source of contamination. The protection of the
water catchment area is important to ensure continuity of
water supply.
This project will continue to adopt the schemes,
approaches and instruments to address negative
environmental impacts that have been implemented in the
ongoing PAMSIMAS.
Lessons learnt from PAMSIMAS project suggested that
community facilitation for environmental and social
screening, identification of impacts and mitigation
measures has been well regulated in the Safeguards
Guidelines. For this PAMSIMAS II AF, especially to
reach the target of new 15,000 villages in this project, the
ESSF has been reviewed and updated to incorporate
recent regulatory changes about Indonesia's
environmental assessment (UKL UPL preparation and
other permit requirements) and also lesson learnt from the
previous project.
In the long run, the project will lead to a range of positive
environmental, social and health impacts by improving
access to clean water to poor communities. Potential
negative environmental impacts will be minimized by
carrying out a pre-screening approach combined with
field supervision.
The project remains category B for environmental
assessment as per World Bank safeguards policies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           PAMSIMAS Safeguards Technical Guidelines section 2.2
4.04                                 h stipulated that PAMSIMAS will not finance subprojects
Page 7 of 15


﻿that will cause conversion or degradation to natural
habitat and critical natural habitat.
Check list form no: PT 2.7 -01A of the guidelines has
listed all forest areas, conservation and sensitive areas
such as peat land, wet land, mangrove area as part of the
initial identification of environmental impacts for the
proposed project location. If the location of the springs,
natural rivers and wells and transmission pipes is inside or
traversing the protection forest or any other protected or
sensitive areas, with minor or limited impact, section
2.2.5 of the Guidelines will request the work plan from
the community to be evaluated by the local environmental
agency office to get their opinion and approval. If the
impact is significant the sub projects will not be approved
during community work plan development.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No            The Project will not finance activities that involve
significant conversion or degradation of critical forest
areas or natural forest as defined under the policy. The
project is not intended for commercial plantation and
there is no project component to improve the forest
function.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No             The project will not supply any pesticide or support
activities that may lead to significant increase use of
pesticide.
Physical Cultural        No            The project will not undertake any physical construction
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  that will largely affect the physical cultural resources
asset in the water resources area, transmission line,
reservoir area or at sanitation facilities.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes          Initial screening using the World Bank Study on IPs
BP 4.10                                suggested that IPs communities might be present in 217
out of 412 participating districts of PAMSIMAS AF II.
Further screening to confirm the existence of IPs
communities will be carried out during the selection of
participating villages at the Project implementation stage,
and potential impacts will be identified during the
participatory community-self social mapping (IMAS) at
the village level. The DPMU with the assistance of the
DMAC is responsible to carry out the screening at the
district/Kabupaten level with regards the presence of IPs
communities based on the criteria specified in the updated
ESSF. The criteria includes those specified under the OP
4.10 and on the "Masyarakat Hukum Adat" (MHA)
criteria. The updated ESSF also includes an IPPF, the
screening and identification of the presence of IPs
communities, procedures and requirements of preparing
Page 8 of 15


﻿Social Assessment (SA) and IPP. The presence of the IPs
communities including MHA will be further reconfirmed
and validated at the village level by facilitators and the
KKM (Community Working Group).
Once the presence of IPs / MHA communities has been
identified, the next step is to identify potential impacts of
the Project on IPs / MHA communities in participating
villages and surrounding areas regardless of
administrative borders.
In the case that the presence of IPs has been confirmed
and they will be part of or affected by the Project both
directly and indirectly, facilitators together with the LKM,
with the guidance of the PMAC, DMAC, will conduct a
social assessment (SA). This social assessment can be
conducted concurrently with the participatory community-
self social mapping (IMAS) at the village level to better
understand the potential positive and adverse effects of
the Project. The same principle of free, prior and informed
consultation with the affected IPs communities needs to
be followed. The format and contents of the SA is
provided in the Project's social safeguards guidelines.
In the event that the Project affects IPs / MHA
communities both positively and negatively, an IPP will
be developed during the preparation of RKM (Rencana
Kerja Masyarakat) by the community under coordination
of LKM. When IPs / MHA communities are the sole or
the overwhelming majority of direct project beneficiaries,
the elements of an IPP / MHA Plan should be
incorporated in the overall Project design including in the
RKM and a separate IPP is not required. The design and
implementation of sub-projects shall accommodate the
aspirations and needs of IPs / MHA communities. The
format and content of IPP / MHA Plan is provided in the
Project's social safeguards guidelines.
Involuntary Resettlement No          Given the similar nature of subprojects in PAMSIMAS
OP/BP 4.12                           AF II, as is the case with the ongoing PAMSIMAS
project, almost all land needed by subprojects will be
obtained through voluntary donation or permit to use, or
permit for passage. Some subprojects will use village land
with permit to use. As explained above (section 4), land
needed by a subproject will remain relatively small in
size. Processes for land donation in PAMSIMAS have
been documented and will remain so in PAMSIMAS AF
II. The project will facilitate the processing of the legal
Page 9 of 15


﻿status of the donated land and be documented.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           Not applicable
4.37
Projects on International  No        Not applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           Not applicable
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The PAMSIMAS AF II will support a national program across 33 provinces. Environmental
aspects are likely to be associated primarily with the community water supply component
(Component 3) and, to a lesser extent, the district and village development grants (Component 4).
The water supply component will provide grants for communities to plan, build and manage water
supply systems based on a menu of possible technical options. However, since the scale/size of
most subprojects is expected to be small, hence, land needed for a subproject was small on average
and no major adverse environmental and social impacts are expected. In addition, the technical
options will not include options that are known to lead to significant residual environmental
impacts or to place a substantial environmental management responsibility on local communities
during the operational phase. For example, part of the process of site selection for water supply
schemes will include water quality testing to ensure that potential sources meet Gol 'clean water'
standards.
Net environmental benefits are expected to accrue from the environmental sanitation
improvements the Project will bring. The types of positive and negative environmental impacts
that may be associated with the Project interventions include:
Positive Impacts
*      Improved water quantity and quality delivered to customers, with consequent positive
impact upon community health;
*      Improved protection of (spring) water resources and watersheds;
*      Greater coverage (coupled with increased use) of improved latrines, resulting in a
reduction in defecation in filed and streams, thereby improving both soil and water quality and
reducing water-borne disease vectors;
*      Improved drainage by reducing the incidence of broken and leaky pipes, and by
installation of proper wastewater drainage around water points;
*      Improved grey water, black water, and solid waste management at community level and
elementary school - although experience under WSSLIC and PAMSIMAS indicates that
inappropriate solid waste management (SWM) practices continue to be a problem in some
participating communities, leading to pollution of water sources;
*      Communities trained in the use of simple technologies for community-based water quality
monitoring; and
*      Improved community and school awareness of health and environmental issues (which are
ultimately components of the same goals), etc.
Page 10 of 15


﻿Negative Impacts
*      Provision of greatly increased quantities of water generates wastewater (both clean
overflow water and grey water) management more problematic;
*      Increased competition over access to/use of water resources;
*      Broader coverage of water distribution points increases the need for and cost of
monitoring the condition of expanded facilities;
*      Poorly design or improperly built or located sanitation facilities can result in cross
contamination between latrines and shallow water tables, adversely impacting water quality in
shallow wells.
In addition, the district and village development grants component will provide financial
incentives to approximately 25% of participating of districts/villages to scale up and enhance the
sustainability of water supply, sanitation and hygiene assistance provided. The amount of village
grants varies according to the needs, on average would be between USD 27,000 and USD 35,000.
They will not be used for income generating activities that might lead to significant negative
environmental consequences (agro-processing, other household based processing activities).
Although PAMSIMAS covers provinces where IPs communities are living, so far there is no
report on the presence of IPs in the ongoing PAMSIMAS villages, although during supervisions
IPs presence as beneficiaries in very few villages were found. Similar to PAMSIMAS, verification
and confirmation of their presence as defined in OP/BP 4.10 will be done during the AF project
implementation after the selection of villages that are eligible to participate is completed (see
Table OP 4.10).
The project remains category B for environmental asses sment.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Given the same nature of sub-projects and hence, the likely insignificant environmental and social
impacts, the AF II project will adopt the ongoing PAMSIMAS approach in environmental and
social safeguards management. The AF II project will continue in adopting the Environmental and
Social Safeguards Framework of PAMSIMAS (consist of environmental management and to
address Vulnerable and Indigenous Peoples) with some updates, as well as the project
implementation manual, technical guidelines for infrastructure and environmental and social
safeguards guidelines. The ESSF for PAMSIMAS II AF has been reviewed and updated during
appraisal to incorporate recent regulatory changes about Indonesia's environmental assessment
(UKL UPL preparation and other permit requirements) and also lesson learnt from the previous
project. The manual and guidelines cover procedures and forms for environmental screening and
mitigation measures, as well as documentation for voluntary land donation and addressing IPs
communities. In addition, the AF II project will use the "format book" containing of safeguard-
related formats to be filled in by the community groups and other project stakeholders. Facilitators
Page 11 of 15


﻿of PAMSIMAS will continue to guide, facilitate and oversee the screening process, consultation
process for land donation, and the addressing of IPs communities and documentation at the village
level for the AF II project. The project management consultant at the kabupaten (district) and
regional levels carries out regular and backstopping supervision to the communities.
The project implementation manual and technical guidelines for infrastructure activities as well as
environmental and social safeguards guidelines of the PAMSIMAS will be continuously updated
to reflect lessons learned from the implementation of safeguards. The AF II project will continue
to provide special arrangement for facilitators whose responsibilities are located in remote
villages, to be able to provide better facilitation and supervision to the communities. For example,
the transport cost and operational cost is higher than others in normal area. The AF II project will
continuously improve the current documentation (recording and reporting from the sub-project to
project level) of the process and results of environmental issues, measures to manage the impacts
(if any) and of land donation, and of IPs communities. Trainings have been given and will be
regularly given to the project management consultants, facilitators, and community organizations
(LKM). To date, there have been no reports of complaints from communities with respect to
environmental and land issues under PAMSIMAS.
The Borrower has good capacity to plan and implement the measures for environmental
management and for addressing social impacts, including land donation. The project stakeholders
and community groups followed the project implementation manual and technical guidelines for
infrastructure activities as well as environmental and social safeguards guidelines in implementing
the environmental and social safeguards, but in the AF II project, monitoring and supervision from
the facilitators and consultants will have to be strengthened.
The CPMU of the lead executing agency (Ministry of Public Works and Housing) has a stronger
capacity than other line Ministry involved in PAMSIMAS (Ministry of Health and Ministry of
Home Affairs) in implementing environmental and social safeguards. CPMU has a five-year
experience in implementing PAMSIMAS, including in implementing environmental and social
safeguards. It has been assisted by a National Consultant Team (CMAC) and District Consultant
Team (DMAC) which has environmental and social development experts. The CPMU will use the
CMAC with these experts in implementing the AF project.
The AF II project will continue in strengthening the capacity of PAMSIMAS' project management
staff, consultants, facilitators, and communities in environmental and social safeguards. Trainings
on safeguards have been given to communities, consultants, facilitators, and government officers.
The CPMU with the assistance of the national consultant / CMAC carry out regular supervision to
the field. Every 1-2 month period, the national consultants pick a 3% sample of villages to be
supervised. Supervisions include environmental and social safeguard aspects. The local Health
Agency will continue to conduct laboratory based water quality test for every AF II project
villages, as has been the case for the ongoing PAMSIMAS.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main key stakeholders are poor local communities lacking access to sustainable water supply
and with limited facilities and awareness of associated sanitation and hygiene practices.
Participatory consultation is taking place during the formation of the community organization
(LKMs), O&M Body (BPSPAMS), preparation of the sub-project proposals and implementation
as well as in the operation and maintenance of sub-projects. The roles of the facilitators and
Page 12 of 15


﻿communities are important in this consultation process. Environmental screening and mitigation
measures are identified and agreed among the beneficiaries during the preparation of the sub-
project proposals. Similarly, the need and mechanisms for obtaining land are identified and agreed
among the beneficiaries through participatory consultations during the preparation of sub-project
proposals. Facilitation and verification of the process and documentation included in the sub-
project proposals are done by the LKMs and community facilitators.
The RKM is an important instrument/document that includes environmental and social safeguards
impacts screening (including identifying and confirming the presence of IPs community and
potential subproject's impacts), identifying impacts, identifying mitigation measures and
implementation arrangements. RKM also includes among others documentations of meetings,
consultations and infrastructure plan, costs, and land donation letter. RKM is available to public in
the LKM / village offices.
As is the case in PAMSIMAS, District Governments are also important stakeholders in the AF II
project, as recipients that help to implement the Government's policy on Community-based Water
Supply and Environmental Sanitation. The District Government will adopt the PAMSIMAS
approach and safeguards instruments in environmental management and land donation for villages
under their financing. At district level, the technical team consisting of local agencies of Public
Works, Health, Planning, and in some cases, also local agencies of Forestry, Mining, and
Environmental Management play important roles in supervising and controlling environmental
and social safeguards implementation in PAMSIMAS project. The verification and evaluation of
technical team are requirement for villages to continue the implementation of sub project
activities. This institutional arrangement will continue in the AF II project.
The Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) including the Indigenous Peoples
Planning Framework and the project operation manual, technical guidelines and environmental
and social safeguards guidelines of the PAMSIMAS have been uploaded in the project website
(www.PAMSIMAS.org). The project operation manual and technical guidelines are distributed to
all project management staff, consultants, community facilitators, and the LKMs. These
instruments will be adopted by the AF II project and will be continuously updated to incorporate
lessons learned and new development on the ground.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                01-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Sep-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Indonesia                                                  01-Sep-2015
Comments: Disclosure of Draft ESSF on September 1, 2015 on PAMSIMAS website (www.
pamsimas.org).
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                                01-Sep 2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             28-Sep-2015
Page 13 of 15


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Indonesia                                                  01-Sep-2015
Comments: Disclosure of Draft ESSF on September 1, 2015 on PAMSIMAS website (www.
pamsimas.org).
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Page 14 of 15


﻿Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X]  No [  ]   NA[]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: George Soraya
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                  Date: 30-Sep-2015
Manager:
Page 15 of 15


