                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSA21930
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 04-Aug-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               05-Aug-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Lesotho                      Project ID:              P155229
    Project Name:                     Lesotho Transport Infrastructure and Connectivity Project (LTIC) (P155229)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Sevara Melibaeva
    Estimated Appraisal               31-Jul-2017                  Estimated Board          19-Oct-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GTI07                        Financing                Investment Project
                                                                   Instrument:              Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                   Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                              Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           18.30                         Total Bank Financing: 18.30
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                  18.30
    Financing Gap                                                                                                 0.00
    Total                                                                                                        18.30
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The proposed development objectives of the Project are to: (a) improve access to social services and markets in
    targeted rural areas of Lesotho, (b) strengthen road safety management capacity, and (c) in the event of an
    Eligible Emergency, provide immediate and effective response to said Eligible Emergency.
    3. Project Description
    Component 1: Improving the infrastructure access. The first component will include the construction of
    footbridges to improve access of rural population to markets and social services in isolated areas. This will
    provide the settlement inhabitants, children and women in particular, with the needed all-weather pedestrian
    connection over a river or a highland terrain for safely accessing schools, health services and markets. The
    component provisionally proposes to construct 35 footbridges in communities located in areas that are isolated
    and cut off from road access, especially in heavy rain season when river water levels increase. The locations of
    19 footbridges have been identified through a prioritization exercise carried out by the Government. The

                                                    Page 1 of 9
remaining 16 footbridge sites will be selected during implementation in accordance with the criteria set forth in
the Project Operational Manual. Specification of employing locally 100 percent of the unskilled labor force for
the footbridges works, including at least 25 percent of the local female labor force, will be included in bidding
documents and contracts. This component also includes the carrying out of the following studies and services: a)
Consulting services to prepare design and Environmental and Social Impact Assessment of the footbridges
(including the preparation of Resettlement Action Plan if required); b) Consulting services for an assessment
study for introduction of Output and Performance-based Contracting (OPRC) methods in the road sector; c)
Consulting Services for monitoring/supervision of works contracts and development of Project Monitoring and
Management System (PMMS) to ensure transparency and accountability in managing works; and d) Consulting
services to prepare the safeguards documents, including the Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF).

Component 2: Improving the road safety. This component will address road safety in a more integrated manner
in order to achieve the Government's objective to meet the global decade of road safety aim of halving road
deaths between 2010 and 2020. The following activities will be supported under this component:

a) Sub-component 2.1: Support for capacity building and institutional strengthening of the Road Safety
Department (RSD) of the Ministry of Public Works and Transport (MoPWT) and operationalization of the
National Road Safety Council (NRSC). This sub-component will potentially support the following activities: (i)
capacity building of the RSD and NRSC. This support is entirely contingent on the full operationalization of the
latter and completion of road safety reforms initiated under previous World Bank-financed Integrated Transport
Project (ITP); (ii) provision of road safety equipment to the RSD and traffic police; and (iii) deployment of
Road Accident Data Management System (RADMS) to improve the systematic recording and reporting of road
accidents through a companion GPS-enabled smartphone application, which would be used by trained citizens
and traffic police to report accidents in real time; and

b) Sub-component 2.2: Establishment of an integrated record management system for revenue collection,
driver's licensing, and vehicle inspection. This sub-component will include support with the implementation of
the new Integrated Vehicle Registration and Drivers’ Licensing System together with a Traffic Management
Information System – entitled the Lesotho Integrated Transport Information System (LITIS), under which
vehicle inspections will be expected to be contracted out to the private sector. Currently, this responsibility lies
with the MoPWT through its Department of Traffic and Transport. Whilst principally offering improvement to
the management and revenue collection procedures for these services, the new system will also bring road safety
benefits from improved driver licensing and vehicle inspection. As part of this sub-component, consulting
services will be carried out for the Needs Assessment and System Specification for Establishing the LITIS.

Component 3: Institutional strengthening support to the transport sector. This component will include the
necessary project implementation support, including implementation of citizen engagement (CE) mechanisms,
HIV/AIDS and gender-targeted activities, and capacity building support to the Roads Directorate (RD) and
MoPWT:

a) Consulting services to assist the MoPWT in preparation of the National Transport Master Plan (NTMP),
including support for institutionalization of cross-sectoral coordination in the transport planning and decision-
making;
b) Project implementation support to the MoPWT and Roads Directorate;
c) Support in implementation of citizen engagement (CE) mechanisms and HIV/AIDS and gender-targeted
activities. This will include the following, inter alia: (i) behavior change and awareness raising activities on
HIV/AIDS prevention among beneficiary communities to address the limited knowledge on HIV/AIDS and
reduce discrimination and stigma towards HIV affected people; (ii) awareness raising and behavior change
training activities among female and male beneficiaries on GBV prevention, care and reporting mechanisms;


                                                 Page 2 of 9
(iii) establishment of gender-balanced monitoring committees in each beneficiary community to facilitate a
continuous dialogue and collaboration between communities, the RD and the contractor; and (iv) development
of CE and grievance redress mechanisms to allow beneficiaries to report feedback and concerns associated with
the implementation of proposed Project activities and collaborate toward its improvement;
d) Capacity building to the staff of RD, Road Fund, and MoPWT and local industry contractors, including
training on OPRC contract management and pricing methods; and
e) Technical assistance to the road sector in designing and piloting community-based maintenance schemes to
address sustainability of road assets.

Component 4: Contingency Emergency Response Component (CERC) (with an initial zero dollar allocation. In
case this component is activated, it will be financed with IDA funds). This component allows for the possibility
to access resources for eligible expenditures in the event of an Eligible Crisis or Emergency, to provide
immediate and effective response to said Eligible Crisis or Emergency. This component is being proposed for
incorporation into the project with zero allocation, given that Lesotho remains vulnerable to climate change with
rising temperatures and rain deficits. Lesotho has declared a National Emergency as a result of the severe
drought during the 2015/2016 planting season which has affected nearly 40 percent of the population.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The civil works to be financed by the project will be located in selected rural areas so as to facilitate pedestrian
access to social services (schools and hospitals) and markets. The construction of nineteen (19) footbridges with
known locations will be distributed in three regions, as follows: seven (7) bridges in Lowlands, three (3) bridges
in Foothills region, and nine (9) bridges in the Mountain region of Lesotho. These locations are in landscapes
that are disturbed, therefore, habitat losses will be minor due to small nature of works and the work site size
(generally 0.25 ha), and the hand excavation causes will be limited to riparian habitat loss. There are not going
to be any endemic or threatened flora at any of the footbridge sites. Most of the crossings are covered with grass
and shrubs and infested with invasive aliens (acacia dealbata, acacia mearnsii, populus alba). Impacts on aquatic
fauna will depend on water quality impacts. Small quantities of sediment over short periods are unlikely to
cause significant impact, but with proper environmental management measures outlined in the Environmental
and Social Management Plan (ESMP), the impacts will be of low significance. In the case of the Bosca bridge
site on the Tsheljane River, Maluti minnow have been recorded. These are the last records of these species
anywhere other than the eastern highland areas, mainly due to the impact of trout in other catchments. All civil
works will take place at the points where land is already allocated to public non-productive use, and are small in
nature. The potential environmental and social impacts are limited and the screening process will be used to
ensure that any sites that might have a negative impact on protected areas or sensitive ecological habitats are not
approved.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Kisa Mfalila, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
 Majbritt Fiil-Flynn, Social Safeguards Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes              The Project activities related to the construction of
                                                                footbridges will generate construction related
                                                                environmental and social risks that are site-specific,
                                                                reversible, and can be mitigated by known
                                                                measures. The project is, therefore, classified as an
                                                                Environmental Risk Category B. The


                                                  Page 3 of 9
                                             environmental assessment for the project was
                                             carried out at two (2) different levels of analysis as
                                             follows:

                                             (a) The Borrower prepared an ESMP for the
                                             construction of nineteen (19) footbridges, for which
                                             the locations have been identified during
                                             preparation. The ESMP includes the principles and
                                             generic measures that will form part of each works
                                             contract with contractors who will then be required
                                             to prepare Site-Specific Environmental
                                             Management, Health and Safety (EHS) Plans based
                                             on this generic ESMP and World Bank Group
                                             (WBG) General EHS Guidelines. The ESMP for 19
                                             footbridges was cleared by the Bank, consulted
                                             upon, and disclosed in the country on July 27, 2017,
                                             and on the Bank's external website on August 1,
                                             2017;

                                             (b) At the overall project level, the Borrower
                                             prepared an ESMF, which (i) describes the
                                             physical, biological and social baseline
                                             characteristics of the project areas, (ii) defines the
                                             eligibility criteria for the civil works, (iii) describes
                                             procedures for screening and scoping potential
                                             positive and adverse impacts for all proposed
                                             investments, and mitigation and monitoring
                                             measures. The remaining 16 footbridges, for which
                                             precise locations were not known during
                                             preparation, will be covered by the ESMF. The
                                             ESMF was cleared by the Bank, consulted upon,
                                             and disclosed in Lesotho on June 22, 2017, and on
                                             the Bank's external website on June 28, 2017.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes            This policy is triggered on a precautionary basis.
                                             None of the proposed works traverse critical
                                             ecological habitats. The ESMF provides guidance
                                             on screening and mitigation measures to ensure that
                                             physical works from construction of footbridges do
                                             not alter or cause destruction of any critical or
                                             sensitive natural habitats especially wetlands. The
                                             preliminary baseline assessment carried out during
                                             the preparation of the project, confirmed that the
                                             existing wetlands in Lesotho occupy a relatively
                                             small footprint. The Lesotho Roads Directorate
                                             confirmed that engineering methods such as the use
                                             of gabions, etc. are normally applied by contractors
                                             to mitigate against destruction of wetlands during
                                             construction and ensure the effective functioning of
                                             the hydrological system. The environmental risk for
                                             OP 4.04 is therefore minimal and should there be a

                               Page 4 of 9
                                                        chance of encountering a wetland during the
                                                        construction of footbridges, the risk is manageable
                                                        through the application of known mitigation
                                                        measures included in the ESMF.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No             The project will not support civil works located
                                                        within forested areas or plantations and there will
                                                        be no new areas that are forested to be opened up.
                                                        Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No             The project will not involve procurement of
                                                        pesticides or fertilizers and does not have the
                                                        potential to lead to increased use of pesticides or
                                                        fertilizers. Therefore, OP 4.09 is not triggered.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes            OP 4.11 is triggered given the likelihood of chance
                                                        finds in conjunction with earth works and
                                                        excavations, or the encounter of graveyard sites.
                                                        The ESMF includes Chance Find Procedures (CFP)
                                                        as well as measures to screen for and manage
                                                        potential impacts on cultural heritage or property
                                                        that could be affected by neighborhood
                                                        development plans.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No             OP 4.10 is not triggered, as there are no indigenous
                                                        people within the project area of influence.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes            Component 1 will improve infrastructure access
                                                        through construction of footbridges. A RPF has
                                                        been prepared to provide procedures for assessing
                                                        impact, as the project locations for 16 of the
                                                        footbridges to be financed are yet to be identified
                                                        and confirmed. The RPF was consulted upon,
                                                        endorsed by the Ministry of Environment, approved
                                                        by the Bank, and disclosed in Lesotho on June 22,
                                                        2017, and on the Bank's external website on June
                                                        28, 2017, in line with OP/BP 4.12.

                                                        The 19 footbridges, for which locations are known,
                                                        will be constructed at existing river crossing points
                                                        where land is already allocated to public non-
                                                        productive use. In accordance with the screening of
                                                        the 19 footbridge sites carried out as part of the
                                                        ESMP and guided by the RPF, no resettlement
                                                        impacts were identified as per OP4.12. In the event
                                                        that engineering design or location changes during
                                                        project implementation, the sites will be re-
                                                        screened.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No             OP 4.37 is not triggered as the project will not
                                                        finance construction or rehabilitation of dams, nor
                                                        will it rely on the performance of an existing dam
                                                        or a dam under construction, as defined in the
                                                        policy.

                                          Page 5 of 9
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                    TThe project will not affect international
    7.50                                                            waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No               The project will not finance any activities located in
                                                                    any known areas under territorial dispute as defined
                                                                    in OP 7.60. Therefore, the policy is not triggered.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The proposed Project activities include construction of footbridges. The Project has been assigned
    Environmental Category B because the environmental impacts are generic and entail small scale civil works for
    the footbridges. These impacts will be site-specific and can be mitigated by known measures included in the
    ESMF and the ESMP for the footbridges. The key potential environmental impacts of the proposed works
    related to construction of footbridges will largely occur during the construction phase of the project, including
    increase in sediment load into water bodies from soil erosion and runoff due to the dominant mountainous
    terrain in Lesotho, and other nuisances such as noise, dust and air pollution from road works. Other impacts are
    related to health and safety issues due to operation of borrow pits and quarries and earthworks during
    construction. The project will not generate any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts. An
    ESMP has been prepared for the 19 footbridges, for which locations have been identified. The remaining
    footbridges, for which locations are not known, will be covered by the ESMF.

    The resettlement impact, as defined by OP4.12, is expected to be minor and partially temporary related to
    construction activities, given that the footbridges will be constructed at existing river crossing points where land
    is already allocated to public non-productive use. Construction activities may lead to disturbances or reduced
    access to local resources such as water or destruction of cultural heritage sites. These issues have been identified
    in safeguards documents; screening will detect challenges and avoidance/mitigation measures will be employed
    during implementation.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
    project area:
    The influx of workers, although limited due to focus on hiring local, may lead to increased stock theft, social
    conflict, disease transmission and GBV/sexual harassment. These will be mitigated through additional clauses to
    be incorporated in the contracts with regards to WBG General EHS Guidelines, such as Code of Conduct, action
    plans and awareness raising activities and training on GBV and HIV/AIDS prevention for the contractor’s
    workers and community residents, and Code of Conduct and action plan on child labor. In each beneficiary
    community, the RD’s social specialist will work with existing community leaders to establish gender-balanced
    monitoring committees. The committees will serve as a contact point between the communities and the
    contractor to facilitate a friendly and supportive environment between community members and workers,
    provide updates during construction and report to the RD and the MoPWT any issues or complaints associated
    with the implementation of these works.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
    If the proposed designs for footbridges require physical displacement or result in permanent loss of more than
    20 percent of individual household productive lands, alternative designs will be developed to minimize impact.
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
    borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    The Lesotho Roads Directorate (RD) is the implementing agency for the construction of the footbridges. The

                                                      Page 6 of 9
   RD is an entity which currently has a permanent environmental manager who oversees the environmental
   assessments, implementation and monitoring of environmental management plans for all projects implemented
   by the directorate. The designs for footbridges were developed by the Roads Directorate based on standard
   design. The potential environmental and social impacts and proposed mitigation measures, as described in the
   ESMP, will be included in the bidding documents for each contract and will form the basis for preparing the
   Site-Specific EHS Plans by each contractor. The implementation of the EHS Plans and ESMP will be carried out
   by the Environmental and Social Unit of the RD. The site-specific ESMP and EHS Plans will also be prepared
   for the footbridges, for which the locations were not known during preparation, and be guided by the ESMF.

   As part of project preparation, the RD has seconded a social specialist to oversee the proper implementation of
   social safeguards. The RD’s social specialist will mainstream social and gender aspects, and serve as the
   interface between the Roads Directorate, local government officers, the local communities, and the contractors.

   Continuous safeguards training will be provided to the Roads Directorate during implementation of the proposed
   Project with regards to the application of World Bank Safeguard Policies in mitigating risks and impacts, and in
   monitoring implementation of ESMPs. The costs for the implementation of safeguard policy measures have
   been incorporated within the Project. The mitigation measures outlined in the ESMP will be incorporated in the
   bidding documents and each contract for the works. The associated costs for implementation of these measures
   will be included in the overall contract cost financed by the Project.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   Community members within the project areas are considered the key stakeholders for the project. It is the RD’s
   responsibility to ensure that communities are fully informed and have easy access to information that is
   understandable through coordination with local governments and contractors. Communities will be placed in a
   position to participate in any necessary resettlement planning and implementation through ongoing
   consultations. The RD’s social specialist will ensure that the consultation processes are recorded and
   incorporated into the decision-making processes.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            18-Jul-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         01-Aug-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




   Lesotho                                                                       27-Jul-2017
 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Apr-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   28-Jun-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Lesotho                                                                    22-Jun-2017
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



                                                   Page 7 of 9
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes []    No [X]   NA    []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes []    No []    NA    [X]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes []    No [X]   TBD   []
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access     Yes []    No [X]   TBD   []
 to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
 of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a           Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 public place in a form and language that are understandable
 and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been             Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?
 Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [X]   No []    NA    []
 with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
 the project legal documents?


                                                 Page 8 of 9
III. Approval
Task Team Leader(s):        Name:Sevara Melibaeva
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:         Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)   Date: 04-Aug-2017
Practice Manager/Manager:   Name: Benedictus Eijbergen   Date: 05-Aug-2017
                            (PMGR)




                                    Page 9 of 9
