                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA21220
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jan-2017
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Jul-2016, 01-Feb-2017
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kosovo                             Project ID:    P152881
                            Project Name:      KOSOVO: COMPETITIVENESS AND EXPORT READINESS PROJECT
                                               (P152881)
                            Task Team          Jieun Choi,Blerta Qerimi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       23-Jan-2017                 Estimated     05-Apr-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GTC03                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        15.27           Total Bank Financing:     15.27
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                  15.27
                              Total                                                                                        15.27
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To support product certification for export markets, strengthen the capacity of export-oriented firms
                           and reduce the cost of business inspections.
                            3. Project Description
                           a)      The Project aims to strengthen the capacity of selected public institutions in Kosovo that are
                           responsible for national quality infrastructure, support to SMEs and business inspections. The Project
                           focuses on a targeted set of achievable actions selected according to the following criteria: (i) those


                                                                        Page 1 of 8
                         prioritized by the government and identified as key drivers of the competitiveness and jobs agenda
                         by the Bank in consultation with the private sector; and (ii) those selected after in-depth
                         consultations with other donors (such as the EU), to coordinate activities and prevent any duplication.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         b)       The Project will enhance the business environment, namely through supporting the national
                         quality infrastructure, reforming the business inspection system and strengthening export readiness of
                         SMEs. These improvements will lead to increased exports, improved product quality, and reduced
                         cost of business inspections.

                         Component 1: Enhancing Business Environment and Export Readiness (US$ 14.72M)

                         c)       Component 1 will contribute to the government's efforts to enhance the business
                         environment and export readiness of firms by modernizing the National Quality Infrastructure,
                         supporting SMEs with export potential, and reforming the business inspections system. Kosovo is
                         one of the least integrated countries in the region and shows very low export performance. Exports
                         are hampered by lack of adequate National quality Infrastructure, a public good that is cost-
                         prohibitive for any private agent to fund on a systemic level. In addition, there is an urgent need to
                         support SMEs to mitigate information asymmetries and overcome the high fixed cost of export entry
                         by helping them to improve the quality of their products, tap into regional value chains, and improve
                         the relevant skills of their employees. In addition, Kosovo has the highest number of individual
                         inspections among all its neighboring countries, which poses a significant regulatory and compliance
                         burden on businesses. This component will finance the following three subcomponents: (i)
                         improving NQI and supporting its international recognition, (ii) supporting businesses to improve
                         export readiness, and (iii) reforming the business inspections system.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Supporting international recognition of NQI (US$7 million)

                         d)       This subcomponent supports international recognition of the NQI➢❨ identified as a key
                         weakness of the Kosovo NQI. The Project will assist the Kosovo Metrology Agency (KMA) and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Kosovo Accreditation Directorate to become qualified to sign the Mutually Recognized Agreements
                         with International Committee on Weights and Measures and International Laboratory Accreditation
                         Cooperation/Accreditation Forum, and support coordination for the sustainability of an NQI system.
                         These efforts will help existing domestic laboratories (and the entire NQI of Kosovo) to be
                         recognized by high-value markets, such as the EU, and thus reduce firms➢❨ costs of obtaining
                         internationally recognized testing reports and certificates.
                         e)       This subcomponent will finance equipment, capacity building, and IT systems (i) to support
                         Kosovo Metrology Agency to upgrade selected metrology laboratories, train their staff to use the
                         new equipment, and build their capacity to improve traceability and interlaboratory
                         comparisons➢❨ key bottlenecks that Kosovo Metrology Agency must overcome to sign Mutually
                         Recognized Agreements with international organizations; (ii) to support Kosovo Accreditation
                         Directorate with IT systems for data interoperability and exchange, which will ensure relevant
                         agencies can access information about standards and laboratories➢❨ testing results, and ensure that
                         Kosovo Accreditation Directorate➢❨ s accreditation of laboratories is in line with international best
                         practice; and (iii) to improve coordination for the sustainability of an NQI system by supporting the
                         establishment of a National Quality Infrastructure Committee (NQIC) with private sector
                         participation and improving public awareness of international standards and harmonization
                         requirements.



                                                                      Page 2 of 8
                         Subcomponent 1.2: Supporting SMEs to improve export readiness (US$3 million)

                         f)       This subcomponent will support the establishment of matching grants for SMEs with export
Public Disclosure Copy




                         potential, to assist them in acquiring product certifications and standards, upgrading employees➢❨
                         skills, and utilizing business development services (BDS). Matching grants can help address market
                         failures by sharing the cost of making risky investments in these knowledge products.

                         g)       This subcomponent will finance grants for consulting services and capacity building for
                         selected SMEs to (i) fulfill requirements to implement international standards and receive
                         certifications required for export markets, (ii) receive relevant training for employees of individual
                         firms or groups of firms, and (iii) gain access to BDS, such as marketing and management skills. The
                         matching grants scheme will be managed by Kosovo Investment Enterprise Agency (KIESA) under
                         the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI). An independent Selection Committee (SC) comprising of
                         international experts and the private sector will adjudicate applications. The overall design of the
                         matching grants will be governed by the Grants Manual (GM) prepared by KIESA and approved by
                         the WBG, based on an SME needs assessment and available supply capabilities in the market. This
                         subcomponent complements the other components of the Project, such as NQI. While an improved
                         NQI system will reduce firms➢❨ costs in obtaining the internationally recognized certification and
                         testing, the matching grants will support firms➢❨ know-how to meet the requirements of these
                         standards. A complementary TA, financed by State Secretariat for Economics Affairs (SECO), will
                         support KIESA➢❨ s capacity in reaching out to firms to encourage their application for matching
                         grants and in implementing the grants scheme. There has been limited analysis of the impact of the
                         various SME support schemes in Kosovo, however, an evaluation of the matching grants is expected
                         to be conducted under the advisory project.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Reforming business inspections system (US$4.72 million)

                         h)       This subcomponent supports the reduction of the administrative burden on businesses and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         improvements in the efficiency and effectiveness of inspection services. The GoK is expected to
                         finalize a new and overarching Inspection Law and respective bylaws during the period of Project
                         implementation. The WBG is supporting the GoK in developing the new legislation through a
                         complementary advisory project, funded by the State Secretariat for Economics Affairs (SECO). This
                         complementary advisory project will ensure that the WBG is able to fully support implementation of
                         this subcomponent. Meanwhile, the adoption of the Concept Document and Action Plan for
                         inspection reform by the GoK is a condition for Project effectiveness, as it will clearly define the
                         reform direction and bind the GoK to respect the timeline and activities. The GoK included the
                         drafting of the General Inspection Law under the European Reform Agenda, planning to complete
                         the Law by the end of 2017.

                         i)       This Project subcomponent will finance equipment, capacity building, and IT systems to
                         support the effective implementation of the new law by the GoK. Specifically this subcomponent
                         will finance: (i) an electronic inspector data management system, which will enable a unified
                         electronic inspection platform for inspection planning and coordination of inspection visits,
                         document management of inspection reports, internal and external reporting, data mining, internal
                         audit, analysis and risk profiling➢❨ basically all aspects of an inspector's work; (ii) business
                         inspection interoperability data exchange system, which will enable data exchange among key
                         institutions to enable risk-based inspections, better business profiling, and reduced informality; (iii)
                         equipment for inspectors to conduct field analysis, sampling, and evidence gathering; and (iv)


                                                                        Page 3 of 8
                         sustainability of the new institutional set-up and capacity building for inspectors.

                         Component 2: Project implementation and coordination support (US$ 0.553M)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         j)       This component will help to ensure efficient and effective implementation of all Project
                         components. This component will finance goods, services, training and operating costs to support the
                         implementation and coordination support for the project, inter alia by financing: (i) consultants to
                         support project management, coordination, fiduciary and monitoring and evaluation functions of the
                         project; (ii) capacity building for the personnel; and (iii) equipment and operating costs necessary for
                         the implementation of the project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project's geographical scope (including the matching grant scheme) is entire territory of Republic of
                         Kosovo, however, no civil works are envisaged under the project and only insignificant, if any,
                         environmental impacts are expected as the result of the project implementation.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists


                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No             Whereas the project will not finance any physical
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      investment through the matching grant scheme, it might
                                                                     support operating of some heavy polluting industries.
                                                                     Given the potential environmental impact exercised by
                                                                     supported companies and lack of pollution abatement
                                                                     infrastructure (e.g. waste water treatment plants) in
                                                                     Kosovo the Grant Manual prepared by the Client will
                                                                     contain guidelines (including a questionnaire) for
                                                                     determining applicants➢❨ degree of environmental
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     compliance with the Kosovo existing environmental
                                                                     legislation. Only applicants (SMEs) fully complying with
                                                                     the national environmental legislation will be found
                                                                     eligible for the financial support. In addition, the project
                                                                     activities must not aggravate existing impacts to the
                                                                     environment and/or environmental conditions. Priority in
                                                                     financing will be given to companies already conforming
                                                                     to some type of recognized sectoral environmental
                                                                     standard/practice/technique such as ones compiled in EU
                                                                     Best Available Techniques Reference Documents or to a
                                                                     norm such as ISO 14001.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             Project activities are expected to take place in highly
                          4.04                                       urbanized areas. No civil works are planned under the
                                                                     project.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 No activities causing significant change in pest
                                                                     management practices or land use will be supported.



                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                         Physical Cultural        No      No works will be carried out that could impact cultural
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11             heritage resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement No      OP/BP 4.12 is not triggered as any form of involuntary
                         OP/BP 4.12                       land take will be excluded from the Project. Under
                                                          subcomponent 1.2, the Project envisages support to SMEs
                                                          in form of matching grants to strengthen their ability to
                                                          meet required export standards and business development
                                                          potential. Applications that may cause involuntary
                                                          displacement of existing occupants or economic users of
                                                          any plot of land, regardless of its current ownership, or
                                                          loss of or damage to others' assets will be excluded from
                                                          applying for grant support. Any land or property
                                                          acquisition must take place on a willing buyer willing
                                                          seller basis.

                                                          Remodeling of PES offices under subcomponent 2.2
                                                          might cause temporary disruption of public employment
                                                          offices services, but there will be no need for permanent
                                                          displacement of any kind. To manage the risk of induced
                                                          land acquisition of refurbishment, the Project Operational
                                                          Manual will specify refurbishment restrictions and
                                                          requirements (e.g., proof of ownership, construction/use
                                                          permits, etc.).
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                         4.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Projects on International   No
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                         Projects in Disputed        No   Administrative and implementation issues related to OP
                         Areas OP/BP 7.60                 7.50 Projects in Disputed Areas, might occur due to the
                                                          fact that Republic of Kosovo is not recognized as an
                                                          independent state by its immediate neighbor, Republic of
                                                          Serbia. In addition, the location of sub-projects (sub-
                                                          component 1.2) is still unknown and may be located in the
                                                          Northern Kosovo which also does not recognize National
                                                          Government of Kosovo, where there is limited
                                                          accessibility for the representatives of the Republic of
                                                          Kosovo, as well as the WB team. However, LEGEC
                                                          concluded that, based on several agreements and accords
                                                          signed in 2012 and 2013, this policy would not apply. The
                                                          MTI is interested to include this region and will make
                                                          sure the documents will be translated into three languages
                                                          to address the language barrier. Nevertheless, risks
                                                          associated with problem implementation because of the
                                                          fact that the Bank team and PCU have limited access to
                                                          North of Kosovo need to be recognized and addressed.


                                                           Page 5 of 8
                                                                       However this area remains a political issue that converts
                                                                       into practical barriers such as property ownership for
                                                                       citizens living there.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              TThe project is classified as C category as is predominantly focused on enhancing business
                              environment and opportunities through reforming of national services (inspection), provision of
                              matching grants for soft services such as acquisition of certification and standards and trainings for
                              employees, purchase of equipment for development of instruments and systems, provision of
                              training and other capacity building activities and similar. No construction works will be financed
                              under the project, including rehabilitation or refurbishment. There may be equipment purchase, but
                              no civil works related to their installation will take place.

                              The project will potentially support all Kosovo exporting sectors through matching grant scheme
                              (except mining and coal processing), priority given to SMEs from wood processing and textile
                              sector which are, in general, very polluting industries especially in areas with lack of adequate
                              pollution abatement infrastructure. E.g. production and processing of textiles is very polluting to
                              water. In the same time there is practically none water treatment infrastructure in Kosovo so it is
                              very likely that companies in that sector are releasing toxic waste waters directly to the natural
                              recipients. Therefore, the grants applicants (SMEs) must provide sufficient proof of compliance
                              with environmental regulation of Kosovo to be found eligible for financing under the scheme. In
                              addition, only activities that will not aggravate existing impacts to the environment and/or
                              environmental conditions will be supported. In order to further support good environmental
                              practices the project will give priority in financing to companies already conforming to some type
                              of recognized sectoral environmental standards/practices/techniques such as ones compiled in EU
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Best Available Techniques Reference Documents or to a norm such as ISO 14001. Matching
                              grants applications with activities that might cause significant change in pest management
                              practices or land use will not be supported. Applications that may cause involuntary displacement
                              of existing occupants or economic users of any plot of land, regardless of its current ownership, or
                              loss of or damage to other assets will be excluded from applying for grant support.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              Since no civil works will take place under the project none (or insignificant) environmental
                              impacts are expected from the project implementation
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              The Grant Manual (GM) will, within the environmental compliance guidelines, set eligibility
                              requirements for the grant funds final users (applicants) regarding (i) confirmation of compliance
                              with the Kosovo existing environmental legislation and (ii) ensuring thesub-project activities will
                              not aggravate existing impacts and/or environmental conditions. Priority in financing will be given
                              to companies already conforming to some type of recognized sectoral environmental standard/

                                                                         Page 6 of 8
                              techniques/practices such as EU Best Available Techniques Reference Documents or norm such as
                              ISO 14001 which will also be reflected in the GM. For that purpose a questionnaire will be
                              developed by the Client, as an integral part of the guidelines, and used as a part of the Application
Public Disclosure Copy




                              package. A complete proof of compliance will be obtained prior to the application approval. The
                              questionnaire will be based on existing Kosovo environmental regulation. MTI will be responsible
                              for the development of the questionnaire and guidelines, conformation of compliance and
                              activities evaluation for which it can gain assistance form the Ministry of Environment and Spatial
                              Planning. The GM is a subject of Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists approval.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              Key stakeholder for ensuring environmental compliance and adherence to World Bank safeguards
                              requirements is Ministry of Trade and Industry.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jieun Choi,Blerta Qerimi
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nina Chee (SA)                                    Date: 01-Feb-2017



                                                                         Page 7 of 8
                         Practice Manager/   Name: John L. Nasir (PMGR)   Date: 01-Feb-2017
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            Page 8 of 8
