                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC19703

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:              Nicaragua                        Project ID:      P161359
                            Project Name:         Improving Quality and Efficiency of Public Sector Audit
                            Team Leader(s):       Lourdes Consuelo Linares Loza
                            Estimated Date        15-Nov-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:        GGO22                            Lending          IPF
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.497                             Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                              Amount
                              Supreme Audit Institutions Capacity Development Fund                                            0.497
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve the quality and efficiency of public sector audit,
                           thereby strengthening external oversight over the management of public resources in Nicaragua.
                           C. Project Description
                           Description of the Proposed Project

                           22.     The Project consists of the following parts:

                           a)       Development and implementation of a training strategy for CGR➢❨ s auditors and staff from
                           the internal audit units (an operational arm of the CGR) on the deployment of the updated auditing
                           standards and audit manual. Considering that the CGR is currently working on the design of the on-
                           line training modules on the updated NAGUN based on ISSAIs and related audit manual, which
                           would be available in their institutional training platform, the Project would finance consulting
                           services, training materials and logistics, and travel costs for:

                           i)      a train-the-trainers course led by an international expert (certified ISSAI facilitator) to guide
                           the on-line learning and deliver face-to-face sessions to train 30 CGRs auditors (future trainers on
                           ISSAIs);
                         ii)     deployment of the on-line training and face-to-face sessions in different regions to train
                         nearly 1,000 CGR auditors and internal auditors working in public sector entities in the application of
                         the new standards ; and,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         iii)    provision of specialized training to a selected group of CGR officials on performance audit
                         through a knowledge exchange arrangement with the Mexican Auditoria Superior de la Federacion
                         (ASF) in the framework of an existing OLACEF➢❨ s Internship Program on Performance Audit.

                         b)       Adaptation and implementation of the Integrated Governmental Audit System (SIAG) .
                         Building on the existing cooperation arrangements among the SAIs in the region, through OCCEFS,
                         the Nicaragua CGR would have access and the right to adapt and use an integrated government audit
                         system currently used by other SAI in the region. To this end, the Nicaragua CGR intends to amend
                         an existing cooperation agreement with the Guatemala CGR to specifically set out the arrangements
                         to use SIAG. The system would support the planning, conducting, monitoring and supervision of the
                         audit work in the public sector, and help in the assignment of auditors. It would also facilitate the
                         recording and maintenance of the documentation gathered during the audit process and which would
                         support the key findings, results and conclusions of the audit process, including the audit reports.
                         These improvements would all be aligned to the new audit standards and manuals. The
                         implementation of the SIAG will not only create the conditions for compliance with the new
                         standards, but would also allow for a more efficient audit process, which is currently manual and thus
                         demands the use of more resources and time. The adaptation and implementation of the SIAG would
                         require the financing of consulting services, goods and travel costs for CGR officials, as well as
                         officials from partner SAIs to facilitate the knowledge exchange. Specific activities include:

                         i)      Agree and sign the amendment to the Cooperation Agreement with the Guatemala CGR for
                         the use and adaptation of the SIAG
                         ii)     Review of the system features and functionalities to identify and define adjustments needed
                         to respond to CGR needs, including the preparation of a comprehensive work plan to complete the
                         adaptation.
                         iii)    Adaptation of existing functionalities, and development of any new additions to SIAG up to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the implementation and readiness for deployment and operation.
                         iv)     Training of audit supervisors and ➢❨ encargados➢❨ on the use of the system.
                         v)      Performance of two pilot audits (financial and compliance) using SIAG and the updated
                         NAGUN based on ISSAIs. These activities would allow CGR to: i) verify the operation of the
                         system, and ii) verify overall compliance with ISSAIs, including quality arrangements. Quality
                         control of the pilot audits would be carried out with the support of an external reviewer potentially
                         from a partner SAI.

                         c)       Design and implementation of a quality control system in compliance with ISSAI No. 40.
                         Delivering high quality audits is a critical factor that may affect the SAI➢❨ s reputation and
                         credibility and ultimately, its ability to fulfill its mandate. The Nicaragua SAI is therefore committed,
                         as part of its strategy, to establish and maintain a quality control system relevant to conducting audits
                         of a high quality in the public sector environment.An effective quality control system would help
                         CGR to have reasonable assurance that i) its staff comply with professional standards, and any legal
                         or regulatory requirement, including relevant ethical requirements (e.g. integrity, independence,
                         objectivity and competence); and ii) the reports issued by the CGR are appropriate to the
                         circumstances. To support this, the Project would finance consulting services, workshops and travel
                         costs for:
                           i)       The design of a quality control system which is appropriate to its mandate and circumstances
                           and which responds to their risks of quality, including the definition and implementation of the
                           policies and procedures built into the performance of the CGR and the production of the CGR➢❨ s
Public Disclosure Copy




                           reports.
                           ii)      Update the Code of Ethics in accordance with ISSAI 30 and training of nearly 250 auditors.
                           iii)     Pilot and assess the operation of the quality control system in three financial audit
                           engagements through an independent international expert.

                           iv)     Project management, M&E and audit. The CGR will secure the financing of key positions
                           within the Unidad de Apoyo Administrativo (UAA/CGR) required for project implementation. Under
                           such arrangements the Grant would i) partially finance a Procurement Specialist or a Project
                           Coordinator within the CGR➢❨ s Unidad de Apoyo Administrativo (UAA/CGR) that would support
                           and facilitate the interaction among different units within CGR, and the interaction with partner
                           SAIs, as well as overall project monitoring; and ii) single project financial audit.

                           NOTE. Supervision resources have been allocated in the form of a BETF.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
                           Projects on International           No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP    No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Lourdes Consuelo Linares Loza
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                                           Date: 15-Aug-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Daniel J. Boyce (PMGR)                                       Date: 18-Aug-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
