The World Bank                                                                          RESTRUCTURING ISDS
Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)




                        Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                     Restructuring Stage


        Restructuring Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Mar-2017| Report No: ISDSR21522




                         Regional Vice President:    Makhtar Diop
                                Country Director:    Diarietou Gaye
                  Senior Global Practice Director:   Riccardo Puliti
                     Practice Manager/Manager:       Lucio Monari
                              Task Team Leader:      Raihan Elahi
           The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)




    Note to Task Teams: The following sections are system generated and can only be edited online in the Portal.

.

I. BASIC INFORMATION

1. BASIC PROJECT DATA

Project ID                                                     Project Name
P119737                                                        Electricity Sector Development Project
Task Team Leader(s)                                            Country
Raihan Elahi                                                   Uganda
Approval Date                                                  Environmental Category
30-Jun-2011                                                    Full Assessment (A)
Managing Unit                                                  Is this a Repeater project?
GEE01

PROJECT FINANCING DATA (IN USD MILLION)

Total Project Cost                                             Total Financing
153,200,000.00                                                 153,200,000.00
Financing Gap
    0.00

Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
Counterpart Funding                                                                                  33,200,000.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                                         120,000,000.00
Total                                                                                               153,200,000.00

2. PROJECT INFORMATION
           The World Bank                                                                            RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)



    Current Project Development Objective
    The project development objective is to improve the reliability of and increase the access to electricity supply in the
    southwestregion of Uganda



.



1. PROJECT DESCRIPTION

The project financed (i) the ongoing construction of the 137km 220 kV Kawanda-Masaka transmission line; (ii) the
ongoing peri-urban electrification along the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line corridor; (iii) the ongoing Street and
Market lighting in Masaka; (iv) Review of the power sector reforms; (v) power sector information center; (vi) the
completed preparatory studies for Lira-Gulu-Nebbi-Arua transmission line being financed from World Bank financed Grid
Expansion and Reinforcement Project (GERP). The project closing date was February 28, 2017 but has since been
extended by twelve months to February 28, 2018 to facilitate completion of ongoing project activities.
Under the proposed restructuring, the new components will include: (i) two Bujagali 220kV transmission line bays to
transform the transmission network between Bujagali and South Western region of Uganda from 132kV voltage level to
220 kV; (ii) to upgrade the transmission network’s Supervisory, Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) system to decrease
outages due to easier /flexible monitoring and control of the transmission network; (iii) design review for the proposed
220 kV Hoima-Kinyara transmission line and upgrade of Nkenda substation; and (iv) social risk management component
covering gender based violence prevention and child protection across energy sector infrastructure projects financed by
the World Bank.

.

3. PROJECT LOCATION AND SALIENT PHYSICAL CHARACTERISTICS RELEVANT TO THE SAFEGUARD ANALYSIS (IF
   KNOWN)
New activities proposed under the project restructuration include: (i) installation of two 220kV transmission
line bays at Bujagali substation (Central region); (ii) upgrade of the transmission grid supervisory control and
data acquisition (SCADA) system ; and (iii) a social safeguards risk management component to strengthen the
mitigation social risks including gender based violence (GBV) and violence against children (VAC)) across the
entire WB energy sector portfolio. All new activites that involve construction works are site specific and
confined to existing and known locations owned by UETCL and hence their Construction Contracts shall
include standard clauses to cover basic health and safety aspects as well as waste management. Construction
of the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line, the peri-urban rural electrification activities, and the Masaka
street and market lighting will continue as per the existing designs and safeguards management plans.



4. ENVIRONMENTAL AND SOCIAL SAFEGUARDS SPECIALISTS ON THE TEAM

Name                                                            Unit
       The World Bank                                                                       RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)



Herbert Oule                                              GEN01
Boyenge Isasi Dieng                                       GSU07
SAFEGUARD_TABLE
5. SAFEGUARD POLICIES TRIGGERED


 Safeguard Policies                        Triggered         Explanation

                                                             The policy is still triggered under the proposed
                                                             project restructuring because of the adverse
                                                             impact on various habitats (forests and wetlands)
                                                             and on affected populations (health/safety, land
                                                             acquisition, and impacts on livelihood). An ESIA
                                                             was prepared for the Kawanda – Masaka
                                                             transmission line (Component A of the Project).
                                                             This ESIA was disclosed in-country on December
                                                             13, 2010 and at infoshop on November 30, 2010.

                                                             Component B involved construction to the peri-
                                                             urban medium voltage grid extension lines along
                                                             the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line route and
                                                             Street and Market lighting activities in Masaka
                                                             municipality. The exact location of these works
                                                             was not known at the time of project appraisal.
Environmental Assessment (OP) (BP 4.01) Yes                  Subsequent to project approval, engineering
                                                             designs were prepared and the exact sites for
                                                             these activities were determined. ESMPs have
                                                             since been prepared and are currently under
                                                             review by the Bank.

                                                             The proposed restructuring includes two activities
                                                             that will be carried out at existing and known
                                                             locations owned by UETCL with minimal
                                                             environmental and social impacts.

                                                             In addition, the proposed restructuring includes a
                                                             new Social Risk Management component to
                                                             address risks associated with influx of labor into
                                                             local communities. These include, but are not
                                                             limited to Gender Based Violence (GBV) and
                                                             Violence Against Children (VAC).
                                                             The Natural Habitats policy is triggered, since
                                                             Kawanda-Masaka transmission line passes through
Natural Habitats (OP) (BP 4.04)            Yes               five Central Forest Reserves, one Local Forest
                                                             Reserve and through wetlands.
       The World Bank                                                                      RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)



                                                          A biodiversity survey was prepared for the
                                                          Kawanda-Masaka transmission line as part of the
                                                          2010 ESIA and as far as is known, the affected
                                                          natural habitats are not critical habitats as defined
                                                          under OP4.04. The implementing agency through
                                                          the National Forestry Authority have undertaken
                                                          restoration of 210ha of affected forest reserves
                                                          along the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line
                                                          corridor. This is deemed a satisfactory mitigation
                                                          measure against the 35ha that was cut down.

                                                          No natural habitats are expected to be impacted
                                                          under the proposed additional activities.
                                                          This is triggered since the Kawanda –Masaka
                                                          transmission line financed under the project
                                                          passes through some forest reserves. Refer to
Forests (OP) (BP 4.36)                     Yes            OP4.04 above.

                                                          No forests are expected to be impacted under the
                                                          proposed additional activities.

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                  No             Pest management will not be used for this project

                                                          Archeological surveys were conducted for the
                                                          ongoing project activities to determine whether
                                                          physical and cultural resources (PCRs) such as
                                                          sacred sites, graveyards, and archeological
                                                          remains were present at project sites, and
Physical Cultural Resources (OP) (BP 4.11) Yes
                                                          accordingly a      PCR management plan was
                                                          prepared. During construction for the proposed
                                                          additional activities, the contractor will be
                                                          required to apply "Chance Find Procedures" while
                                                          undertaking any excavation works.
                                                          This project does not impact Indigenous People
Indigenous Peoples (OP) (BP 4.10)          No             (IP) since it is being implemented in areas where
                                                          there are no IPs.
                                                          The project triggered OP 4.12 and site specific
                                                          Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) have been
                                                          prepared to mitigate project-associated impacts.
                                                          The RAP for Kawanda – Masaka transmission line
                                                          (Component A) was disclosed in country on
Involuntary Resettlement (OP) (BP 4.12)    Yes
                                                          December 03, 2010 and at infoshop on December
                                                          06, 2010 and is currently being implemented by
                                                          the client.

                                                          No resettlement impacts are expected under the
       The World Bank                                                                                 RESTRUCTURING ISDS
       Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)



                                                                    proposed additional activities.




Safety of Dams (OP) (BP 4.37)                No                     No dams will be constructed under the project.


Projects on International Waterways (OP)                            The project will not be implemented on
                                             No
(BP 7.50)                                                           international waters.


                                                                    The project will not be implemented in disputed
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP) (BP 7.60)    No
                                                                    areas.

KEY_POLICY_TABLE
II. KEY SAFEGUARD POLICY ISSUES AND THEIR MANAGEMENT

 A. SUMMARY OF KEY SAFEGUARD ISSUES


 1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and describe any
   potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.
   The project was assigned an EA Category A because of the associated large land-take and involuntary resettlement.
   For activities under the proposed restructuring, the main safeguard issues relate to the health and safety (H&S) of
   both the workers and the general public; management of waste; establishment and operation of equipment storage
   yards; and work-force management. Construction of the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line affected 2,474
   households (13, 596 PAPs) whereas the implementation of the proposed additional activities will have no PAPs since
   they are all on existing and known sites owned by UETCL. There are no known irreversible impacts associated with
   the restructuring components.



 2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project area.
   There are no potential indirect or long-term impacts that have been identified for activities proposed under the
   restructured project, as construction under the proposed activities will be within existing and known sites owned by
   UETCL.


 3. Describe any potential alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
   Apart from the do-nothing option, there are no other viable alternatives to the proposed additional components
   that are aimed at enhancing the ability of the current project to meet and exceed it intended objective, with
   acceptable environmental and social impacts. The social management component will focus on the prevention of
   gender based violence (GBV) and violence against children (VAC). The investments components are confined to
   existing and known sites already owned by UETCL and are intended to help the ongoing project activities to meet
   and exceed their intended objectives of providing secure and reliable power supply in South West Uganda.
           The World Bank                                                                           RESTRUCTURING ISDS
           Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)



   4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of borrower
    capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    For the Kawanda-Masaka transmission line, the borrower prepared and disclosed ESIAs, RAPs and an RPF to guide
    the management of environmental and social issues arising out of all project activities, as described in table for
    triggered Safeguards Policies above. An ESMP was prepared for the Peri-Urban rural electrification along Kawanda-
    Masaka transmission line corridor. For the proposed activities under the project, construction contracts will include
    standard clauses to cover basic health and safety aspects and waste management.The borrower’s capacity to
    implement measures outlined in ESIAs and RAPs has been mixed and marred with systemic issues, particularly in
    terms of compensation payments and acquisition of right of ways. This could be related to inadequate human
    resource capacity of the implementation agency, for example, there is only one Officer (Environmental) who is
    assigned to handle both social and environmental safeguards issues under the project. As a result of this, the social
    aspects of the project have not been addressed satisfactorily while the environmental aspects have been
    satisfactorily addressed. To address this issue, the Bank recommended that a dedicated Social Development
    Specialist be recruited to focus on the social safeguards aspects of the project and the client has started the
    recruitment process.


   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanism for consultation and disclosure on safeguard policies,
    with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The key stakeholders in this project include the: (i) Uganda Electricity Transmission Company (UETCL); (ii) Ministry
    of Energy and Mineral Development (MEMD); (iii) National Environment Management Authority (NEMA); (iv)
    Ministry of Gender, Labour and Social Development; (v) Umeme; and (vi) Electricity Regulatory Authority (ERA).
    Other key stakeholder include the local authorities of Mbarara, Masaka, Mpigi, Wakiso, non-governmental
    organizations ( NGOs), and communities within the project area. Through the proposed social risk management
    component, measures will be put in place to provide awareness to local communities about the potential impacts of
    labor influx in their areas and measures to mitigate such impacts. Training and sensitization of workers of key
    stakeholders and construction workers on gender based violence prevention and child protection shall also be
    provided.


 DISCLOSURE_TABLE
 B. DISCLOSURE REQUIREMENTS
ENV_TABLE
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other

Date of receipt by the Bank                                   Date of submission for disclosure
03-Dec-2010                                                   03-Dec-2010
For Category ‘A’ projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
06-Jun-2011
“In country? Disclosure

 Country                                                        Date of Disclosure
 Uganda                                                         13-Jan-2011
                         The World Bank                                                                         RESTRUCTURING ISDS
                         Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)



            Comments




RESETTLE_TA BLE




Resettlement Action Plan/Framework Policy Process

Date of receipt by the Bank                                                 Date of submission for disclosure
09-Dec-2010                                                                 10-Dec-2010
“In country? Disclosure

          Country                                                            Date of Disclosure
          Uganda                                                             13-Dec-2010
           Comments


        COMPLIANCE_TABLE
                  C.   COMPLIANCE MONITORING INDICATORS AT THE CORPORATE LEVEL

EA_TABLE
 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) report?                                              Yes

            If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Manager (PM) review
                                                                                                                Yes
            and approve the EA report?

            Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated in the
                                                                                                                Yes
            credit/loan?



            NH_TABLE
            OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
             Would the project result in any significant conversion or degradation of critical
                                                                                                                No
             natural habitats?

             If the project would result in significant conversion or degradation of other
             (non-critical) natural habitats, does the project include mitigation measures                      NA
             acceptable to the Bank?



            PCR_TABLE
            OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
            Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural property?                                 Yes
        The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
        Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)



Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the potential adverse
                                                                                   Yes
impacts on cultural property?



IR_TABLE
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy             framework/process
                                                                                   Yes
framework (as appropriate) been prepared?

If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Practice
                                                                                   Yes
Manager review the plan?



FO_TABLE
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues and constraints
                                                                                   Yes
been carried out?

Does the project design include satisfactory measures to overcome these
                                                                                   Yes
constraints?

Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, does it include
                                                                                   No
provisions for certification system?



PDI_TABLE
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the World Bank for
                                                                                   Yes
disclosure?

Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public place in a form
and language that are understandable and accessible to project-affected groups     Yes
and local NGOs?



ALL_TABLE
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional responsibilities been
                                                                                   Yes
prepared for the implementation of measures related to safeguard policies?

Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included in the project
                                                                                   Yes
cost?

Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project include the
                                                                                   Yes
monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures related to safeguard policies?

Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed with the                 Yes
          The World Bank                                                             RESTRUCTURING ISDS
          Electricity Sector Development Project (P119737)



borrower and the same been adequately reflected in the project legal
documents?




III. APPROVALS


                                           Raihan Elahi
    Task Team Leader(s)
                                           Mbuso Gwafila

    Approved By

    Safeguards Advisor                      Nathalie S. Munzberg       08-May-2017

    Practice Manager/Manager                Sudeshna Ghosh Banerjee    09-May-2017

.
