INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA16738
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Feb-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Malawi                     Project ID:  P154185
Project Name: Malawi Education Sector Improvement Project (MESIP) (P154185)
Task Team       Soren Nellemann
Leader(s):
Estimated       20-Feb-2016                Estimated    01-Jul-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDO1                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Primary education (90%), Public administration- Education (10%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     44.90             Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                  44.90
Total                                                                      44.90
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The overall Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the equity and quality of primary
education service delivery in early grade levels with an emphasis on improved accountability and
functioning at the school level.
3. Project Description
The project consists of three components to support enhanced quality and equity of education service
Page 1 of 8


﻿delivery through improved accountability and system functioning at the school level. A fourth
component will support project implementation in Malawi's fragile implementation environment
characterized by weak capacity and fiduciary risks made apparent by the recent 'Cashgate' scandal.
O
U         Component 1: Performance-Based School Improvement Grants for Improving Promotion and
Retention (ESIP II reform theme 3: Learner Retention). The objective of the component is to pilot
the feasibility of improving promotion rates through addressing the inefficiencies of repetition and
dropout in the primary education system through performance based funding and incentives. There
will be about 800 schools in the pilot which will all receive a base grant for improving learning
outcomes. Half of the schools (about 400) will be eligible for the performance grant based on the
level of improving promotion rates. The schools will be expected to use the resources to develop and
implement strategies to reduce repetition and dropout. They are also be expected to use the resources
to address girl dropout in Standards 6 to 8. This design aims to test whether providing incentives has
an impact on performance or whether it is only the provision of adequate resources that matters. Thus
reducing both repetition and dropout in Standards 1-4 will lead to better retention and promotion
rates. This will lead to improved learning and teaching conditions resulting in higher achievement
and attainment in the long run thus enhancing learning outcomes.
Component 2: Improving Equity for the Most Disadvantaged, including Girls. The component will
support ESIP II theme 6 (Education Access and Infrastructure) and reform theme 3 (Learner
Retention) by helping reducing PCR ratios in the 8 most disadvantaged districts (Kasungu, Dedza,
Lilongwe Rural West, Mzimba South, Machinga, Chikwawa, Thyolo and Mangochi districts) and
reducing teaching 'under the sun' thus improving the learning environment. It will also focus on
improving the retention of teenage girls especially in standards 6-8 by improving availability to
sanitary facilities an issue identified as a constraint for girls. Currently, it is estimated that Malawi
needs some 27,000 new classrooms, including the 350 schools destroyed during the January 2015
flood. The component will support construction of 500 classrooms, 300 latrine blocks, focusing
mainly to girl's sanitation needs and some 150 water points. All new school facilities will be
constructed to ensure proper access for children with physical disabilities. An estimated 150
communities/local artisans will be trained and their skills upgraded related to classroom construction,
building and management.
Component 3: Improving Learning Outcomes, Accountability and Cost-Effectiveness at School
a        Level: This component will pilot cost-effective interventions related to ESIP-II reform themes 1, 2
and 3 by building on existing experiences of other donors and CSO/NGOs. The component will
support 3 activities: (1) School Leadership Program to change School level management and Teacher
Behaviors; (2) School Data Collection and Usage, and (3) Improving Community Involvement in
Schools, especially targeting retention of teenage girls.
Component 4: Project Management, and Sector Program Support and Coordination. This component
will finance activities, core consultant staff, technical assistance and recurrent costs related to the
project management and sector program facilitation and coordination, including communication,
monitoring and evaluation. It will also fund activities need to verify or monitor variable part progress
as well a system wide development initiatives. As it will build upon the Common Financing
Mechanism it will be very strategic as it will help lay the foundation for wider sector support
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Malawi Education Sector Improvement Project (MESIP) will cover public primary schools
Page 2 of 8


﻿throughout Malawi. The specific locations, sizes of pieces of lands needed for classroom
construction are not known at this stage. Some of the information on the above aspects will be
gathered during the ongoing project preparation phases. Classroom construction will be done at
existing primary schools. Some schools will potentially be located in areas with high population
O
U         density, which have implications for involuntary resettlement, as more land would be required for
expansion of the existing facilities.
O
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
a        Boyenge Isasi Dieng (GSUO1)
Ruma Tavorath (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The environmental footprint of the project is expected to
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                be small, since the project will finance rehabilitation and
construction of new classrooms in or adjacent to existing
school facilities. There is scope for environmental
enhancements, where needed and possible, such as
improvement of water supply and sanitation facilities,
ventilation and lighting of classrooms and accessibility
and safety. The project is classified as Category B.
Construction related impacts will need to be addressed
including waste and rubble management, mitigation of
noise and dust, and occupational safety of workers. Safety
of children and teachers during civil works needs to be
well managed (barricades, fencing, lighting, signage)
along with lack of disruption of regular school activities.
In congested areas, construction activities will need to
ensure that there is minimal disruption to neighboring
communities with adequate safety precautions and
Q)                                             signage. In case, vegetation/trees have to be cut,
replacement tree planning in appropriate locations is
recommended, if possible. The Borrower has prepared
an Environmental and Social Management Framework to
identify and detail the potential impacts resulting from
project activities and the mitigation measures to be
implemented and procedures to be followed. TheESMF
has been consulted with stakeholders, and disclosed
incountry and in Infoshop
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           Project activities are not expected to affect Natural
4.04                                 Habitats since the project will be implemented in or
adjacent to existing schools. New land acquisitions for
expansion will not be in close proximity to natural or
critical habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Project activities will not affect forests or plantations, as
the scale of land required, if at all, will be minimal.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project activities will not support or fund
procurement of pesticides, or its usage.
Page 3 of 8


﻿Physical Cultural       No           Since the project activities are within existing structures,
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 the probability of known physical cultural resources
(PCR) may be minimal. In case of culturally sensitive
PCRs such as graves, shrines, etc, appropriate measures
will be taken to prevent or mitigate damage or impact.
These measures will be detailed in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
BP 4. 10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The construction of new classrooms might require
OP/BP 4.12                           additional land acquisitions. The acquisition of land may
generate social and economic losses; affect access to land
or assets to some people.
The Resettlement Policy Framework which outlines a
guideline for standards to be followed addressing
incidences of land acquisitions and compensations
whenever such cases occur has been prepared by the
client, disclosed in country and in Infoshop. Individual
Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs), based on the disclosed
RPF, for the subprojects will be prepared and disclosed
before any civil works start if those subprojects involve
land acquisitions or have an impact on livelihoods.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not involve construction of dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        The project will not be located on, or impact on any
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 international waterway.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project will not be located on land in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
0
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The environmental footprint of the project is expected to be minimal, because the project will
finance rehabilitation and construction of new classrooms in or adjacent to existing school
facilities. There is scope for environmental enhancements, where possible, such as improvement of
water supply and sanitation facilities, ventilation and lighting of classrooms and accessibility and
safety and also the promotion and use of environmentally friendly construction materials.
Construction related impacts will need to be addressed including waste and rubble management,
mitigation of noise and dust, and occupational safety of workers. Safety of children and teachers
during civil works needs to be well managed (barricades, fencing, lighting, signage) along with
lack of disruption of regular school activities, especially in congested areas. In case, vegetation/
trees have to be cut, replacement tree planning in appropriate locations is recommended, where
possible.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Page 4 of 8


﻿Construction of new classrooms will result in increased numbers of children attending schools.
From the environmental perspective, this will result in increased use of school facilities, and
increased use of utilities and generation of waste. Through proper design and construction quality
and implementation of appropriate mitigation measures, these future impacts can be well managed
and negligible
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The first alternative to considered is "no project" option. This alternative scenario entails that the
abandonment of the project on expansions and rehabilitation works of educational facilities. This
option further assumes that the existing schools are adequate, and are in good physical state, and
do not require rehabilitation or repair. This option has its own environmental advantages and
disadvantages. The main advantage is that the potential environmental and social impacts
predicted in table 1 would not occur, and would not affect workers and various environmental
components. Disadvantages include risks of overcrowding from the growing number of students at
schools and denial of access to education to Malawian students.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Since the actual site locations for civil works are not known, the MEST has prepared an
Environmental and Social Management Framework which provides a uniform approach for
identifying and mitigating potential environmental aspects at all sites. The ESMF establishes clear
procedures and methodologies for site-specific environmental and social assessment and review,
approval and implementation of the sub-projects, including roles and responsibilities and reporting
procedures. It clarifies the institutional mechanism for incorporating the environmental mitigation
actions into site-specific designs and contractor documents. The ESMF has been consulted with
stakeholders and disclosed both in-country and at the Bank's InfoShop prior to project appraisal.
The Local Development Fund (LDF) will carry out implementation of Component 2 of the project
on improving school facilities. The LDF has many years of experience in implementation of
Environmental and Social Management Frameworks (ESMF). The experience is based on years of
O
implementing community demand driven interventions funded through the Malawi Social Action
Fund and other partners including the school construction under the GPE I. The LDF follows a
decentralized approach in implementing the safeguard activities, with most of the implementation
being undertaken by district level and frontline staff at community levels. It has recruited a
0           dedicated officer to coordinate with the local authorities in the implementation of safeguard
activities. In addition, it is supported by the of Ministry of Environment and Climate Change
which, through its Environmental Affairs Department, is responsible for coordination of
environmental planning, policy implementation, management of environmental considerations,
including environmental assessment work in development programs, and the Ministry of Lands,
Housing and Urban Development coordinates resettlement planning.
Staffing levels within the Environmental Affairs Department and the Department of Lands and
Valuation are satisfactory. At the district level, capacity has improved as key technical staff for
implementation of Safeguards is already in place. These include Environmental District Officers,
District Environmental Inspectors and District Lands Officers who have been trained in
environmental management issues. Also, at district level, there is a District Environmental Sub
Committee (DESC), which coordinates natural resource management, including environmental
and social safeguards. Environmental District Officers (EDOs) fall under the Authority of the
Department of Environmental Affairs but operate at decentralized level.
The District Environmental Sub-committee (DESC), which is a sub-committee within the District
Page 5 of 8


﻿Executive Committee (DEC), will have an active role in the implementation and monitoring of
environmental and social safeguards at local level. Recently, the government has recruited
Environmental Inspectors to strengthen the environmental inspectorate and advisory management
services in all parts of the country. These Environmental Inspectors are stationed at the national
O
Q)         level and will play active role in mainstreaming environmental and social consideration of the
project activities as well as monitoring compliance of Environmental and Social Management
Plans (ESMPs).
There is also a strong focus on capacity building - Staff at Central and District levels will
participate in training courses for MESIP, which includes training on preparing ESMPs and RAPs.
LDF will coordinate the Directorate of Environmental Affairs and the Ministry of Lands and
Housing to ensure that training is provided to District Councils, which will then be cascaded to
AECs. A Safeguards Officer has been recruited to reinforce the capacity of the LDF-TST to ensure
the implementation and monitoring of environmental and social safeguards during implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
MESIP will be implemented through the LDF-TST, the intergovernmental fiscal transfer agency
established to coordinate financing and implementation of MASAF at district and community
levels. The LDF-TST is also responsible for backstopping related to environmental and social
safeguards. It will coordinate closely with the Directorate of Environmental Affairs and Ministry
of Lands and Housing on all aspects of safeguards implementation including capacity building,
screening and monitoring of mitigating measures during project's implementation. Several key
Ministries would play a role in overseeing the coordination and harmonization process: the
Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, the Ministry of Environment and Climate Change
and the Ministry of Lands, Housing and Urban Development. The project will mainstream
mitigating measures as part of subproject design to improve implementation and monitoring.
Cascaded training to the District/community level will also anchor safeguards implementation not
just part of subproject planning but as an ongoing process. Key indicators will also be reported in
the M&E system. The application of the ESMF is vital to ensuring that project activities are
environmental and socially sustainable and that inappropriate subprojects are eliminated. The
quarterly monitoring on safeguards implementation initiated by the Directorate of Environmental
Affairs in 2012 will be continued during MESIP. Annual reviews will also examine the
participatory planning process and grievance redress mechanism and feedback information to the
M&E system.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           05-Feb-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Malawi                                                   05-Feb-2016
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              07-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           05-Feb-2016
Page 6 of 8


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Malawi                                                    28-Jan-2016
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Page 7 of 8


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Soren Nellemann
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)            Date: 15-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Sajitha Bashir (PMGR)               Date: 15-Feb-2016
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


