INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 17-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P151281
Project Name:   CAPACITY STRENGTHENING FOR IMPLEMENTATION OF MINAMATA
CONVENTION ON MERCURY PROJECT (P151281)
Task Team       Jiang Ru,Ms. Anisi
Leader(s):
Estimated       15-Apr-2016                Estimated    30-Sep-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN02                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
GEF Focal Area:  Persistent Organic Pollutants
Sector(s):      Central government administration (80%), Other Mining and Extractive
Industries (10%), Other industry (10%)
Theme(s):       Climate change (10%), Environmental policies and institutions (80%), Pollution
management and environmental health (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
U
Total Project Cost:     16.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                             Amount
Borrower                                                        8.00
Global Environment Facility (GEF)                               8.00
Total                                                          16.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed project development objective is to improve China's capacity to address its mercury
issues in priority sectors under the Minamata Convention on Mercury.
C. Project Description


The proposed project will have three components: Component 1: Development of National Strategy
for Minamata Convention implementation; Component 2: Capacity Building for Mercury
Management and Monitoring; and Component 3: Project Management.
O
Component 1: Development of National Strategy for Minamata Convention implementation. This
component will support: (a) the development of an institutional set up for the preparation and
implementation of the National Strategy (NS); and (b) supplemental inventory exercises to develop a
reliable baseline for (i) production and trade (including import and export) of primary and recycled
mercury; (ii) import and export of mercury-added products; (iii) four key sources of mercury
emission - cement, waste incineration, boilers, and coal-fired power plants; and (iv) mercury wastes
and contaminated sites, including mining areas; (c) Strategy Development. The inventory results of
this project, as well as from the Mercury Initial Assessment (MIA) Project and the UNEP-led GEF
Pilot Project on the Development of Mercury Inventory in China, analyses of national policy and
regulations, and broader consultations with domestic and international stakeholders will feed into the
development of China's Mercury National Strategy. Under the strategy, sector specific priorities will
be identified for short-, medium- and long-term interventions, based on cost benefit analyses of
various interventions and taking into account potential co-benefits and multi-pollutant control
approaches. Based on the result of gap analysis under the MIA Project, policy revisions needed will
be proposed for key sectors. The completed strategy will be submitted for government approval
during project implementation. Along with preparation of this strategy, media campaigns will be
organized to improve the public and stakeholders' awareness on mercury issues and mobilize their
participation and support to the development and implementation of the national strategy.
Component 2: Capacity Building for Mercury Management and Monitoring. This component will
help improve China's capacity for implementation of the National Strategy through the following
activities: (a) development of a National Mercury Information Reporting and Management System
with data on mercury production, trade (including import and export), use, recycling, releases and
disposal; (b) development of a monitoring and certification system for national, provincial and
municipal laboratories, and strengthening capacity of pilot laboratories; (c) assessment of potential
O
U       environmental health risks of non-operational and operational mercury mines and take institutional
control measures at priority sites if identified and deemed necessary (such as set up fencing and
warning signs, and carry out public awareness building activities in the surrounding areas) ; (d)
assessment of technical, financial, social, environmental and institutional feasibility of mercury
recycling in non-VCM priority sectors; and (e) collection and dissemination of project
implementation information and lessons. Site level assessment will identify affected population,
including less prosperous communities. Given the project's limited development objective and grant
resources, the project will not support any investment activities related to clean-up of any
contaminated sites.
Component 3: Project Management. This component will support the MEP to manage proper
implementation of this project.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This is a national capacity building project to be implemented in Beijing, supporting China develop a
sound national strategy on mercury management to comply with the international environmental
treaty on mercury. It will not involve on-site investments, but the development of a national strategy
on sound mercury management will involve policy revisions that may have downstream


environmental and social impacts and implications for sites and communities living on and/or close
to mercury contaminated areas.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Foreign Economic Cooperation Office (FECO) under the MEP will serve as the overall national
implementing agency for the Project. FECO will manage and coordinate project activities at the
national level, and also supervise project implementation at the local level and consolidate project
progress and financial reports. FECO has been managing several World Bank financed GEF projects,
a      preparing one on PFOS, and currently implementing three projects: China Dioxin Reduction from
Pulp and Paper Sector Project, China Contaminated Site Management Project, and China Solid
Waste Management Project. FECO is familiar with Bank financed projects and their safeguards and
fiduciary requirements.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Chongwu Sun (GENDR)
Songling Yao (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         This project will support China to develop a sound
OP/BP 4.01                              national strategy on mercury management to comply
with the international environmental treaty on
mercury. Its development will be based on
international best practices. Successful
implementation of this project will have positive
impacts on reducing mercury pollution in the country
and globally.
This capacity building project will not support any
physical investments but its output - the national
strategy - will cover the full ranges of mercury
issues (e.g. mercury waste disposal and contaminated
site management). As China has a relative robust
environmental management system and is gradually
improving its enforcement efforts, potential
environmental risks associated with downstream
activities for the implementation of the national
strategy beyond this project will be modest. Based on
these considerations, the environmental category of
this project is proposed as Category B.
The proposed instrument is an environmental and
social management framework (ESMF) to be
developed during project implementation. Prior to
appraisal, a TOR for ESMF preparation will be
developed and agreed upon.


As the preparation of the national strategy will
collect detailed information on overall mercury
issues in China from sectoral and strategic
perspectives, benefits and risks of available
alternative technologies, standards and requirements
for all potential mitigation measures, and treatment
and disposal technologies, the ESMF will focus on
(a) potential environmental and social risks
associated with key actions of the national strategies;
(b) a framework for environmental and social
assessment and related management of mercury
contaminated sites; (c) guidelines for the preparation
of site specific environmental and social
management plans, including any specific
environmental code of practice (ECOP); and (d) key
steps and institutional arrangements for carrying out
such site assessment and management activities.
ESMF will be prepared based on international best
practices and the Bank's safeguard policies,
including the Bank's Environmental, Health and
Safety Guidelines.
Preparation and implementation of this project,
including preparation of the ESMF, will be consulted
broadly among mercury related industrial
associations, concerned national and local
government agencies, and interested research
institutes and universities.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           This capacity building project will not include on-
site investments and is not expected to have any
impacts on natural habitats. However, potential
impacts and risks from future investments will be
assessed during the preparation of the ESMF, and the
ESMF may include procedures for screening for
impacts on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           This capacity building project is not expected to have
any impacts on forestry. Additional screening will be
performed during the preparation of the ESMF.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           This capacity building project will not have any
activities related to pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources  No          This capacity building project is not expected to have
OP/BP 4.11                               any impacts on physical cultural resources.
Screening will be performed during the preparation
of the ESMF and the ESMF may include procedures
for screening for impacts on physical cultural
resources.


Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes          The project aims to improve China's capacity to
4.10                                      address its mercury issues, reducing pollution and
benefiting the population. As such, it will have
positive social impacts, including on ethnic
minorities living on or near mercury contaminated
areas.
Component 1 activities on the development of the
national strategy on sound mercury management will
involve policy revisions that may have downstream
impacts on ethnic minority communities living on
and/or close to mercury contaminated areas. As such,
OP 4.10, Indigenous Peoples, is triggered. To
mitigate such potential impacts, an EMPF will be
prepared as part of the ESMF during project
implementation as a project output.
Prior to appraisal, the agreed ESMF TOR will
include the requirements on the preparation of the
EMPF.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         The national strategy to be developed under
BP 4.12                                   Component 1 may require policy revisions that affect
land use or resettlement issues at mercury
contaminated sites. As such, OP 4.12, Involuntary
Resettlement, is triggered. To mitigate such potential
risks, a RPF will be prepared as part of ESMF during
project implementation as a project output.
Prior to the appraisal, the agreed ESMF TOR will
include the requirements on the preparation of the
RPF.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           This capacity building project will not involve dams.
Projects on International    No           This project will not involve any international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         This project will not involve any disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Mar-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The TOR for the preparation of the ESMF (including the RPF and EMPF) will be prepared prior
to appraisal. The draft TOR will be publicly disclosed and consultations will be held with key and
interested stakeholders. The ESMF, including the RPF and EMPF, will be prepared during
implementation, and will involve public disclosure and consultations.
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jiang Ru,Ms. Anisi
Approved By:
O
Safeguards Advisor:  Name: Surhid P. Gautam (SA)                 Date: 06-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/    Name: lain G. Shuker (PMGR)                 Date: 17-Aug-2015
Manager:


