INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12382
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Jun-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Peru                       Project ID:  P148499
Project Name: Dedicated Grant Mechanism in Peru (P148499)
Task Team       Kristyna Bishop
Leader(s):
Estimated       30-Apr-2015                Estimated    31-Aug-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Forestry (40%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (60%)
Theme(s):       Indigenous peoples (40%), Other social development (20%), Rural non-farm
income generation (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.50            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Strategic Climate Fund Grant                                                5.50
Total                                                                       5.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Principal Objective for the Global Dedicated Grant Mechanism for Indigenous Peoples and
Local Communities (Global DGM) is to, "strengthen the role of Indigenous Peoples and Local
Communities (IPLCs) in the FIP and other REDD+ programs at local, national and global levels by
supporting capacity building and demand-driven initiatives of IPLCs."
The Project Development Objective for the Saweto DGM is to support Indigenous Peoples in the
Page 1 of 10


﻿Peruvian Amazon in their efforts to to improve their sustainable forest management practices.
3. Project Description
The Project would finance three components. Component 1 would finance native land titling and
Component II would finance indigenous forestry management. Both components will include cross-
cutting activities to support increased capacity for forest governance and gender equity. Component
III would finance project management.
o        The Project would be implemented in two phases over 5 years. There will be a formal mid-term
review at the end of Year 3 to assess progress with implementation and make any necessary
adjustments before beginning Phase II.
A key design feature is that the sub-projects will be implemented by regional indigenous federations
and organizations acting as Project Intermediaries (PI) under an executing agreement with the NEA.
The PIs will work with their constituent communities to identify and prioritize sub-projects under
each of the Components using the eligibility criteria identified during preparation and reflected in the
Operational Manual. There will be a maximum of eighteen master proposals for Phase I and these
will be submitted to the NEA for technical review and then to the NSC for approval. The master
proposals will contain a clear explanation of the process by which the sub-projects were selected,
explain how the set of sub-proposals support the PDO, explain any cost efficiencies or savings
related to the particular set of sub-projects and include activities to support the transversal themes of
governance and gender inclusion. A specific target for women is a key element of Component 2. All
sub-projects/master proposals must include evidence of broad community support for the activities
on the part of the respective native community.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Peru is the third largest country in South America, with a total area of 1 285 216 sq.km. It is
considered one of the most mega diverse countries in the world and ranks second in South America
and ninth in the world in terms of natural forests. The largest of the three biological regions is the
Amazon, which covers nearly 61% of the country and contains 73.3 million ha or 94% of the
country's forests. Of this total, approximately 15 million hectares are either currently owned or
managed by native communities.
Despite its large geographical size, the Amazon region is sparsely populated with only 13% of the
country's total population. It is estimated that approximately 332,957 indigenous peoples belonging
to 60 different peoples live in 2250 communities and speak 17 different languages. Social indicators
for Amazonian indigenous peoples are among the lowest in the country with high levels of chronic
malnutrition, limited access to education and primary health care and disproportionate levels of
maternal and infant mortality. Average life expectancy is 15-20 years less than the national average.
The impressive biodiversity found in Peru is threatened by high deforestation rates especially in the
Amazon region. Annual deforestation averaged close to 110,000 ha between 2000-2009, which is
equivalent to an annual deforestation rate of 0.14%. Deforestation currently causes about half of
Peru's greenhouse gas emissions (d.i.e./GDI 2014). Peru's Forest Investment Plan (PIP) indicates
that the main drivers of deforestation are migration and agricultural expansion, infrastructure such as
road construction and unregulated timber extraction. The PIP asserts that most deforestation occurs
in areas without legally assigned rights to land and that territorial reserves including indigenous lands
and natural protected areas consistently have the lowest deforestation rates.
Page 2 of 10


﻿According to the results of the Social Assessment completed during Project preparation, there are
three major categories for stakeholders in the Project area: (i) Communities (native communities,
ribereila communities and colonos); (ii) Public Sector Agencies such as regional offices of
O
U         MINAGRI; and (iii) Private sector actors including NGOs, forest, hydrocarbon, and mining
concessionaires and illegal loggers.In the Peruvian Amazon collective titles are established by
community instead of by ethnicity, as is the case in countries such as Panama (comarcas), Colombia
(resguardos) or others. As demonstrated in Table 1 below, the recognition and titling processes for
native communities varies greatly with 294 communities lacking legal recognition as native
communities, 616 recognized native communities lacking demarcation and title, and 264
communities with titles but within areas that are insufficient to meet their substantive needs.
Community recognition and titling is urgent due to the range of pressures driving the invasion and
deforestation of their traditionally occupied lands resulting in the loss of the natural resource base
critical for their physical, cultural and spiritual survival.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Dianna M. Pizarro (GSURR)
Juan Carlos Enriquez Uria (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          This Project is designed to generate positive
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                environmental impacts through increased incentives to
protect the forests and stronger capacity at the local level
for forest and resource management. Potential negative
impacts would be of limited scope and will not be
significant or irreversible. An Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) is being prepared in
order to screen, assess, avoid and mitigate the potential
negative environmental and social impacts associated
with the various lines of activities to be supported by the
Saweto DGM. The ESMF also will outline the process to
prepare the Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) for
activities requiring an EMP, especially those that may be
in the proximity of an environmentally sensitive area and
provide specific guidelines to avoid or minimize risks and
manage potential environmental impacts. Any sub-
projects or activity considered as Category A will not be
eligible for funding by the Project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          This policy is triggered as some of the community
4.04                                 forestry sub-projects may have impacts on natural
habitats. The ESMF will include a description of the
process to engage the different stakeholders during the
implementation of the Project to avoid or degradation that
may result from human activity associated with the
Project activities. The project will not finance any activity
that could potentially cause significant conversion or
degradation of natural habitats. The project activities will
Page 3 of 10


﻿also promote sound practices in forest management,
which may include innovative ideas to protect
environmentally sensitive habitats. The ESMF will
include criteria and procedures to avoid and minimize
risks and manage potential negative impacts on natural
habitat. Subprojects contemplating significant degradation
or conversion of natural habitats will not be eligible for
financing.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes          This policy is triggered as the proposed Project will be
developed in natural forest areas and there will be both
non-timber agroforestry as well as timber subprojects.
The ESMF includes a framework for the development of
sustainable management plans for the timber sub-projects
and guidelines for managing Project related impacts.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes           This policy is triggered as the Saweto DGM will be
financing agro-forestry subprojects. The work on
agricultural production systems may involve pest
management and the use of pesticides in subproject
activities. The ESMF will include screening procedures
for pest management and pesticide use. A Pest
Management Plan will be prepared for subprojects likely
to procure pesticides or envisage changes in pest
management practices. The ESMF will include guidelines
for the use of pest management practices.
Physical Cultural        Yes          This policy is triggered as Project related activities may
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  have an impact on the use of and access to areas with
potential cultural significance such as sacred sites. The
principles of this Policy will be fully integrated into the
screening and mitigation planning processes described in
the ESMF. The ESMF will include provisions for the
treatment of physical cultural resources discovered during
project implementation (chance finds).
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes          OP/BP 4.10 is triggered as the overwhelming majority of
BP 4.10                               the Project's direct beneficiaries are Indigenous Peoples
per the criteria of this Policy. The project is being
prepared with and will be governed by the NSC which is
comprised of indigenous leaders nominated by AIDESEP
and CONAP. Project benefits will directly support
Indigenous community priorities for land titling and
community forestry projects and will be implemented by
the regional indigenous federations and organizations.
The project has been designed in full collaboration with
the NSC. Two national consultation meetings were
carried out with their respective regional organizations
and coordinators to design the key aspects of the project.
The NSC participated in the drafting of the TORs for the
Page 4 of 10


﻿Project's social assessment, the selection of the
consultants hired and the review of the draft results. The
Social Assessment included perception surveys with
indigenous community members where it was noted that
85% of those interviewed found the Assembly decision
making process highly participatory, including women
and elders, and that 90% were in agreement with the way
decisions are made through the Community General
Assemblies. Acts from these community assembly
meetings will be required for all subprojects financed to
ensure broad community support.
The MOP will incorporate the specific measures to ensure
free, prior and informed consultation and documentation
of broad community support of all subprojects. The
NEA's capacity to screen, assess and address safeguards
issues will be evaluated in an upcoming mission and
capacity building will be provided as described in the
section below.
Involuntary Resettlement No           This policy has not been triggered for this Project. The
OP/BP 4.12                            Project's Operational Manual and ESMF will include
specific measures to ensure that the NEA: (i) screens all
subprojects for potential conflict with non-Indigenous
peoples in the area or along the boundary of the native
community to be titled; (ii) reviews boundary agreements
(Actas de Colindencia) for all land titling applications;
and (iii) carries out adequate supervision of sub-project
implementation to ensure that any conflicts that arise are
adequately managed through the Project's grievance
redress mechanism.
Safety of Dams OP/BP     No           This policy is not triggered as the project will not support
4.37                                  the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will it
support other investments which rely on the services of
existing dams.
Projects on International  Yes        This policy has been triggered as it is possible that a very
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                  small number of subprojects under Component 2 will
support the improvement or establishment of fish farms
(piscigranjas) that may use water from a small tributary of
the Amazon. The Amazon River and all its tributaries are
considered international waterways for the purposes of
OP 7.50. An exception to the notification requirement in
paragraph 7 (a) of this policy has been requested given
that project activities will not adversely change the quality
or quantity of water flows to other riparians and will not
be adversely affected by other riparians' possible water
use.
Page 5 of 10


﻿Projects in Disputed    No           This policy is not triggered as there will be no subprojects
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     in disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
O
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
This Project is classified as Category B. The Project is designed to generate positive
environmental impacts through increased incentives to protect the forests and stronger capacity at
the local level for forest and natural resource management. Potential negative impacts would be of
limited scope and will not be significant or irreversible. An Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) is being prepared in order to screen, assess, avoid and mitigate
the potential negative environmental and social impacts associated with the various lines of
activities to be supported by the Saweto DGM.
From a social perspective, the Project will support activities that will prevent long-term cultural
and environmental impacts that would result from the no-project scenario given current pressures
of land taking and natural resource exploitation of the Peruvian Amazon by a range of actors. This
invasion is not only destructive to the forest and its flora and fauna, but also extremely detrimental
to the Indigenous Peoples, their cultures, and traditional systems whom have inhabited these
forests for thousands of years.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Support for community tourism projects is the only type of activity proposed for support under this
Project that could have a long-term impact on the participating communities. For all community
tourism subprojects, a specific social, cultural and gender assessment will be carried out by
proponent regional organization together with the NEA to ensure that risks are identified and
O
U           mitigated through a management plan. Specific subprojects will only be identified and prepared
during project implementation.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Project design alternatives to avoid and mitigate adverse impacts include: (i) avoiding any land
titling applications that have existing conflicts with third parties that are not resolved by the time
of the application; and (ii) the decision to only include wood and non-wood commercialization
projects in exceptional circumstances when they meet specific criteria: (a) they have an approved
forestry management plan, (b) they do not have outstanding fines or penalties, and (c) they are
self-managed by the beneficiary communities, and (d) they have an identified market, business
plan or purchaser.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The NSC and Regional Organizations received training on the Bank's social safeguards in the first
preparation mission. Their participation and reactions to the issues and risks raised in the Social
Assessment workshop on a subsequent preparation mission demonstrated their assimilation and
understanding of the key impacts and procedures required by OP/BP 4.10 and OP/BP 4.12. An in-
depth assessment and training session will be carried out with the newly identified National
Executing Agency in the next preparation mission. The Project Team will work together with the
Page 6 of 10


﻿NEA to ground many of the proposed screening, assessment and mitigation measures within the
Project Operations Manual.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The Social Assessment prepared a stakeholder analysis that groups key actors into three
categories: (i) Communities: native communities, ribereila communities, and colonos; (ii) Public
Sector Agencies (numerous); and (iii) Private sector actors including NGOs, forest, hydrocarbon,
and mining concessionaires, and illegal loggers.
The Amazonian Indigenous Peoples to benefit under this project are known in Peru as native
communities. The Peruvian Amazon is home to approximately 2250 native communities that are
organized, almost entirely, into regional indigenous federations and organizations, which are then
represented by one of two national Amazonian organizations- AIDESEP and CONAP.
Indigenous peoples living in voluntary isolation are also within the Project area. Threats to these
peoples and their rights to remain in isolation should not occur under this project as the activities
will be carried out physical spaces already occupied and under use by the beneficiary
communities. However, the Project Operations Manual will adopt specific measures to ensure that
subprojects, especially for expansion of communities, and any other subproject in or around buffer
areas occupied by these peoples, do not invade these areas or introduce potential contact situations.
In the Peruvian Amazon, there are estimated to be approximately 2,400 Ribereila communities.
These Amazonian mestizo communities settle adjacent to the Amazonian rivers and share
common ethnic and cultural ties and traditions based on communal organizing and systems. The
Ribereila communities frequently live within the same areas as native communities without
conflict- including the peaceful negotiations of land and resource boundaries. There has recently
been a movement whereby many Ribereila communities are starting to self-identify as native
communities given their strong indigenous cultural and ethnic heritage. Despite the fact that these
communities also face similar threats as the native communities, the Ribereila communities are yet
to establish inter-communal organizational structures that would permit their active participation
as beneficiaries of this stage of the DGM.
Another group of Peruvian Amazonian inhabitants are "colonos", or farmers who migrate from the
Sierra (Highlands). These farmers, and the cumulative impacts from their unsustainable
agricultural practices, were identified by both the Social Assessment and the FIP Investment Plan
among the primary drivers of deforestation. For native communities they are also considered a
major threat, especially for untitled native lands as the colonos often invade traditional native
lands and claim these lands for settlement and cultivation. The DGM will serve as a mitigation
measure to the pressures introduced by colonos through securing native community land rights.
In regards to the public sector stakeholders, the most critical stakeholder is the Regional
Governments and Regional Agrarian Agencies charged with carrying out native community land
titling. Two key risks that these stakeholders present to the project include the lack of political will
to support native land titling and the lack of resource capacity to implement this mandate. The
national Indigenous organizations that are represented on the NSC have overcome these issues
through the establishment of regional agreements with these agencies, where external
organizations support with human and financial resources to carry out the desired titling processes.
In regards to the private sector actors identified, the forest, hydrocarbon, and mining
Page 7 of 10


﻿concessionaires and illegal loggers are all among the primary actors driving deforestation and are
viewed as a threat to native communities, especially those that do not enjoy legal recognition and
secure tenure. These actors could potentially affect the project indirectly by creating political
pressure on regional government actors to disincentivize land titling for native communities.
O
Q)          Based on the complicated and highly conflictual relationship between illegal loggers and native
communities, the NSC has decided to limit eligible community forestry projects to those that do
not include the extraction of wood and thus limit the potential for DGM subprojects to interact
with illegal loggers.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              00000000
Date of submission to InfoShop                           25-Mar-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              00000000
Date of submission to InfoShop                           12-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     NA
Date of receipt by the Bank
5 ~Date of submission to InfoShop //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [ X]  NA[]
report?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Page 8 of 10


﻿Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[   ] No[X]       NA[    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [X]      NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [  ]  No [X]     NA [  ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [   ]   NA [  ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [  ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[     NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X]  No[   NA
o          in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[       NA[
0          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[      NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kristyna Bishop
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maria Elena Garcia Mora (SA)         Date: 05-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Emilia Battaglini (PMGR)             Date: 05-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


