                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC15771

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Lebanon                         Project ID:      P157983
                            Project Name:   Leveraging Innovation in Financial Service Provision to Manage Crisis in
                                            Lebanon
                            Team Leader(s): Peter McConaghy
                            Estimated Date 22-Feb-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GFM05                           Lending          Lending Instrument
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):           Payments, settlements, and remittance systems (30%), Microfinance (40%),
                                                 Other social services (30%)
                            Theme(s):            Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (40%), Social Safety Nets/Social
                                                 Assistance & Social Care Services (30%), e-Services (30%)
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 2.3                            Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                                           Amount
                              State and Peace Building Fund                                                                 2.3
                            Environment        C - Not Required
                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           19.      The project development objective (PDO) is to enhance the economic resilience of
                           vulnerable populations and refugees in Lebanon through piloting innovative approaches to financial
                           inclusion. The PDO will be met through threetransmission channels. First, the project will produce
                           rigorous analytical work documenting global best practices in innovative mechanisms to deliver
                           financial services during crisis. Second, the project will apply innovation at the programmatic level
                           through piloting the provision of microfinance services to recipients of agency-executed cash
                           transfers. Third, through regional learning, the project will develop a policy framework for delivering
                           financial service provision to other conflict-affect countries in the MENA region.
                           C. Project Description
                           A. Description (Concept)

                           22.     Component 1: Strengthening the analytical base on promoting economic resilience of
                         refugees and vulnerable host communities through access to financial services. The objective of this
                         component is to enhance knowledge of Lebanese policymakers on innovative approaches to
                         promoting economic resilience of vulnerable Lebanese and refugees through financial inclusion,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         drawing on international best practice in both microfinance, livelihood development, and crisis
                         management. The analytical work will also assess the legal/regulatory framework and institutional
                         setup in Lebanon and propose interventions to be piloted. Particular attention will be placed on
                         innovative linkages between cash transfers and financial services – for example digital transfers to
                         transaction accounts, remote agent network development, or linkages to microinsurance and savings
                         products. ($250,000)

                         23.      The analytical work will coordinate closely with key international actors working on
                         promoting financial inclusion using cash transfers as an entry point, particularly in fragile and post-
                         conflict contexts. This includes the United National Capital Development Fund (UNCDF), United
                         Nations High Commission for Refugees (UNHCR), the GSMA, DFID, and the Gates Foundation, in
                         close coordination with Lebanese authorities. The analytical work will commence directly after grant
                         effectiveness and will inform the programmatic pilot under component 2 of the program. The
                         document will seek to have impact both on the global levels, highlighting international best practices
                         for promoting financial inclusion during emergency/crisis context, and locally through analyzing the
                         institutional and regulatory options for Lebanon. Depending on implementation, the team may
                         produce two outputs. The first focused on bringing international best practices to managing crisis in
                         Lebanon and the second an internal document providing policy suggestions for Lebanese authorities.

                         24.      Component 2: Programmatic Pilot of an electronic cash transfer program where transfers are
                         digitized and connected to microfinance institutions (MFIs). The objective of this component is to
                         promote economic resilience and livelihood development over a medium-term time horizon through
                         targeted income support linked to access and usage of transaction accounts. The pilot would in first
                         instance target low-income vulnerable Lebanese communities who have been affected by the
                         economic instability caused by the ongoing Syrian crisis. Particular attention will be placed on
                         female-headed households. The income support program would also benefit refugees. ($1,800,000)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         25.      The pilot will catalyze innovation through two transmission channels. First, the pilot will
                         seek to employ international best practices with regards to targeting and payment systems. This
                         involves digitizing transfer payments through mobile or card-based technology. Secondly, the pilot
                         will link cash transfers to microfinance institutions (MFIs) who can then offer beneficiaries financial
                         services (transaction accounts) and non-financial services (financial education training). This pilot
                         would be informed by the analytical work and draw on international best practice and current
                         institutional/regulatory realities in Lebanon.

                         26.     The program will include a rigorous evaluation comparing outcomes of beneficiary groups
                         with respect to household welfare, vulnerability to economic shocks, access and usage of financial
                         services, and relative poverty levels. This evaluation will capture the primary economic effects of the
                         income support program as well as additionalities with respect to access and usage of financial
                         services through participating microfinance institutions.

                         27.      Component 3: Regional knowledge sharing and policy framework development. The
                         objective of this component is to improve policies to promote economic resilience during periods of
                         crisis through regional knowledge sharing and policy development. Funding would finance a series
                         of workshops on the role of financial inclusion in times of crisis in the MENA region, as well as
                           technical assistance in developing a policy framework on using innovative financial inclusion
                           pathways to manage crisis and conflict for the MENA region as a whole. ($250,000)
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)
                           Yes. Tentative timeframe for preparing the appraisal stage ISDS is 15-December 2015.

                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Alaa Ahmed Sarhan (GEN05)
                           Mariana T. Felicio (GSU05)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/         No              The project is limited to developing analytical
                           BP 4.01                                              work, knowledge sharing, and piloting a digital
                                                                                cash transfer program linked to financial
                                                                                services at the micro household level. The
                                                                                project will not involve civil works or major
                                                                                activities that will cause negative impacts on the
                                                                                environment.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04          No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                   No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09              No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/      No
Public Disclosure Copy




                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10        No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP       No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37            No
                           Projects on International            No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP     No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  The proposed project is classified as a Category C, as it is likely to have no adverse environmen
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  18-Dec-2015
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Peter McConaghy
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Mariana T. Felicio (SA)                                      Date: 10-Nov-2015
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Rolf Behrndt (PMGR)                                          Date: 18-Nov-2015
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
