                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA13152
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Aug-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Aug-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Panama                            Project ID:    P155097
                            Project Name:     Strengthening Social Protection and Inclusion System (P155097)
                            Task Team         Edmundo Murrugarra
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         03-Aug-2015                       Estimated   23-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSP04                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Other social services (80%), Vocational training (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (35%), Social
                                              Protection and Labor Policy & Systems (35%), Indigenous pe oples (15%),
                                              Income Support for Old Age, Disability & Survivorship (15%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      75.00           Total Bank Financing:                75.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                  0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    75.00
                              Total                                                                                    75.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase the efficiency of the social protection system and
                           improve the income generation capacity of the poor and vulnerable. The efficiency of the social
                           protection system would be increased through improved performance and enhanced harmonization of
                           MIDES Conditional Cash Transfer (CCT) programs. Improved income generating capacity of the

                                                                      Page 1 of 7
                         poor and vulnerable would be addressed through increased participation of the poor and vulnerable in
                         productive inclusion programs.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 1. Strengthening and efficiency of social protection system. The objective of this
                         Component is to strengthen the capacity of the Government to improve the harmonization,
                         transparency, accountability and follow up mechanisms of MIDES CCT programs. This Component
                         finances three Sub-components: (i) improving social protection system instruments; (ii) enhancing
                         social program management tools; and (iii) strengthening the monitoring and evaluation capacity of
                         MIDES.

                         Component 2. MIDES territorial structure and direct family support. This Component will support
                         the strengthening of the MIDES territorial structure to operationalize activities such as outreach and
                         registration, management of non-compliance, transparency and accountability, and information
                         collection processes including implementation of feedback mechanisms, among others. This
                         component includes activities to enhance the role of provincial and comarcal coordinators, social
                         workers and family sponsors (promotores) as the gateway to social programs offered by MIDES and
                         those of other relevant institutions. Building on the existing Provincial and Comarca Coordinators
                         and more than 300 MIDES promotores, the role of the latter will be institutionalized and scaled to
                         better provide services across MIDES CCTs.

                         Component 3: Productive inclusion services for the poor and vulnerable. This Component seeks to
                         complement the activities of CCT programs with support to investments in human capital that
                         enhance income generating capacity. This Component will institutionalize and scale up the
                         productive and training activities for the poor and vulnerable population registered in the single
                         registry. Eligible population include those MIDES Participants and members of families that are
                         beneficiaries of MIDES CCTs.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will be country-wide, including indigenous autonomous territories (comarcas). Despite a
                         decade of sustained fast growth and poverty reduction in Panama, there are sharp regional disparities
                         as the extremely poor are increasingly concentrated in remote geographic areas where indigenous
                         peoples live. The comarcas have the highest poverty rates (between 80 and 90 percent) and show the
                         lowest poverty declines: poverty declined just 4.2 percentage points between 2007 and 2014. In
                         2014, extreme poverty was five time larger in comarcas (58.2 percent) compared to the national
                         incidence. As a result, extreme poverty has become an indigenous phenomenon: in 2007, 24 percent
                         of all extremely poor people in Panama lived in the comarcas, a figure which rose to 42 percent by
                         2012. The population in extreme poverty in Panama live in households where the heads have on
                         average only 5 years of education (4.5 fewer than the national average), are concentrated in the
                         agricultural sector, and work mainly as self-employed or unpaid family workers. They have much
                         higher dependency ratios, driven by a much greater share of young children. The slower poverty
                         reduction in comarcas and rural areas points to the need to address bottlenecks in access to social
                         services and improvement in their productivity.

                         There are other demographic groups that are lagging behind in benefitting from the recent growth
                         experience. The last years of growth had an impact on poverty through reduced unemployment rates
                         (4.3 percent in 2014) and higher labor incomes that explain two thirds of the reduction in poverty.
                         Still, labor markets did not benefit all individuals in the same way. Youth unemployment in 2014


                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                         reached 10.3 percent, more than twice the national rate, and it was particularly high among secondary
                         education graduates (14.8 percent). Youth from families that receive social assistance like Red de
                         Oportunidades conditional cash transfer program (CCT) that have lower levels of secondary
Public Disclosure Copy




                         completion, also show high unemployment rates reaching 17 percent. Unemployment has also a
                         strong geographic concentration in urban areas, reaching 9.8 percent in areas like Colon. This recent
                         growth and poverty reduction experience emphasizes the need for a differentiated social policy
                         agenda across geographic areas in Panama and across socioeconomic and ethnic groups
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Gunars H. Platais (GENDR)
                         Kimberly Vilar (GSURR)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               No            The project originally at concept stage had an
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     Environmental Risk Category B due to issues related to
                                                                   medical waste management and old medical equipment
                                                                   disposal in the former Component 3 on health service
                                                                   provision. The health component was dropped from the
                                                                   project design during preparation. As such the project
                                                                   does not support any activities that would cause any
                                                                   adverse environmental impacts and is has now an
                                                                   Environmental Risk Category C.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No            None of the activities under the project will have any
                         4.04                                      impact on natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No            The Project does not consider any works in forest areas or
                                                                   changes to forest management.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                The Project would not finance investments that would
                                                                   results in the procurement or significant use of pesticides.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Physical Cultural           No            The Project will not involve works and thus no significant
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                      impacts on physical cultural resources are expected.




                                                                     Page 3 of 7
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes            The Project triggers OP/BP 4.10 given the inclusion of
                            BP 4.10                                    indigenous peoples as one of the Project’s beneficiary
                                                                       populations. An Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       has been prepared, consulted with all twelve of Panama’s
                                                                       indigenous congresses and disclosed both in-country (July
                                                                       31, 2015) and on the World Bank's website by appraisal
                                                                       (August 3, 2015). During early stages of implementation,
                                                                       the MIDES will work closely with technical liaisons from
                                                                       each indigenous community already assigned by
                                                                       corresponding members of indigenous congresses, in
                                                                       consultation with the indigenous women’s networks and
                                                                       program beneficiaries. They will design specific actions
                                                                       that each of the three MIDES programs and activities
                                                                       supported by the Project will incorporate into their
                                                                       differentiated service delivery to indigenous populations
                                                                       in order to ensure that their programs’ methodologies and
                                                                       associated services are culturally appropriate.
                            Involuntary Resettlement No                Project activities do not include any civil works that
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 would involve any type of involuntary resettlement.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP     No                The Project will not support the construction or
                            4.37                                       rehabilitation of dams nor will support other investments
                                                                       which rely on the services of existing dams.
                            Projects on International   No             The Project will not affect international waterways as
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       defined under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed        No             The proposed Project will not affect disputed areas as
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                           defined under the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Ministry of Social Development's three social protection programs (Red de Oportunidades,
                              Angel Guardian, 120 a los 65) are currently already providing services to a targeted population of
                              Panamanians. The programs’ users already benefit from the programs’ cash transfers, and in
                              compliance with co-responsibilities related to the programs, access government financed health
                              and education services. However the health and educational services are not fully adapted to the
                              cultural diversity of their users, especially the diverse indigenous populations living within
                              comarcas and other areas (e.g. collective territories). Similarly, the implementation of training
                              activities in Component 3 would need adequate consultation and adaptation to the specific
                              indigenous peoples that are being addressed. The supply of conventional services (education,
                              health, trainings) that are not tailored to cultural norms and practices may pose risks such as low
                              take up or utilization of services by potential users resulting in ineligibility to receive cash
                              transfers and potential deterioration of health and education indicators. On the other hand, use of
                              culturally inappropriate services could include the risk of the programs’ conditions contributing to
                              a loss of cultural identity in the case of indigenous users who comply with these conditions in
                              order to receive their cash transfers.


                                                                         Page 4 of 7
                           The Project originally at concept stage had an Environmental Risk Category B due to issues
                           related to medical waste management and old medical equipment disposal in former Component 3
Public Disclosure Copy




                           that supported provision of health care. In the course of Project preparation, this component was
                           dropped from the Project (and component numbering adjusted). Thus the Project’s risk rating has
                           been adjusted to an Environmental Risk Category C.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Not applicable
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Not applicable
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Project triggers OP/BP 4.10 given that Panama's diverse indigenous peoples are targeted. An
                           Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework has been prepared, consulted with all twelve of Panama's
                           indigenous congresses- and disseminated both in-country and on the Bank's website before
                           appraisal. During early stages of implementation, MIDES will work closely with delegates from
                           each indigenous community already assigned by corresponding members of indigenous
                           congresses, in consultation with the indigenous women's networks and program beneficiaries.
                           They will design specific actions that each of the three MIDES programs and activities supported
                           by the Project will incorporate into their differentiated service delivery to indigenous populations
                           in order to ensure that their programs’ methodologies and services are culturally appropriate. A
                           draft social assessment was already prepared describing demographic data, as well as knowledge
                           gaps, on indigenous peoples in the country and in each of the three MIDES programs, detailed
                           minutes of the dialogue and consultation that MIDES initiated with the twelve congresses.
                           In terms of borrower capacity, the Ministry's Department of Social Policies has recently brought
Public Disclosure Copy




                           together a team of social scientists dedicated to mainstreaming ethnicity across the Ministry's
                           programs. This is very promising to the efforts of establishing instruments within the three
                           programs supported by the current project. Moreover, the three programs vary substantially in
                           terms of their own capacity to implement social safeguards. Red de Oportunidades has in-house
                           social scientists who are currently the recipients of capacity building provided by a local expert on
                           indigenous engagement in public policy and indigenous consultation methodology. On the other
                           hand, the other two programs will be building their capacity more during implementation. The
                           MIDES team supporting RO would also be involved in the coordination of activities in
                           Component 3.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The main stakeholders of the project are the users of the Ministry of Social Development's three
                           social protection programs (Red de Oportunidades, Angel Guardian, 120 a los 65) and their
                           families. In the case of indigenous families, their own governing structures and traditional
                           authorities, as well as technical and advocacy organizations play an important role in influencing
                           public policy and how and to what extent the Ministry's programs intersect with their own
                           National Indigenous Development Plan, as well as each congress's development plan for their
                           members. Given this context, the consultations on the project, the social assessment and the
                           Indigenous Peoples’ Planning Framework were carried out with the main representatives from the
                           country's twelve indigenous congresses. The first workshop was carried out and well attended in


                                                                      Page 5 of 7
                           May, 2015 in Panama City and was considered by all participants to be an initial dialogue rather
                           than a “consultation”. Subsequently, a consultation workshop was held and well attended on June
                           12th in Panama City. The components of the Project were discussed and minor observations and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           suggestions were made, which were thoroughly documented by the MIDES team and included in
                           the draft social assessment. Generally, the Project design was accepted as a starting point that will
                           be completed and enhanced by the specific Indigenous Peoples Plans, to be jointly developed by
                           the Ministry and the relevant congresses to identify design and implementation improvements to
                           suitably serve the country's diverse indigenous populations.

                           The two workshops provided recommendations regarding the proposed methodology that will
                           guide the consultations processes that the Ministry will carry out in order to prepare an Indigenous
                           Peoples Plan for each indigenous group. As a result, the MIDES prepared a draft framework based
                           on these inputs and circulated it to all participants and their designated technical liaisons for
                           feedback. Instructions were provided as to how the feedback should be presented and the timeline
                           (seven days). Despite an extension of the deadline for feedback submission, some congresses
                           have not yet provided their feedback. MIDES has been documenting the feedback status from each
                           congress and its incorporation into the IPPF. The IPPF also states that the Government is
                           committed to receiving and incorporating the remaining feedback and will be updating the
                           framework once feedback or acceptance from all twelve congresses is received.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Jul-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Jul-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Panama                                                           31-Jul-2015
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [     ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?


                                                                      Page 6 of 7
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
Public Disclosure Copy




                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Edmundo Murrugarra
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Margaret Ellen Grosh (PMGR)                   Date: 03-Aug-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 7 of 7
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
