INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA161 17
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P148523
Project Name: Hubei Jingzhou Historic Town Conservation Project (P 148523)
Task Team       Yan F. Zhang,Ji You
Leader(s):
Estimated       05-Oct-2015                Estimated    19-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU08                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Urban Transport (50%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
(50%)
Theme(s):       Cultural Heritage (60%), Other urban development (40%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     170.51            Total Bank Financing:  100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   70.51
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     100.00
Total                                                                     170.51
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
To conserve cultural heritage and improve water quality and tourism services in selected areas in
Jingzhou Municipality.
3. Project Description
The project includes four components: Component A: Cultural heritage conservation and tourism
Page 1 of 12


﻿services improvement; Component B: Water environment improvement; Component C: Transport
improvement; and Component D: Assistance to project management and capacity building. This
package of interventions offers an integrated approach to achieve the PDO. Project investments are
prioritized according to their potential contribution to the conservation of cultural heritage sites and
O
tourism development. Heritage sites chosen are those with the most historical value, among the top
tourist destinations (the ancient City Wall and the Jingzhou Museum), and with the greatest potential
to become anchor tourism destinations (Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park and the City Moat).
Improvement in accessibility to these cultural heritage sites and water quality will help achieve the
synergies necessary sustainably to contribute to the twin goals.
Component A: Cultural Heritage Conservation and Tourism Services Improvement (Total Cost US
$83.27 million, IBRD US$45.58 million). This component comprises six sub-components.
(a)    Sub-component Al: Carrying out of conservation and restoration activities over selected
segments of Jingzhoul s Historic City Wall, including the construction of a retaining wall,
landscaping and vegetation improvements.
(b)    Sub-component A2: Carrying out of conservation activities in the Kaiyuan Taoism Temple
including, inter alia, (i) improvements to basic infrastructure, and (ii) preservation and restoration of
cultural heritage assets, including stone tablets, inscriptions and other archaeological artifacts.
(c)    Sub-component A3: Upgrading of the Jingzhou Museum, including comprehensive
rehabilitation of the treasure halls, redesign of the exhibition schemes, and procurement of protective
display equipment.
(d)    Sub-component A4: Carrying out of piloting interventions for the conservation and
regeneration of selected historical buildings along Dongti and Nanmen streets in Jingzhoul s
Historic Town, and the conversion of a vacant lot into a tourism services facility.
(e)    Sub-component A5: Provision of support to the Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park,
including, inter alia, the construction of an exhibition center, display buildings and archaeological
park management facilities, as well as installation of lighting and interpretation in the exhibition
halls, associated park signage, website development and tour guide systems.
(f)    Sub-component A6: Construction of a tourist information center alongside Jingzhoul s
Historic Town, creation and/or improvement of green areas, and development of tourist signage and
tour navigation systems in selected areas.
O
Component B: Water Environment Improvement (Total Cost US$55.10 million, IBRD US$37.08
o        million). This component aims to systematically improve the water ecosystem in the moat, lakes, and
ponds through the following sub-components:
(a)    Sub-component B 1: Dredging of the moat and lakes within and immediately around
Jingzhoul s Historic Town, including the removal and safe disposal of inorganic and organic
deposits.
(b)    Sub-component B2: Carrying out of infrastructure improvements of Jingzhoul s Historic
Town internal drainage and sewer network, including interceptor sewers along the Towni s moat.
(c)    Sub-component B3: Creation of wetlands along Jingzhoul s Historic Town moat and lakes,
including the construction of an ecology embankment.
(d)    Sub-component B4: Carrying out of activities aimed at enhancing Jingzhoui s Historic
Town water bodies, including flow augmentation, construction and provision of culverts, conveyance
pipes, rubber dams, pump stations, and ancillary facilities.
Component C: Transport Improvement (Total Cost US$21.35 million, IBRD US$13.14 million).
This component aims to facilitate access to the cultural heritage sites for residents and tourists alike
by improving NMT and public transport options. It will also help improve movement of tourists by
Page 2 of 12


﻿upgrading signage. It will include the following sub-components:
(a)    Sub-component Cl: Improvement of urban roads, including the rehabilitation of Jingzhoul s
Historic Town inner ring road and optimization of key road junctions.
(b)    Sub-component C2: Carrying out of activities aimed at improving non-motorized
U        transportation (NMT) including, inter alia, the establishment of color-paved bicycle lanes and
rehabilitation of protected road spaces, pedestrian crossings, and facilities to enhance pedestrian
safety.
(c)    Sub-component C3: Improvement of public transportation through, inter alia, (i) upgrading
the mini-bus tourism system, (ii) establishment of new tourism bus lines, improvement of bus stops,
and procurement of new hybrid buses.
(d)    Sub-component C4: Installation and upgrade of signage systems, including the provision of
static and variable message signs at key locations in Jingzhoul s Historic Town, as well as provision
of real-time parking guidance signage.
Component D: Assistance to Project Manageme nt and Capacity Building (Total cost US$5.15
million, IBRD US$3.95 million). This component aims to strengthen the technical and institutional
capacity of the Project Management Office (PMO) and the Project Implementing Agencies (PIAs):
(a)    Sub-component D1: Provision of support for project management, monitoring, and
supervision and independent monitoring of environmental and social safeguards, including the
provision of office equipment and supplies.
(b)    Sub-component D2: Carrying out of capacity building activities, including training,
organization of workshops and study tours for relevant staff and key stakeholders.
(c)    Sub-component D3: Provision of technical assistance, including the realization of studies on
conservation and restoration of historic sites and neighborhoods, as well as on traffic management
for Jingzhoul s Historic Town.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Jingzhou is one of the municipalities in the Hubei Province of China, with history of more than 2600
years. Total population is about 6.3 million in which about 1.56 million in urban areas. It is densely
covered by a network of waterways, as well as lakes. Jingzhou is located on the middle reaches of
Yangzi River (Chang Jiang) in the Jianghan Plain. To its east -- downstream -- lies Wuhan, the
provincial capital; to its west -- upstream -- Yichang Municipality, where the Three Gorges dam is
located. Jingmen City, another city in Hubei, lies to the north; and to its south are Yueyang and
Changde, two municipalities in Hunan province.
As one of the famous historic towns in China, Jingzhou has more than 590 PCRs that are at different
levels for conservation. It has a long and fabled past in Chinese history and in the imagination of the
people, as many of the well-known episodes in the Three Kingdoms, an ancient novel and a part of
the national literary canon read by all school children, take place there. Because of these reasons,
Jingzhou was among the first set of cities to be listed as a national historic city in 1982. Jingzhou
Historic Town (JHT) is surrounded by a 12-km City Wall, one of the best preserved and complete
City Walls in China and is of immense cultural and historical value. Recognized as a National
Cultural Heritage asset since 1996, it is now on the tentative list, along with other walled cities in
China, for nomination to be submitted to UNESCO as a World Heritage site. Its abundant historic
and cultural resources lie not only in its complete and unique ancient walls in South China, well-
known stories about the Three Kingdoms and Guan Yu relics, but also in cultural-center position of
Hubei Province embodying splendid Chinese civilization. With rich cultural history, Jingzhou
Historic Town owns a great many historic sites in and surrounding the City, such as Xirang in Dayu
Page 3 of 12


﻿flood control, the former capital of ancient Chu State, relics of the Three Kingdoms period, traces of
celebrities in all ages and other numerous sites. The cultural sites involved in the proposed project
are: Jingzhou historic town wall, Kaiyuan Taoist Temple, Xiongjiazhong Graveyard, and historical
buildings along historic streets.
o
There are about 1,700 ethnic minorities identified as Chinese ethnic minorities by the Chinese
Government, scattered across 1.56 million populations in Jingzhou Municipality. It accounts for
1.35% of the total population, including 614 of Tujia, 436 of Manchu, 260 of Hui, 167 Mongolian,
58 of Miao, 36 of Zhuang, 23 of Uygur, 23 of Dong, 12 of Tibetan, 11 of Bouyei, 11 of Li as well as
Yi, Yao and so on. There are no living quarters of these ethnic minorities and the implementation of
the project will not have any special impact on their daily life.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Chongwu Sun (GENDR)
Zhefu Liu (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The Bank policy OP 4.01. Environmental Assessment is
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                triggered and the project has been classified as Category
A. The project aims to have significant benefits in terms
of providing improved water environment, transport
services and tourism promotion in Jingzhou historic town.
The proposed project components would include civil
works for water, drainage, transport facilities, etc., which
may bring negative environmental and social impacts
during construction and operation. Potential negative
environmental and social impacts would mainly occur in
the construction phase, and they would include soil
erosion, noise, dust, traffic interruption and shipping and
disposal of dredged materials and construction waste, etc.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          Based on the information provided, there are no
4.04                                 significant natural habitats located in the proposed project
areas. However, since the project components are located
in various water bodies, this policy is triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Not applicable
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           Not applicable
Physical Cultural       Yes          One of the key objectives of the project is to protect the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 cultural heritage and the policy is triggered. Component 1
addresses crucial issues to preserve valuable cultural
heritage in the city. In the EA process, related information
has been checked and assessed, and an appropriate
mitigation and management plan has been proposed as
part of the EA. In the process, the Culture authority
participated and provided all required information and the
guidance.
Page 4 of 12


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are about 1,700 ethnic minorities identified as
BP 4.10                             Chinese ethnic minorities by the Chinese government,
scattered across 1.56 million populations in Jingzhou
Municipality. It accounts for 1.35% of the total
population, including 614 of Tujia, 436 of Manchu, 260
of Hui, 167 Mongolian, 58 of Miao, 36 of Zhuang, 23 of
Uygur, 23 of Dong, 12 of Tibetan, 11 of Bouyei, 11 of Li
as well as Yi, Yao and so on. There are no living quarters
of these ethnic minorities. The project areas are
predominantly Han Chinese and there is no ethnic
minority groups as defined by OP 4.10, present in, or have
collective attachment to the project area. The Bank
Indigenous Peoples Policy OP 4.10 is not triggered and
the Indigenous People Development Plan was not
requested.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        Involuntary Resettlement is triggered due to the
OP/BP 4.12                          requirements for land acquisition and relocation and also
the linked project as Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park
in Jingzhou.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          Not applicable
4.37
Projects on International  No       Not applicable
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No          Not applicable
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Safeguards:
Through preparation of safeguard documentation, it is found that there would be some negative
impacts during project construction, such as air-borne dust; noise from equipment and construction
during nighttime; wastewater generated from sediment dredging, grouting and washing equipment;
soil erosion during construction stage, and social impacts, such as traffic blocking and
interruption, business impact to small shops along the streets, permanent and temporary land
occupation during construction, etc. As a project activity, sediment dredging would be carried out
with estimated total volume of 301,900 m3. The sampling and test were conducted and the results
indicated that the quality of the sediments is within the applicable standard, and thus can be
classified as non-toxic material.
From proposed components, following environmental and social benefits are expected: The
project is aiming to comprehensively improve the environment on the existing rivers and lakes and
embankment with multiple means such as sediment dredging and ecological remediation
(including the construction of artificial wetland). After this project is implemented, the water
Page 5 of 12


﻿system of the ancient city of Jingzhou will become mutually connected as natural water bodies,
which will bring great ecological significance to the water system. About 301,900m3 sediments in
the water system of the ancient city will be dredged and totally 193.22t of TP and TN will be taken
away, which can effectively reduce the endogenous pollution of water system in the ancient city.
According to estimation, 470.54t of COD, 41.34t of NH4-N, 84.15t of TN and 5.88t of TP that
would be reduced through wastewater collection and interception, and being treated in wastewater
treatment plants. After the sewer collection pipes in operation inside the city, the sewage
collection rate in the ancient city will be increased to 90%. The west city wall protection and city
wall vegetation upgrading will greatly improve the city wall landscape and ecological
environment, and also create conditions for surrounding residents to enjoy the city or and its water
environment landscape closely.
Induced impact of the project was analyzed from perspectives of tourism activities, increased
visitors to local traffic, commercial and economic development, crime and additional pressure on
environmental and sanitation facilities, etc. After the project is completed, it is estimated the
tourist visit will increase to 4.01 million/year (or 11,000 per day) by 2020 and the increased
volume of tourists will pose pressure on existing infrastructures. It was realized that through
reviewing the tourism development plan of the city that there are already sufficient
accommodation capacity in hotels and sanitation service in place for the increased tourists, as well
as for wastewater treatment and solid waste management and disposal, based on existing facilities.
To address the increased demand for transport due to the tourism development, the project will
upgrade the inner ring road through structural interventions and upgrade the traffic management
through a combination of structural and non-structural interventions without expanding the
existing roads. In addition, the project will finance public transportation to connect the ancient city
with the Xiongjiazhong Area to handle the tourist flow between the two attractions. After the
project implementation, a comprehensive traffic management system including the road network,
slow traffic management, parking, public transportation, and traffic signage subsystems will be
developed.
Due diligence for associated facilities: due diligence was carried out for associated projects/
activities, including operation of existing wastewater treatment plants that will treat sewers
collected by the sewer pipes installed under the project; operation of existing solid waste
incineration plant that will receive the domestic solid waste collected under the project; water
transfer project from Changjiang to Hanjiang, that is in trial operation stage and from which 10m3/
second out of 350-500 m3/s water flow is allocated to Jingzhou Municipality. The detail results of
the due diligence are in the ESIA with following summary: All above mentioned facilities are in
operation and comply with national and local environmental policies and requirements. The EIA
reports were prepared in accordance with national and local regulations and local environmental
protection bureau (EPB) conducts monitoring to get the data for management.
As an important element, cumulative impact assessment was considered along with ESIA
preparation. The methodology for the cumulative impact assessment defined in the Good Practice
Handbook-Cumulative Impact Assessment of IFC has been adopted. During the assessment,
various VECs were considered based on the nature, location, scale and magnitude of the proposed
project. Through the consultation with relevant groups and experts, the VECs selected for further
cumulative assessment is the water quality in the city in terms of COD and NH3-N. The relevant
projects in the past, present and future have been identified through review of the water pollution
load reduction plans for the 11th five-year and 12th five-year plan respectively, and the
implementation reports issued by government on the 11th five-year and the progress reports for
Page 6 of 12


﻿the 12th year. Thus a matrix method is used to assess the cumulative impacts of these project and
the proposed project. The result of the cumulative impact show that this project is an important
part of the overall water pollution control effort in the city and the combined reduction of the
water pollution loads from the projects exceed the target set by the government.
o
OP OP/BP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources (PCR): Based on detailed screenings and the survey
conducted during ESIA process and consultation with local culture authorities, a chapter on PCR
was developed. As a cultural heritage conservation project, the investment in cultural relic
conservation and tourism development has surpassed 50% of the total investment in this proposed
project and constituted the most important part of this project. This project involves many
national, provincial and municipal cultural relic conservation units, so the protection of cultural
relics is particularly important during the project construction process. The identification of
cultural relics, status quo of cultural relici s damage, preservation and restoration and other
information related to cultural relics involved in this project are provided by local cultural and
tourism authorities and be included in the ESIA. As part of the EMP, mitigation measures were
developed and included, including chance-find procedures.
Social Safeguards:
The project has significant social benefits as it supports the improvement to conservation of
cultural heritage, promotion to tourism development and improvement to water environment
quality in Jingzhou Municipality. A social assessment covering various social aspects was carried
out for each of the proposed components. The project triggers OP 4.12 due to the resettlement
requirements in historic town of Jingzhou. The project will require 8,180 square meters of
structures, including 3,600 square meters of concrete and brick structures of private owned
buildings, 4,580 square meters of concrete and brick structures of enterprises buildings. The
project will impact 38 families with 125 persons due to housing demolition and two shops owned
by two enterprises will be relocated. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) was prepared including
details on resettlement policy procedures and requirements that will be followed during project
implementation, and compensation rates, mitigation measures to restore livelihoods, and
institutional and monitoring arrangements. A resettlement policy framework was prepared to guide
any project modifications that might cause any resettlement and land acquisitions, and local
funded projects that will be linked to the Bank supported project prior to the Close of the Bank
loan.
The Xiongjiazhong Archaeological Park was identified as a linked project prior to the project pre-
appraisal follow-up mission. This national archaeological park was approved by the Chinese
central government in 2008 and the civil works of the project was completed in 2013. This park
was opened to public in 2014. About 59 hectares of collective land were required and 17 rural
families with 3,736 square meters of their housing were relocated in their original village. Due
diligence review of this locally funded project was undertaken and found in compliance with
Chinese land law, and Hubei provincial land management regulation and local regulation have
been followed and the affected people received their compensation. Most of the people received
about RMB 500,000, with RMB 1 million as the highest. They joined in Chinese pension system as
social insurance and medical insurance. 8 of them were employed in the park. Among those 8
persons, 6 are female. The village committee will help those displaced families to receive their
housing certifications before December 31, 2015. The due diligence review for Xiongjiazhong
Archaeological Park also found that resettlement was undertaken in consistence with OP 4.12
objectives.
Page 7 of 12


﻿2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
As designed, the proposed project will 1) conserve Jingzhoul s key cultural heritage assets and to
also foster tourism development; 2) systematically improve the water ecosystem in the moat, lakes
and ponds; and 3) facilitate access to the cultural heritage sites for residents and tourists alike by
introducing multimodal transport options. Therefore, there was no any potential large scale,
significant and/or irreversible environmental impacts to be found. There would be some negative
impacts during project construction as described in the above section.
P.          The resettlement impacts as potential resettlement impacts that might be caused by the project
component named as rehabilitation and utilization of historical buildings were not included in the
RAP since whether those about 28 families who would be relocated or stay in their original
apartments were not determined. The RPF will guide this activity through citizen's engagement.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Alternatives were considered for different project components during the project feasibility study
and ESIA preparation from following four aspects: 1) with/without project: it can be seen that
while the project will generate some environmental; impacts during construction and operation,
these impacts can be prevented and minimized through good on-site management and timely
supervision. In the long-term, the objective of the project is to improve the sustainable tourism,
increase the residents  quality of life. The residents are also supportive that are known through
interview and consultation; 2) comparison of dredging scenario: the comparison was conducted
from following aspects: dredging method, de-watering method, final disposal of dredged
materials. It was recommended that hydraulic dredging (wet dredging) with combined dewatering
and solidification will be used, in order to have less environmental impact with less land
occupation; 3) alternative of water system connection schemes: based on two schemes proposed in
FSR, it was recommended to consider using scheme two because of larger environmental benefit;
and 4) alternative of artificial wetland system schemes: three schemes were proposed based on
different possible types of wetlands. In order to minimize pollution load and enhance self-cleaning
capacity of the water body, it was recommended to use scheme two three. Details are in the
Chapter 4 of the ESIA report.
Prior to the project pre-appraisal follow-up mission, resettlement impact analysis and optimization
to the project design contributed significantly to reduccing the resettlement impacts, such as the
project scoping and location selections of the tourism centers.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental:
An Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and an environmental and social
management plan (ESMP) were carried out to determine the key environmental and social
impacts, the mitigation measures and environmental monitoring program and necessary
institutional arrangement as well as capacity building development. The documents have been
prepared on the basis of Chinese legal and policy framework for environmental protection, master
plans and environmental plans as well as applicable Bank safeguard policies and Bank group??s
Environment, Health and Safety Guidelines.
Page 8 of 12


﻿The ESIA report, prepared by the client and their consultants, thoroughly addressed the potential
environmental and social impacts envisaged for the project, and developed adequate measures in
the ESMP to avoid, minimize, mitigate and compensate the potential adverse impacts. As a
Category A Project, an ESIA Summary has been prepared for distribution to Bank's Board for
O
review. The preparation of environmental safeguards documents followed the relevant national
laws/regulations and guidelines, as well as Bank's safeguards policies and environmental health
and safety (EHS) guidelines.
The major negative environmental impacts are expected short term mainly during project
construction phase, including dust, noise, traffic interruption, sediment dredging, etc. A stand-
alone ESMP has been prepared based on the findings of the ESIA report. The ESMP summarized
the key environmental impacts and detailed the environmental management and supervision
organizations/institutional arrangement and responsibilities, mitigation measures, training plan,
monitoring plan, and budget estimates of ESMP implementation. It includes sets of Environmental
Codes of Practice (ECOPs) for contractors, which will be incorporated into bidding documents
and contracts to ensure effective implementation. The ESMP also included the mitigation
measures to reduce and eliminate the impacts to natural habitats, e.g., wetland. In addition, chance-
find procedures have been included in the ESMP.
The contractors are requested to send the dredged sediments to the designated sites, such as
landfill, for disposal. The PMO will carry out supervision and monitoring in implementation. The
contractor is also requested to rehabilitate the land that is temporarily occupied for construction
activities.
The ESMP also includes environmental monitoring programs for both construction and operation
phases. The parameters to be monitored include noise, dust, and water quality. To ensure the strict
and efficient implementation of the mitigation measures proposed, including environmental
obligations during construction, a program of monitoring activities has been developed as part of
the ESMP. The project progress reports furnished by the PMO will include a section for ESMP
implementation and related environmental monitoring reports.
o
Institutional arrangement also was determined in the ESIA and ESMP. Jingzhou PMO will take
overall responsibility to coordinate and oversee the ESMP implementation, including management
and supervision, training, and preparation of project progress report based on the reports and
a          monitoring information from each project implementation unit (PIU), etc. Each PIU will take
respective responsibility for ESMP implementation, including hiring qualified environmental
expertise for environmental monitoring, supervising contractor to implement the mitigation
measures, promoting good practice of environmental protection measures and technologies. With
related mitigation measures and clauses to be incorporated in the bidding documents and contracts,
contractors will have obligations and mandates to implement the ESMP.
The mitigation measures were proposed in the ESIA and specifically detailed in the ESMP to
tackle and reduce the environmental issues. The relevant clauses would be included in the bidding
documents and the contracts to ensure implementation and enforcement.
Social:
Citizen's engagements were led by Wuhan University, an experienced national consulting team,
which contributed significantly to the preparation of the RAP and project scoping as well the
location selections of tourism center. Affected persons and enterprises were consulted and
encouraged to participate in the resettlement planning process and the preparation of the project.
Page 9 of 12


﻿Their feedback was incorporated in the project design and RAP. Mitigation measures were
undertaken properly to minimize the resettlement negative impacts.
The social assessment was undertaken covering various social aspects for each of the proposed
O
components. Local people's concerns were incorporated into the project design and mitigation
measures were appropriately undertaken to reduce the negative impacts caused by land acquisition
and resettlement relocation. The affected people considered that the project would provide
opportunities to develop their family business and to improve their living standards. The people in
the project area also considered that the poor infrastructure was the main reason that slowed down
local economic development. It constrained their family economic development, attraction to
investment projects, and poor business and tourism development. They desire to improve their
living and to increase their family income through the project development.
A disaggregated gender analysis in the affected community was undertaken by Wuhan University
with support from local agencies, listening to womeni s expectations, and collecting ideas and
recommendations that were incorporated in the designs of subprojects. Gender disaggregated
information were also collected and used in the RAP to ensure that womeni s interests could be
safeguarded during any resettlement implementation. Women will play an increasingly important
role in the project implementation. They could participate in the project implementation and in
training courses for family business development and decision-making. The team will continue to
monitor gender impact during project implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Three rounds of public consultations were carried out during the ESIA process. The technique
used for the public consultations include surveys using public opinion questionnaires, focused
group discussions, public meetings with key stakeholders and interviews with some project
affected persons. The issues raised during these consultations have been incorporated in the ESIA
and ESMP. Furthermore, feedbacks to the concerns and issues collected in public consultation
have been provided to the concerned groups and documented in the ESIA. The ESIA and ESMP
documents and other project related documents have been fully disclosed locally through websites
and local newspaper since October 2014 and a notice was made on Jingzhou Daily on March 26,
2015, the most popular local newspaper, as required by national and Bank's policies. The English
language ESIA and ESMP have been disclosed through Bank's InfoShop on June 14, 2015.
The RAP and other project related documents have been disclosed locally through Jingzhou Daily
by May 15, 2015. A resettlement information booklet providing details regarding compensation
rates and other entitlement policies and grievance procedures will be distributed to the displaced
people prior to the resettlement implementation. The RAP was disclosed through Bank's InfoShop
on June 14, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              13-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Jun-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  12-Oct-2015
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 10 of 12


﻿"In country" Disclosure
China                                                      26-Mar-2015
Comments:
O
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                                13-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             14-Jun-2015
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                      15-May-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[  ]  No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ]  No [   ]  NA [ X]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [X] No [     ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Page 11 of 12


﻿Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ X] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
a          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yan F. Zhang,Ji You
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Surhid P. Gautam (SA)                Date: 09-Dec-2015
Practice Manager!      Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)               Date: 09-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


