                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                         Report No.: ISDSC18730

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Sep-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Central African Republic       Project ID:     P156721
                            Project Name:      Central African Republic REDD+ Readiness (P156721)
                            Task Team          Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEN07

                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      3.80                   Total Bank Financing:         0.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                        Amount
                              Borrower                                                                  0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                  3.80
                              Total                                                                     3.80
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective is the design of a socially and environmentally sound national REDD+
                           strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation and to inform the
                           development of a national reference emission level for REDD+.
                           C. Project Description
                           This REDD+ Readiness Preparation grant will provide financing for several of the major components
                           of the R-PP to ensure a basic level of REDD+ Readiness. The R-PP approved by the FCPF in May
                           2013 is organized into six sections: 1) Organization and Consultation; 2) Development of the
                           national REDD+ strategy; 3) Development of a baseline scenario; 4) Measurement, Reporting and
                           Verification (MRV) Systems; 5) Budget and Timeline, and; 6) Monitoring Plan and Productive
                         Measurement Framework. Other partners are supporting key aspects of these elements (notably the
                         EU and FAO on MRV and assessment of strategic options), however some budget is allocated to
                         each aspect of REDD+ readiness to complement planned activities. Table 1 presents a consolidated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         view of funding under this grant for activities across the main sections as outlined in the R-PP.
                         Activities to be financed by the proposed grant are explained in more detail below.

                         The evolution of REDD+ in the Central African Republic has been informed by past experience,
                         including development and conservation projects, the development of the protected areas, the
                         development of the R-PP, and the evolution of international dialogue about REDD+ over the past
                         years. While the FCPF financing is not enough to cover all of the activities envisaged in the R-PP, it
                         will be used to implement key components which represent strategic entry points to building capacity
                         in certain areas. Other sources of funding from bilateral donors are being identified and will be used
                         to enhance the ongoing activities. Particular attention will be given to the development of the
                         institutional and governance framework for REDD+ readiness.

                         Resources from the Central African Forest Initiative (CAFI) will be used to develop a National
                         Investment Framework for the implementation of activities that address the drivers of deforestation
                         and forest degradation in the CAR. Preparation resources of US$ 1 million were agreed upon by
                         CAFI➢❨ s Executive Board on February 22 2016, and will be used complementarily to the readiness
                         resources of this grant to identify strategic investments that are consistent with the national REDD+
                         strategy. Maximum effort will be used to harmonize the different resources so as not to duplicate
                         work, while at the same time being consistent with the particular objectives of each funding source.
                         Appropriate fiduciary mechanisms will be established in order to allow for clear and effective
                         monitoring of the different resources. More details on the activities for CAFI preparation resources
                         for the CAR are found in Annexes C and D.

                         Readiness Preparation Activity Components
                         Component 1: Institutional Arrangements for REDD+ Readiness (US$ 1.3M). This activity
                         corresponds to sections 1a and 1c of the R-PP. This component will support the structures that will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         lead the coordination and implementation of the REDD+ Readiness process in CAR. Notably this
                         will include support for the operationalization and functioning of the REDD+ Technical
                         Coordination agency (CT REDD+), including the hiring of staff and technical specialists; operational
                         and travel costs; personnel management tools and training; office supplies (including computers),
                         furniture and maintenance; technical trainings and other capacity building; communications. Support
                         for institutional arrangements of the national strategy preparation process aims to complete the
                         operationalization of the proposed entities responsible for REDD+ readiness process and also enable
                         the implementation of the process of consultation and stakeholder participation. Component 1
                         activities are grouped into two sub-components.

                         Sub-component 1.1 - Support for governance structures for national REDD+ strategy development.
                         This activity will provide resources for holding regular sessions of the National REDD+ Committee
                         chaired by the Ministry of Planning, Economy and International Cooperation, (MEPCI) Inter
                         Prefectural Committees at the sub-national level, and strengthening financial and technical functions
                         of the REDD+ Technical Coordination agency. This activity will support the recruitment of technical
                         consultants, fiduciary management consultants and the procurement of goods and materials to enable
                         proper functioning of the CT REDD+. This activity will also support audits and monitoring and
                         evaluation of the grant.

                         Sub-component 1.2 - Support for consultation and participation processes. This activity will support
                         the implementation of consultation and participation processes for REDD+ readiness. Resources will
                         be used to strengthen the inclusive and participatory nature of the REDD + process in the CAR by
                         funding the consultation and communication plans and the plan for capacity building of stakeholders
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (National Committee, Technical Coordination, Platform of Civil Society, Indigenous Peoples and
                         private sector). Specific actions will be funded to strengthen the integration of the gender approach
                         and also ensure greater engagement of vulnerable groups and the private sector involved in REDD+
                         issues as a key partner in the implementation of development actions.

                         Sub-component 1.3 - Support for the design of a Feedback and Grievance Redress Mechanism.
                         During the Readiness preparation phase, numerous questions, inquiries, and grievances may arise
                         about the REDD+ Readiness strategy and the process of developing it (i.e. process of consultation
                         and participation processes). The consultative part of the Strategic Environmental and Social
                         Assessment (SESA) should help to identify issues and stakeholders and provide a forum for
                         discussion. Nevertheless it is deemed important that during the Readiness preparation phase,
                         effective mechanisms and capacity will need to be put in place to address grievances that may arise,
                         and build the base for future forest investments. This will be done in alignment with the objectives
                         identified in the RPBA under Pillar 1: Support peace, reconciliation and security, notably on the
                         implementation of national mechanisms for the peaceful resolution of civil conflicts.

                         Component 2: Support for preparation of the National REDD+ Strategy (US$ 2.5M), this activity
                         corresponds to sections 2a, 2b and 3 of the R-PP. This component aims to supplement the actions
                         already undertaken by the CAR and its partners in the process of building the national REDD+
                         strategy. Resources will be used to finance additional studies to deepen the understanding of strategic
                         options for addressing the deforestation and forest degradation and conduct a Strategic
                         Environmental and Social Assessment of the proposed policy options including the development of
                         an Environmental and Social Management Framework. This component will also support and
                         supplement, in synergy with the other technical and financial partners, the activities leading up to the
                         proposal of a reference emissions level compliant with international requirements in this area. It is
                         organized into three sub-components. To the extent possible these activities will be bundled into one
Public Disclosure Copy




                         or several large contracts to reduce the transaction costs of multiple procurement processes and to
                         maintain consistent between the different outputs.

                         Sub-component 2.1 - Analysis of strategic options to address drivers of deforestation and forest
                         degradation. This activity will finance analytical studies on addressing the drivers of deforestation
                         and forest degradation in order to inform the national REDD+ strategy. This will improve the
                         understanding of the dynamics of developing agricultural and livestock activities at national level, to
                         better understand the pressures such as the issues associated with fuelwood as well as the
                         development of the mining sector. Additionally, analysis will be conducted to better understand how
                         to increase the economic performance of the forestry sector so that it can contribute to sustainable
                         economic growth and development that provides local and national benefits in line with
                         recommendations from the Forest Sector Policy Note. A full list of the studies to be carried out can
                         be found in Annex D.

                         Sub-component 2.2 - Development of an environmental and social management framework adapted
                         to REDD+-This activity will finance the preparation of a Strategic Environmental and Social
                         Assessment (SESA) of the strategic options of the national REDD+ strategy with all the instruments
                         that will be used in the implementation of this strategy. The activity will also finance analyses and
                         studies for the establishment of benefit sharing mechanism for potential revenues from REDD+ and
                         will also be used to develop a feedback and grievance redress mechanism to handle complaints that
                           might arise from the implementation of REDD+ activities in the country.

                           Sub-component 2.3 - Support for the development of a national Reference Emissions Level (REL)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           ➢❨ This activity will be used to complement actions already undertaken by the REDD+ Technical
                           Coordination agency as well as all technical and financial partners for the development of a REL.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           This activity is a predominantly a technical assistance activity that will not involve localized
                           investments. The focus on consultations and future planning will focus on the Prefectures wtih the
                           most significant forest cover, namely: Southwest, Southeast, and North.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Borrowers institutional capacity for implementing safeguards is weak, as is overall implementing
                           capacity. The Bank team will reinforce this capacity through a capacity strengthening program that is
                           an integral part of the overall implementation support.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSU01)
                           Erik Reed (GEN07)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes           In line with the nature of the REDD+ Readiness
                           OP/BP 4.01                                     preparation activities, the Government of Central
                                                                          African Republic will use a Strategic Environmental
                                                                          and Social Assessment (SESA) as the applicable
                                                                          safeguards approach. The strength of the SESA for
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                          REDD+ is that it will combine analytical work and
                                                                          consultation in an iterative fashion to inform the
                                                                          preparation of the REDD+ strategy. The SESA will
                                                                          help ensure compliance with the Bank's safeguard
                                                                          policies by integrating key environmental and social
                                                                          considerations relevant to REDD+ including all those
                                                                          covered by the safeguard policies.

                                                                          The SESA will help the Government of Central
                                                                          African Republic formulate its REDD+ strategy in a
                                                                          way that reflects inputs from key stakeholder groups
                                                                          and addresses the main environmental and social
                                                                          issues identified. The SESA will be accompanied by
                                                                          an Environmental and Social Management
                                                                          Framework (ESMF) as a distinct output, which
                                                                          provides a framework for managing and mitigating
                                                                          the environmental and social risk related to
                                                                          investments and carbon finance transactions in the
                                                                          context of the future implementation of REDD+.
                                                                          Certain future REDD+ investments will still require
                                                             specific Environmental and Social Management
                                                             Plans (ESMP), but these will benefit from the SESA
                                                             and ESMF, which will include standard methods and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             procedures, along with appropriate institutional
                                                             arrangements for screening, preparing, reviewing,
                                                             implementing and monitoring specific ESMPs to
                                                             prevent adverse impacts as well as cumulative
                                                             impacts.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy seeks to ensure that all options proposed
                                                             in the National REDD+ Strategy should take into
                                                             account the conservation of biodiversity, as well as
                                                             the numerous environmental services and products
                                                             that natural habitats provide to human society.
                                                             Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                             significant positive impacts on natural habitats, as the
                                                             country puts in place an effective strategy to reduce
                                                             loss of natural forests. The SESA will address issues
                                                             related to natural habitats and potential impacts of
                                                             the National REDD+ Strategy.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
                                                             significant positive impacts on forests, in that the
                                                             main goal of the program is to reduce deforestation
                                                             and forest degradation, while contributing to the
                                                             well-being of forest-dependent communities.
                                                             Potential impactof the National REDD+ Strategy on
                                                             natural forests will be assessed through the SESA
                                                             and included in the ESMF. The SESA and associated
                                                             ESMF will reflect the requirements of the Bank➢❨ s
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Operational Policy regarding forest management, in
                                                             particular as these relate to the establishment of
                                                             plantations.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   This project involves planning and technical
                                                             assistance, and will not directly involve any pest
                                                             management activities. Nevertheless, the ESMF and
                                                             SESA will address potential pest management needs
                                                             in subsequent (post-project) REDD+ follow-up
                                                             activities involving forestry plantations or
                                                             agricultural intensification.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   This project does not include civil works and no
                         OP/BP 4.11                          physical cultural resources are anticipated to be
                                                             affected. Nevertheless, the ESMF and SESA will
                                                             provide criteria and procedures for properly
                                                             addressing physical cultural resources (including
                                                             sacred forests, trees, and shrubs) in future REDD+
                                                             implementation activities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes   It is possible that some of the activities to be
                                 4.10                                                                                   implemented as part of the National REDD+
                                                                                                                        Strategy would take place in areas inhabited by
                                                                                                                        Indigenous Peoples. This policy underscores the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        need for the government of the Republic of Central
                                                                                                                        African Republic to identify Indigenous Peoples in
                                                                                                                        the project area, consult with them in a culturally
                                                                                                                        appropriate manner at each stage of project
                                                                                                                        preparation and implementation, and ensure that they
                                                                                                                        participate in, and benefit from, REDD+ activities.
                                                                                                                        Adverse impacts on Indigenous Peoples will be
                                                                                                                        avoided. Drawing on the SESA, an Indigenous
                                                                                                                        Peoples Planning Framework will be prepared, and
                                                                                                                        integrated into the ESMF.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        This project does not plan to undertake on-the-
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                ground investments that would involve involuntary
                                                                                                                        land acquisition and/or new restrictions of access to
                                                                                                                        protected forest areas. However, all project-
                                                                                                                        supported land use and forest conservation planning
                                                                                                                        activities will take measures to avoid involuntary
                                                                                                                        resettlement or adverse social impacts upon forest-
                                                                                                                        based livelihoods to the extent feasible, consistent
                                                                                                                        with the guidance provided by OP 4.12 during up
                                                                                                                        REDD+ implementation. Through the SESA process,
                                                                                                                        any issues related to land acquisition or involuntary
                                                                                                                        resettlement will be identified and a Resettlement
                                                                                                                        Policy Framework (RPF) will be prepared. In terms
                                                                                                                        of restriction to natural resources a Process
                                                                                                                        Framework (PF) will be prepared to account for any
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        eventual restriction of access to natural resources of
                                                                                                                        protected areas.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The REDD+ activities do not involve the
                                                                                                                        construction of new or use of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The REDD+ activities do not involve international
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The REDD+ activities under this project do not
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                involve disputed areas between countries, as defined
                                                                                                                        in OP 7.60.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Dec-2018
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      It is anticipated that the SESA and ESMF studies and activities will be launched within the first 12
                                      months of the projects effectiveness and be developed by the end of 2018
                         IV. APPROVALS



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                         Task Team Leader(s): Name: Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna
                         Approved By:
                         Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)             Date: 27-Sep-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Practice Manager/    Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)           Date: 27-Sep-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
