INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR16187
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Cote d'Ivoire              Project ID:  P082817
Project Name: Emergency Post-Conflict Assistance Project (PO82817)
Task Team       Nicolas Perrin
Leader(s):
Estimated       07-May-2007                Estimated    17-Jul-2007
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU01                       Lending      Emergency Recovery Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Other social services (55%), Central government administration (20%),
Vocational training (17%), General education sector (5%), Heal th (3%)
Theme:          Conflict prevention and post-conflict reconstruction (50%), Improving labor
markets (25%), Income Support for Old Age, Disability & Survivorship (25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
O
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     120.00            Total Bank Financing:  120.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
IDA Grant                                                      120.00
Total                                                          120.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 5


﻿Improve conflict-affected communities' and individuals' opportunities for economic reintegration and
access to social services, which will accelerate Cote dIvoire's crisis recovery and strengthen the
prospects for sustainable peace in its territory.
O
This additional financing (AF) was formally requested by the Government of Cote d'Ivoire to scale-
up this successful project and increase its development effectiveness. It will help finance the costs
associated with upgraded activities in support of (i) the socio-economic reintegration of vulnerable
youth; (ii) the identification process in fragile areas; and (iii) community rehabilitation. The
institutional and implementing arrangements of the parent project (PO82817) will be retained.
The purpose of the proposed AF is to consolidate peace-building efforts by strengthening social
cohesion. The key expected outcomes from the activities to be supported include: (a) 9,000
vulnerable youth reintegrated; (b) improved access to civil registration in 10 fragile areas; (c)
improved collective infrastructure in 200 communities at risk; and (d) sustained local development
and conflict mitigation through 200 active community development committees.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
As with the parent project, resources will be concentrated in the most conflict-affected and/or
conflict-prone areas. Accordingly, 10 d6partements in the center, north, and west of the country, as
well as one commune in Abidjan, will be selected. No national park or reserve will be included or
otherwise affected by the project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The Additional Financing does not trigger new safeguards
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               policies and it continues to be an environmental category
B project. The project continues to apply OP/BP 4.01 and
the safeguard instrument prepared for the parent project:
the Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) which was prepared, consulted upon, and
disclosed in-country in 2009. Since that time, three ESIAs
have been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
No
Page 2 of 5


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP
Pr2iects on International No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
U         Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Additional Financing will not trigger new safeguards policies and it will continue to be an
environmental category B project. The project continues to apply OP/BP 4.01 and the safeguard
instrument prepared for the parent project: the Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) which was prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed in-country in 2009. Since that time,
three ESIAs have been prepared, consulted upon, and disclosed. The components and the activities
are the same as the parent project: (1) Socio-Economic Reintegration; (2) Identification Process;
(3) Community Rehabilitation and (4) Capacity building and project administration. In addition,
an evaluation of the implementation of this framework was conducted in July 2013, according to
which the project is safeguard compliant and implementation has been satisfactory. The PCU has
an environmental specialist who will continue to regularly monitor and follow-up with any
safeguard issues.
The project will involve some rehabilitation/construction of housing and other structures under
revised component 3 on community rehabilitation; but these activities do not trigger OP 4.12 since
the rehabilitation related civil works will take place within the existing physical footprint of a
given structure to be restored and there is no need for land acquisition. The CDD approach to
selecting subproject targets will continue to be used in the AF, whereby the community itself,
through the Community Development Committee, decides on the works to be done. Land
acquisition is not an issue because the small land areas where works are done are already allocated
for a specific purpose (for instance for a school or a well). Because the community itself is
managing the rehabilitation works, there will be no losses of assets or restrictions of access to
resources. This is further enforced through the operational manual for Component 3, which
contains detailed checklists for the communities in the selection and implementation of works;
based on the screening for environmental and social impacts. Any construction related impacts
such as noise or dust will be handled as per the provisions of the ESMF. ESMPs will be prepared
as needed for the civil works. For works with negligible impacts environmental measures based on
national laws and regulations will apply.
No large scale or significant irreversible impacts are anticipated under this AF project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Given the nature of the activities (which focus on rebuilding social capital through community
driven projects and support targeted populations in their longer-term socio-economic
reintegration), no long-term impact due to project activities is foreseen.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Page 3 of 5


﻿N.A.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Activities financed under the project will be screened using a standardized approach based on the
tools developed under the original project. An Environment and Social Management Framework
has already been produced and used to guide project activities under the original project. ESMPs
will be prepared as needed for the small civil works expected to be undertaken under this AF. For
works with negligible impacts environmental measures based on national laws and regulations will
apply.
The PCU has an environmental specialist who will continue to regularly monitor and follow-up
with any safeguard issues.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project will continue to focus on vulnerable populations, which have been affected by the
conflict and/or are at risk of further violence and exclusion. The project will rely on the
Community Development Committees (comit6 de d6veloppement communautaire, CDC), that will
be established or reactivated in all 200 communities in the 10 targeted d6partements. Last,
officiers d'6tat civil and agents d'6tat civil will also be involved under Component 2.
The Project Coordination Unit (PCU), sponsored by the Prime Minister's Office, and its three
Regional Offices will be responsible for compliance with the Project's ESMF and ensuring the
dissemination and adequate use of the environmental and social screening tools required at all
levels of stakeholders. The PCU has an in-house environmental specialist who will continue to be
in charge of safeguard compliance during the implementation of this AF project.
The process envisaged is based on environmental and social screening checklists, and involves
three steps:
0
1.    An initial checklist will be used for a pre-screening to exclude (a) activities expected to
have a harmful environmental or social impact, and (b) activities that have no environmental or
social implications;
a           2.    An additional checklist will be used for detailed screening of sub-projects; and
3.    Standard technical guidelines and/or mitigation measures by area of potential sub-project
(e.g., construction and rehabilitation of buildings, water supply and sanitation, etc.) will guide
project staff in assessing possible social and environmental impacts and identifying appropriate
measures.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           No
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-May-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                           28-Oct-2013
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 4 of 5


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Cote d'Ivoire                                            14-May-2009
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA[    ]
report?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[    NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nicolas Perrin
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)           Date: 03-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Jan Weetjens (PMGR)                Date: 04-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 5 of 5


