                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA13259
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Oct-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Oct-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Georgia                            Project ID:   P149953
                            Project Name:      Secondary Road Asset Management Project (P149953)
                            Task Team          Natalya Stankevich
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          30-Nov-2015                        Estimated   24-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GTI03                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Public administration- Transportation (10%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and
                                              Highways (90%)
                            Theme(s):         Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (10%), Managing
                                              for development results (10%), Regulation and competition p olicy (10%), Trade
                                              facilitation and market access (35%), Rural services and infrastructure (35%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      60.00           Total Bank Financing:                  50.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                   10.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      50.00
                              Total                                                                                      60.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives are (i) to improve road users’ access to social services and
                           markets on the project roads in a safe and sustainable manner, and (ii) to enhance road asset
                           management for the secondary roads network in Georgia.

                                                                       Page 1 of 10
                         3. Project Description
                         The Project will contribute to the implementation of the Government’s Program for Improvement
                         and Preservation of the Secondary Road Assets (2016-2020) which is being drafted as Five-year
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Rolling Program. The Five-year Program is estimated to cover the rehabilitation and periodic
                         maintenance of about 970 km of secondary roads and routine maintenance of the entire secondary
                         road network, and is to be financed primarily from the GOG’s budget with a minor contribution
                         (around 13 percent) from the Bank’s loan in the amount of US$50 million over a five-year period.

                         Secondary Road Asset Management Project (SRAMP) comprises of the following three components:

                         Component 1: Road Asset Improvement and Preservation (Estimated Cost US$58 million; IBRD
                         financing: US$48.1 million). The objective of this component is two-fold: (i) to support the
                         improvement and preservation of secondary roads assets and (ii) further stimulate the growth of the
                         local industry through innovative performance-based contracting methods: output- and performance-
                         based rehabilitation (OPRC) and design-build (DB) contracts. This is a Disbursement Linked
                         Indicator (DLI) based component, and its financing will be released upon the achievement of agreed
                         DLIs. This support will consist of three sub-components:

                         (a)      Sub-component 1.1: Improvement and Maintenance of Secondary Roads in Guria through
                         OPRC (Estimated Cost US$ 25.0 million; IBRD financing: US$20.8 million). This sub-component
                         will support the scaling up of OPRC to another region of the country (e.g., Guria, one of the poorest
                         regions in the country). It will finance a single OPRC which will be a five-year contract with
                         sufficient length of roads under rehabilitation in order to attract the private sector. The contract is
                         expected to cover the rehabilitation and periodic maintenance of about 75 km of secondary road
                         sections and routine maintenance of about 240 km of the same rehabilitated sections and other
                         sections rehabilitated in the recent years. Payment will be based on achieving and maintaining
                         specified levels of service and not on the completion of physical works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (b)      Sub-component 1.2: Rehabilitation and Improvement of Secondary Roads Assets through
                         Design-Build Contracts (Estimated Cost US$ 28.8 million; IBRD financing: US$23.9 million). This
                         sub-component will provide support to the implementation of RD’s design-build program, which is
                         estimated at US$36 million for the period of 2016-2020. SRAMP will contribute 80 percent of the
                         finances (equivalent to US$25 million) to this sub-program; the remaining 20 percent will be
                         provided by the State budget outside this Project’s scope. This sub-program will finance the
                         rehabilitation of about 120 km of several secondary roads, including about 90 km in three regions -
                         Mtskheta-Mtianeti, Racha-Lechkhumi and Shida Kartli which will be financed through this Project.
                         Improvement and rehabilitation works will be executed within the roads’ existing horizontal
                         alignment, with bridge and culvert repairs where appropriate. As some of the design-build sub-
                         program roads are located in mountainous terrain, climate resilient standards to be developed under
                         Component 2 will be adopted and incorporated in the respective Bidding Documents.

                         (c)     Sub-component 1.3: Supervision and Monitoring Services of Civil Works (Estimated Cost
                         US$4.2 million: IBRD financing: US$ US$3.5 million). This sub-component will finance two
                         separate contracts for the provision of the monitoring and supervision services of OPRC and DB
                         contracts. The primary role of the Monitoring and Supervision Consultants will be to ensure that the
                         pre-defined levels of service are complied with in both OPRC and Design-Build contracts. The
                         Consultants will also provide initial road safety audits of the designs and ensure that road safety
                         engineering countermeasures are incorporated in the design of capital works. RD will take over the


                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         OPRC monitoring role from the Monitoring Consultant in the last two years of the OPRC execution.
                         Geotagging will be used to monitor and supervise the implementation of the OPRC and Design-Build
                         contracts in order to increase transparency of contract management and ensure timely solution of any
Public Disclosure Copy




                         emerging quality or performance issues.

                         Component 2: Enhanced Secondary Road Assets Planning and Management (Estimated Cost US$1.0
                         million; IBRD financing: US$0.83 million). The objective of this component is to support
                         institutional reforms aimed at integrating innovative management practices in RD’s overall road
                         assets management and enhancing RD’s capacity in multi-year programming and annual planning for
                         secondary road assets on a country level, not project level. It is a DLI-based component, and
                         financing will be linked to the achievement of the agreed DLIs. This Component will build on a
                         number of activities which are being implemented under the ongoing Bank-funded projects and
                         involve (i) the development of RAMS under SLRP-II, (ii) improvement of RD’s methodology for
                         and the preparation of a five-year rolling program and annual plans for the secondary road assets, and
                         (iii) piloting of International Road [Safety] Assessment Program (iRAP) under SLRP-III. This
                         Component will support the following activities:

                         (a)      Sub-component 2.1. Enhancement of RAMS and Improved Assets Programming and
                         Planning (Estimated Cost US$0.2 million; IBRD financing: US$0.17 million). This sub-component
                         will finance the Technical Assistance to support (i) enhancement of RAMS with the development of
                         a bridge and tunnel management sub-system, and (ii) collection and maintenance of inventory and
                         condition data on bridges, tunnels and other artificial structures on secondary roads to ensure that RD
                         covers all assets on its secondary road network during its multi-year programming and annual
                         planning. This Component will also monitor by the use of the relevant DLI that the Five-Year
                         Rolling Program and annual plans are prepared by RD based on (i) the methodology which is to be
                         soon revised and improved under the Third Secondary and Local Roads Project and (ii) annually
                         collected data on traffic on the secondary roads, and condition of roads and artificial structures.

                         (b)      Sub-component 2.2. Integrated Road Safety Management (Estimated Cost US$0.2 million;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IBRD financing: US$0.17 million). This sub-component will finance (i) scaling up the use of
                         Georgia Road [Safety] Assessment Program (GeoRAP) to Mtskheta-Mtianeti, Racha-Lechkhumi and
                         Shida Kartli regions, (ii) implementation of GeoRAP’s Safer Roads Investment Plans either through
                         their integration into rehabilitation civil works contracts or stand-alone small-scale road safety works
                         on roads which are not due for rehabilitation yet, and (iii) a road safety awareness and education
                         campaign in Guria region with the involvement of a specialized NGO and enforcement (Traffic
                         Police). The road safety campaign will target four groups of road users (vehicle occupants,
                         pedestrians, cyclists, and motorcyclists) to improve their road safety behavior.

                         (c)      Sub-component 2.3. Climate Resilience Technical Assistance (Estimated Cost US$0.6
                         million; IBRD financing: US$0.5 million). This sub-component will finance an assessment of
                         vulnerability of the roads network to climate change (e.g., changes in precipitation patterns in
                         Georgia), development of climate resilient standards for roads construction and maintenance, and
                         provision of road weather information systems (RWIS). The location for the installation of RWIS
                         will be determined by the vulnerability assessment exercise to ensure timely measurement and
                         collection of real-time atmospheric, pavement, water level conditions, and visibility data on roads
                         with the highest traffic volumes in mountainous regions. The climate resilient standards which will
                         be developed will be integrated in the design-build contracts for roads in mountainous areas.

                         Component 3: Project Monitoring and Management Support (Estimated Cost US$0.8 million; IBRD

                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         financing: US$0.7 million). Financing under this component is based on standard Bank IPF
                         disbursement procedures. This component will finance project implementation support and the
                         activity aimed at enhancing RD’s performance management capacity.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (a)      Sub-component 3.1. Project Management Support (Estimated Cost US$0.3 million; IBRD
                         financing: US$0.25 million). This sub-component will provide institutional support to RD, including
                         its Foreign Project Unit (FPU), and Transport Reform and Rehabilitation Centre (TRRC), which is in
                         charge of financial management for RD, for hiring consultants, a project manager for project
                         implementation.

                         (b)      Sub-component 3.2: Project Audit Consultant (Estimated Cost US$0.1 million; IBRD
                         financing: US$0.08 million). This sub-component will finance the services of a project audit
                         consultant (PAC) to provide independent verification of the delivery of results (DLIs) and
                         assessment of adequate use of the respective country’s systems and World Bank’s guidelines under
                         this project.

                         (c)      Sub-component 3.3: Monitoring of the Five-Year Rolling Program (Estimated Cost US
                         $0.4million; IBRD financing: US$0.33 million). This sub-component will finance road user
                         satisfaction surveys (RUSS) and impact evaluation studies (IE) on the sample OPRC and design-
                         build roads to compare the results and impacts of the two different contracting methodologies on
                         road users and beneficiaries. The methodologies for both RUSS and IE piloted under the Second
                         Secondary and Local Roads Project will be used and adjusted for SRAMP.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will contribute to the implementation of the Government’s Five-year Rolling Program
                         for Improvement and Preservation of the Secondary Road Assets and enhance the country’s systems
                         in secondary roads assets multi-year programming, annual planning, budgeting, contracting, which
                         are all country-wide activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Darejan Kapanadze (GENDR)
                         Jorge E. Villegas (GSURR)
                         Nino Metreveli (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes           The Project is not expected to have significant impact on
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    the environment. All planned physical works are limited
                                                                   to rehabilitation and maintenance of the existing
                                                                   alignments. Overall long term social and environmental
                                                                   impacts will be positive, while negative impacts will be of
                                                                   minor scope and duration, and typical for any secondary
                                                                   road rehabilitation and maintenance activities. The Project
                                                                   is therefore classified as environmental Category B.

                                                                   An Environmental and Social Management Framework
                                                                   (ESMF) was prepared to guide environmental and social
                                                                   management of the Government’s Plan for the Investment


                                                                     Page 4 of 10
                                                        and Maintenance of the Secondary Roads Network.
                                                        ESMF provides the overview of the expected
                                                        environmental and social issues related to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        implementation of this plan and offers comprehensive
                                                        guidance on the site-specific environmental management
                                                        planning to be carried out by the client. ESMF serves the
                                                        needs of the entire Five-year Plan of the Government and
                                                        will be applied for activities financed from the proceeds
                                                        of SRAMP. The use of an EMP Checklist for Small Scale
                                                        Road Construction or Rehabilitation is proposed to
                                                        facilitate site-specific environmental management
                                                        planning under the Project, unless a higher risk Category
                                                        B subproject is identified through environmental
                                                        screening that may require conduct of a more in-depth
                                                        Environmental and Social Impact Assessment. No
                                                        Category A activities will be eligible for the Project
                                                        support.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Individual sections of roads to be rehabilitated and/or
                         4.04                           maintained with the Project support may pass through the
                                                        natural habitats or fragile ecosystems and be potential
                                                        damaging for biodiversity. OP/BP 4.04 is therefore
                                                        triggered. Site-specific environmental work required for
                                                        preparing all individual investments will examine
                                                        potential impacts on natural habitats and include required
                                                        mitigation measures into the ESMPs.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No    Potential minor to medium scale impacts that some
                                                        individual investments may have on forests is covered by
                                                        triggering OP/BP 4.01 and 4.04.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     Pesticides are not being used for controlling road-side
                                                        vegetation anywhere in Georgia and this practice will not
                                                        be applied for the roads covered by the project.
                         Physical Cultural        No    The Project will support rehabilitation and maintenance of
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           existing roads and therefore will not affect any known
                                                        physical cultural resources. OP/BP 4.11 is therefore not
                                                        triggered, while blueprint of action in case of chance finds
                                                        during earth works will be provided in the ESMF and site-
                                                        specific ESMPs.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   The Project will not finance new road construction and all
                         OP/BP 4.12                     civil works will be performed within the existing right-of-
                                                        way. However, minor land acquisition may take place to
                                                        provide adequate sidewalks and drainage, if required.
                                                        There might as well be the case of seasonal street traders
                                                        that will need to be addressed.




                                                         Page 5 of 10
                                                                      Since the roads to be rehabilitated and maintained are not
                                                                      yet defined it is not possible at this stage to define the
                                                                      needs for land acquisition and resettlement.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been
                                                                      developed building on the existing RPF for the Third
                                                                      Secondary and Local Roads Project. The new RPF takes
                                                                      into account lessons learned during the implementation of
                                                                      the three previous SLRPs. Under each sub-project a
                                                                      feasibility study will be undertaken, that will include
                                                                      social assessment and screening as part of ESMP. If
                                                                      screening identifies the need for a RAP it will be prepared
                                                                      according to the elaborated and approved RPF.

                                                                      The RPF for SRAMP has been structured based on OP
                                                                      4.12 and good international practices and, if the RD
                                                                      voluntarily decides so, it can also be used to guide non-
                                                                      Bank financed operations.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              SRAMP will finance the rehabilitation and maintenance of priority sections of the existing roads.
                              The project is classified as environmental category B. Works to be undertaken in various locations
                              will be similar in terms of applied technologies and scope. Their potential environmental risks and
                              measures required for mitigation of these risks are also mostly common are well known upfront.
                              An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) was developed to provide guiding
                              principles for environmental and social management of the Government's Fine-Year Rolling
                              Program for Improvement and Preservation of the Secondary Road Assets. A checklist for
                              developing site-specific Environmental and Social Management Plants (ESMPs) for small scale
                              road construction or rehabilitation will be used as a simplified tool applicable to individual
                              investments. Rehabilitation of individual road sections may carry complex multiple and complex
                              environmental and social implications not all of which are clearly understood upfront. Designs of
                              such works will be subject to Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) prior to the
                              development of ESMPs. However bulk of rehabilitation and maintenance works to be supported
                              by SRAMP are low risk activities to be undertaken on the existing roads in the current right-of-
                              way, without tangible widening or re-routing of the carriageways. Most of these roads pass
                              through significantly transformed landscapes, away from important habitats and biodiversity
                              hotspots. Potential environmental issues associated with rehabilitation of these roads are expected


                                                                        Page 6 of 10
                          to be minor and typical for small-scale rehabilitation works on roads, mainly comprising:
                          construction waste management, sourcing of natural construction materials (soil/gravel/sand),
                          running of small asphalt/concrete plants, and maintaining/servicing of construction machinery. In
Public Disclosure Copy




                          rare cases road sections selected for the project support may pass through natural habitats or other
                          highly sensitive ecosystems. Site-specific environmental work for such operations will include due
                          assessment of the implied risks and mitigation measures will be included into the ESMPs.

                           The potential social impact that road works may entail in terms of resettlement is considered to be
                           acceptably low to moderate, as the project will not finance new road construction and the civil
                           works will be performed within the existing right-of-way. However, minor land acquisition may
                           take place to provide adequate sidewalks and drainage for rehabilitation works. No physical
                           displacement of occupants or restriction of access to resources or income streams is expected. As a
                           guiding resettlement instrument, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been developed
                           based on the existing RPFs currently used by RD for the purposes of ongoing Secondary and
                           Local Roads Projects. Site-specific Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) will be prepared, as
                           required, according to RPF.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           The Project is expected to have positive long term social impacts while being neutral to the natural
                           environment.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           SRAMP is designed to support the Government's Program for Improvement and Preservation of
                           the Secondary Road Assets, and therefore considering of alternatives of the Project design had not
                           been feasible while developing this Project.

                           Selection of road sections for the project financing will include comparison of alternative options,
                           and those roads rehabilitation of which do not imply significant environmental and social risks
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will be preferred over those with high potential negative impacts. No environmental Category A
                           investments will be selected.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The Borrower developed ESMF and RPF for the purposes of implementing the Government’s
                           Five-year Rolling Program for Improvement and Preservation of Secondary Road Assets. These
                           framework documents will be used for the purposes of SRAMP, which is designed to contribute to
                           the implementation of the Government’s Program. These documents provide detailed guidance for
                           preparing site-specific safeguard documents, disclosing them, discussing with project affected
                           people, and monitoring their implementation.

                          The RD is responsible for the application of environmental and social safeguards. Due
                          environmental diligence of the RD will include assuring: (i) presence of satisfactory site-specific
                          ESMPs for all sections of roads under rehabilitation; (ii) presence of the required permits for waste
                          disposal, quarrying and borrowing, operation of asphalt/concrete plants, etc., as applicable; (iii)
                          proper application of mitigation measures provided in the site-specific ESMPs in the course of
                          works and upon their completion; and (iv) observance of occupational safety rules as well as
                          safety of traffic and pedestrian movement in and around work sites. For meeting such standards,
                          RD will exercise quality control of ESMPs, guarantee their inclusion in the bidding documents and


                                                                     Page 7 of 10
                           incorporation into the works contracts, and maintain efficient mechanism of field environmental
                           monitoring of works.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Environmental performance under the ongoing Secondary and Local Roads Project being
                           implemented by the RD is satisfactory. The RD has a specialized Resettlement and Environment
                           Unit, with well-defined duties and responsibilities of staff members who are adequately skilled.
                           No environmental damage has been caused by the implementation of works on secondary and
                           local roads so far and the social impacts from these activities are positive. Quality of the monthly
                           environmental supervision reports generated under current projects are marginally satisfactory,
                           because while providing basic information on the environmental performance of works providers,
                           they lack technical details and visual images of work sites that would allow to better understand
                           situation on the ground.

                           Alike the arrangements for Secondary and Local Roads Projects, technical supervision of SRAMP
                           may be contracted out by the RD. Quality of supervision will be of special importance under this
                           Project, because release of Project funds under DLI-based components will be bound to the quality
                           of services performed by OPRC contractors, including their environmental and social
                           performance. RD will be expected to maintain adequate in-house capacity for providing quality
                           control of the supervision consultant’s work and for taking relevant and timely action on the issues
                           reported by the consultant. In November of 2015, two representatives of the RD will attend an
                           international course on resettlement in the Netherlands sponsored by the WB, IFC and EBRD.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           As the Project will support rehabilitation and maintenance of secondary roads across the country,
                           its key beneficiaries include road users, local businesses, and local municipalities. Central
                           Government bodies - especially the MRDI and its RD - are the key stakeholders of the Project.

                           The RD disclosed the draft ESMF in Georgian and English languages, and held a public
Public Disclosure Copy




                           consultation meeting with relevant stakeholders. It was finalized, and re-disclosed in-country on
                           August 12, 2015 and through the World Bank’s electronic database on August 13, 2015. The final
                           draft RPF in English was disclosed in-country and through the World Bank's InfoShop on October
                           22, 2015. The final draft RPF in Georgian is expected to be disclosed on October 29, 2015. Site-
                           specific ESIA reports, ESMPs, and RAPs, as required, will undergo similar procedures once the
                           designs are prepared for rehabilitation of individual roads. ESMPs will be included into tender
                           documents and will be attached to works contracts. RAPs, as required, will be drafted, disclosed,
                           consulted, approved by the Bank and implemented prior to commencement of works.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                          12-Aug-2015
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                       13-Aug-2015
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive          00000000
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                     Page 8 of 10
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                           12-Aug-2015
                           Comments: Final draft ESMF was disclosed in-country in June 2015 and the public consultation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         meeting was held on July 14, 2015. Final version with attached minutes of
                                         consultation meeting was re-disclosed in August, 2015.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       22-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    22-Oct-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Georgia                                                           22-Oct-2015
                           Comments: Final draft RPF in English was disclosed on October 22, 2015; the final draft RPF in
                                         Georgian is to be disclosed on October 29, 2015.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Natalya Stankevich
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                           Date: 22-Oct-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
