INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA15961
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Afghanistan               Project ID:  P150632
Parent       P120427
Project ID:
Project Name: Second Public Financial Management Reform Project (PFMRP II) - Additional
Financing (P150632)
Parent Project Public Financial Management Reform II (P120427)
Name:
Task Team       Paul Welton
Leader(s):
Estimated       25-Nov-2015               Estimated     15-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                           Board Date:
Managing Unit: GG024                      Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Financial Sector (100%)
Theme(s):       Public expenditure, financial management and procurement (95%), Other public
sector governance (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     42.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:           0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                   0.00
Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                     42.00
Total                                                                     42.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 6


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
The proposed PDO is to strengthen public financial management through effective procurement,
treasury and audit structures and systems in line with sound financial management standards of
monitoring, reporting and control.
B. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
To further strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of Afghanistan's procurement, treasury, and
audit systems.
3. Project Description
An original ARTF grant amount of US$73 million was approved for the Second Public Financial
Management Reforms Project (PFMR II) on June 14, 2011, and the project became effective on
August 9, 2011. The current project closing date is December 31, 2015. The project was developed to
support Government's effort to implement the its Public Financial Management (PFM) strategy,
following its commitment to a set of PFM reforms, geared towards ensuring: (i) efficiency,
transparency and accountability in the use of public resources; (ii) increase in aid absorption capacity
and securing on-budget donor aid; and (iii) improved development outcomes. The PFMRP II was
developed to support Government to implement this strategy.
The Ministry of Finance (MOF), which is also the implementing agency for PFMRP II, requested for
Additional Financing (AF) and extension of the closing date of PFMRP II. The PFMR II is due to
close on 31 December 2015, at a critical time when Government is trying to develop its new PFM
Strategy and implement key reforms to lay the foundation for future developments of PFM in
Afghanistan. As part of the Bank's ongoing dialogue with Government on PFM, the Government had
requested the Bank to develop a new project (PFMR III) to help support the implementation of key
aspects of the new PFM Strategy. This would leave a gap in the Bank's support for PFM in
Afghanistan and possibly lead to a loss of momentum on key results achieved under PFMR II. The
AF would help to scale up some of the results achieved under the PFMR II and also ensure that some
new critical activities can be incorporated into the project. It will also act as a bridge to ensure
sustained support for PFM in the interim period before the proposed new project (PFMR III)
becomes effective. Based on the Banks's assessment, an additional financing of US$ 39.975 million
and an extension of the closing date to June 30, 2017 are required. The AF-PFMR II has five
components which include: 1) Procurement Reform, 2) Financial Management Reform, 3) Audit
Reform and Performance, 4) Reform Management, and 5) Revenue Mobilization. The description
and objectives of each of these components are summarized below:
Component 1: Procurement Reform: This component will support the National Procurement
Authority (NPA), which was created through a Presidential Decree in 2015. The Procurement Policy
Unit (PPU), Special Procurement Committee (SPC) and the Afghanistan Reconstruction and
Development Services (ARDS) have been merged into the NPA. The NPA is based in the
Administrative Office of the President (AOP). The main activities of this component include:
* Capacity building in Line Ministries and Provinces
* Institutional support and sustainable development of public procurement
Component 2: Financial Management Reform: This component aims to support high level PFM
performance and build the staff and institutional PFM capacity. The main activities include:
Page 2 of 6


﻿*      Treasury operations and systems development
*      Human resources capacity development
*      Professional accountants organization development
*      Line Ministry PFM assessment
Component 3: Audit and Reform Performance: this component focuses on institutional reforms in
internal audit and capacity building to improve management oversight. The main activities include:
*      Internal audit capacity development
*      Internal audit institutional development
*      Internal audit information technology development
*      Direct audit support - grant audits
*      Direct audit support - line Ministries
*      Policy advice to the Auditor General and coordination
*      Training support
*      Infrastructure support (IT center, databases and officer furnishing)
*      Public account committee strengthening
*      Preparatory activities for future audit reforms
Component 4: Reform Management: this component focuses on reform within the MoF. Its main
activities include;
*      Strengthening Monitoring and Evaluation
*      Strengthening of MoF Human Resource Management Department
*      Project management
*      Other institutional strengthening and capacity building activities
Component 5: Revenue Mobilization: this is a newly added component to the AF-PFMR II, which is
the top priority of the new PFM road map. The Government is committed to ambitious targets for tax
collections. Therefore, additional support is needed to achieve these targets. The main activities of
this component include:
*      Maintenance of computerized tax system (SIGTAS)
*      The implementation of initiatives such as risk based compliance
*      Preparing for VAT
*      Establishing the new organizational structure
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project location is the MoF and its provincial branches. The project is designed to provide
technical assistance, capacity building and institutional building services. There will be no
construction work and/or land acquisition during the course of the AF-PFMR II project. Therefore,
none of the World Bank's safeguards policies are triggered by the AF-PFMR II project. The project
interventions will be consistent with the Government's and World Bank's safeguards policies and
guidelines.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Mohammad Arif Rasuli (GENDR)
Page 3 of 6


﻿Mohammad Ateeq Zaki (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           No           There will be no construction work and/or land
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                acquisition activities during the course of the project.
Also, the project does not envisage any activity that can
possibly lead to trigger any safeguards policy after the
completion of the Additional Financing project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           This policy is not triggered; because none of the project's
4.04                                 components engages in any work that has direct or
indirect relationship with Natural Habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project activities do not impact forests in any way, as
defined by the policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will neither finance pesticides nor will they be
used in the project.
Physical Cultural       No           The Additional Financing does not support any work that
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 would trigger this policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           This policy is not triggered as there are no Indigenous
BP 4.10                              Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP 4.10 within the
project area that could potentially benefit or be adversely
affected by the Project's activities.
Involuntary Resettlement No          No involuntary land acquisition is expected during the
OP/BP 4.12                           Additional Financing.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not have any activity involving dams.
4.37
Projects on International  No        The project does not involve any activity that will affect
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No           The project does not involve any activity in any known
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     disputed area.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
No environmental and social impacts are envisaged under any component of the AF-PFMR II
project. The project solely provides technical assistance, capacity building and institutional reform
services.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
None
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
Page 4 of 6


﻿assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Although no safeguards policy of the Bank is being triggered, it is necessary to apply relevant
Citizen Engagement tools such as the Grievance Redress Mechanism, during the implementation
of the Additional Financing project. Therefore, the borrower shall introduce a Social Safeguards
Focal Point, from the existent staff within the project, for the implementation of the required
Citizen Engagement activities and coordination with the Bank's Social Safeguards Team. It is
essential that the safeguards focal person get sufficient training on Citizen Engagement tools and
its application.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main stakeholders are MoF, the line Ministries and the private sector (i.e. Professional
Accountants Organizations). Since the Additional Financing involves a number of capacity
building, institutional building and reform activities, the client shall apply rigorous processes
during the implementation to ensure all eligible beneficiaries are included and have the
opportunity to benefit from the project activities. Besides, there is a need for having procedures to
receive and process complaints pertaining to any project activities. As a result, the client needs to
develop a GRM, in accordance with the Citizen Engagement Strategy of the Bank. Also, the client,
in consultation with the Safeguards Team of the Bank, may apply other citizen engagement tools.
GRM: Communities and individuals who believe that they are adversely affected by a Bank-
supported project may submit complaints to existing project-level GRMs or the Bank's Grievance
Redress Service (GRS). The GRS ensures that complaints received are promptly reviewed to
address project-related concerns. Project-affected communities and individuals may submit their
complaint to the Bank's independent Inspection Panel which determines whether harm occurred,
or could occur, as a result of Bank non-compliance with its policies and procedures. Complaints
may be submitted at any time after concerns have been brought directly to the Bank's attention,
and the Bank management has been given an opportunity to respond. Information on how to
submit complaints to the Bank's corporate GRS are available at http://www.worldbank.org/GRS.
Information on how to submit complaints to the Bank Inspection Panel are available at www.
inspectionpanel.org.
B. Disclosure Requirements
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
not applicable
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 5 of 6


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [  ]  No [  ]  NA [ X]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [   ]  No [  ]   NA [ X]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ]  No [  ]   NA [ X]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paul Welton
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                    Date: 10-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Fily Sissoko (PMGR)                   Date: 11-Dec-2015
Manager:
Page 6 of 6


