INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13476
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Apr-2015, 13-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Nicaragua                   Project ID:  P152136
Project Name: Nicaragua Strengthening the Public Health Care System (P152136)
Task Team       Amparo Elena Gordillo-Tobar
Leader(s):
Estimated        13-Apr-2015                Estimated    04-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GHNDR                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Health (100%)
Theme(s):       Child health (10%), Health system performance (40%), Injuries and non-
communicable diseases (40%), Population and reproductive healt h (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      60.00             Total Bank Financing:    60.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
IDA Grant                                                                    60.00
Total                                                                        60.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objectives (PDO) are to: (a) strengthen quality and access to health
services; (b) contribute to adapting the public health system to the country's changing
epidemiological profile; and (c) secure financial support in case of Public Health Alert or Public
Health Emergency.
Page 1 of 8


﻿3. Project Description
This ISDS was originally disclosed on April 10, 2015. It is being revised to reflect changes
following Project Appraisal.
0
Component 1: Strengthening the quality and access to health care services (US$25.9 million). This
component seeks to strengthen the quality and supply of the public health care services delivered
nationwide through the following subcomponents: Subcomponent 1.1 Improvement of quality health
a        care services in selected municipalities; and (b) Subcomponent 1.2 Strengthening and expanding the
provision of basic health care services.
Component 2. Institutional Strengthening of MOH to respond to the country's changing
epidemiological profile (US$25.4 million). The purpose of this component is to contribute to
adapting the public health system to the country's changing epidemiological profile. It consists of
two sub-components supporting interventions to address the increased mortality and morbidity
caused by chronic diseases and traumas, as follows: (a) Subcomponent 2.1 Strengthening the MOH
capacity to prevent and respond to chronic diseases; and (b) Subcomponent 2.2 Strengthening the
MOH capacity to prevent and respond to trauma injury cases.
Component 3. Contingency Financing of a Public Health Emergency or Public Health Alert and
Capacity Building (US$7.9 million). This component will provide funding to prevent and respond to
a public health alert or a public health emergency. It also includes funding to prevent and control
outbreaks, epidemics, and other potential risk factors involving the handling of general and medical
waste. It has three subcomponents: (a) Sub-component 3.1 Provision of Contingency Financing in
the case of an eligible Public Health Alert or a Public Health Emergency; (b) Sub-component 3.2
Strengthening Entomological Surveillance and Raising Awareness of Vector-Borne Diseases; and (c)
Sub-component 3.3 Strengthening Hospital Waste Management in Selected Hospitals.
Component 4. Project Management (US$0.73 million). This Component is financing the
Strengthening of the Ministry of Health capacity to manage Project implementation and to fund the
annual financial external audits.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The institutional strengthening of MoH in components 2 and 3 is national in scope, including some
indigenous territories in the RAAN (Regi6n Aut6noma del Atldntico Norte). The strengthening of
access and improvement of the quality of preventive, promotional and curative health care services
among poor and vulnerable populations in 66 municipalities in 10 selected Local SILAIS in
component 1 as well as the strengthening of comprehensive health care for adolescents and young
people in municipalities of prioritized SILAIS in component 2.1 (a) will particularly benefit the
indigenous and ethnic communities present in those areas. As part of the Improving the Community
and Family Health Care Services Project (P106870 and AF) the MoH had adapted the standard set of
basic health and nutrition services as defined under the Community and Family Health Model
(MOSAFC) to ensure that they are culturally appropriate to these communities, based on a study that
described the traditional health practices and customs and how these could be integrated in the public
health systems.
The project is not expecting the construction of new infrastructure that could affect the physical
environment in sensitive or critical areas.
Page 2 of 8


﻿5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Marco Antonio Zambrano Chavez (GENDR)
Peter F. B. A. Lafere (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
O
Environmental           Yes         This policy is triggered because the Project will support
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               minor pre-installment works for the medical and non-
medical equipment to be purchased by the Project. These
potential negative impacts are not significant and the
mitigation measures are easy to know and to implement.
Additionally, some activities during the operation will
produce negative environmental and social impacts that
should be prevented and mitigated. In this regards the
project was classified as Category B according with the
OP/BP 4.01
An Environmental Management Framework (EMF) was
prepared for the Improving Community and Family
Quality Health Care Services Project (P106870). An
Environmental Management Plan was prepared on March
6, 2015 and was disclosed in-country and in the World
Bank's external website on April 10, 2015.
Six Hospitals Dangerous Waste Management Plans
(HDWMP) will be implemented in the new Project. These
instruments will be disclosed as available according with
the Bank's policy. These Plans will include the WBG
EHS Guidelines for Medical Facilities; and procedure to
manage radioactive waste associated to the medical
equipment to be acquired under the project.
Finally, the capacity building effort includes
comprehensive occupational health and safety training,
including exposure to diseases, medical waste and the use
of certain equipment with radiation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          This policy is not triggered given that the project's
4.04                                interventions are not located within or in the proximity of
natural habitats; hence no conversion or degradation of
natural habitats is expected.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          This policy is not triggered since the project activities are
not expected to impact forested areas, forest dependent
communities or involve changes in management of
forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          This policy is not triggered given that the project's
activities do not include the use of pesticide.
Page 3 of 8


﻿Physical Cultural       No          This policy is not triggered given that the projects
Resources OP/BP 4.11                activities do not affect any physical or cultural resources.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         There are indigenous peoples as defined by the policy
BP 4.10                             present in the Project area. For nine of the ten SILAIS,
the activities in component 1 are a continuation of the
activities in the on-going Nicaragua Community and
Family Health Care Project (P106870) for which the IPP
was consulted, disclosed and implemented. The IPP has
been reviewed, updated, consulted and redisclosed to
include the additional SILAI and ensure that there is
continued broad community support for this project in the
nine original SILAIS. The IPP ensures that the indigenous
communities in the territories of Alto Wangki and Bocay
also broadly supported by the project activities. The IPP
has also been consulted at national level to ensure that the
measures related to Maternal, Adolescent, Child and
Reproductive Care take into account the cultural practices
of Indigenous Groups. The IPP was disclosed prior to
Project Appraisal on April 10, 2015.
Involuntary Resettlement No         This policy should not be triggered given that the project
OP/BP 4.12                          will focus on strengthening the access and improving the
quality of health care services. The project will, however,
finance minor pre-installment works for medical and non-
medical equipment, for which no land acquisition will be
required and for which no impacts covered under OP 4.12
are expected.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
4.37                                support the construction or rehabilitation of dams.
Projects on International  No       This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                affect international waterways as defined under the policy.
Projects in Disputed    No          This policy is not triggered given that the project will not
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    affect disputed areas as defined under the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples is triggered. There are indigenous peoples as defined by the
policy present in the Project area. When preparing the Nicaragua Community and Family Health
Care Project (P106870) currently under implementation, an Indigenous Peoples Framework and
Indigenous Peoples Plan were prepared, consulted and disclosed. The implementation of the IPPF
and IPP are being managed by the Directorate of Health, who is in charge of ensuring proper
provision of health services (including compliance with safeguards and user satisfaction), and
supervised by the National Coordination of Indigenous Peoples and Traditional Medicine (as part
of the Ministry of Health). Among the activities implemented, two documents were prepared
which are key for the effective implementation of the IPP. These are the "Diagnosis of traditional
Page 4 of 8


﻿ancestral medicine and the link among health systems" and the "Guide of articulation between the
western and traditional ancestral health systems". These products have been reflected in the
updated version of the IPP. The country is moving towards the integration of traditional ancestral
medicine with the western health systems. The documents are in compliance with the requirements
O
of the social assessment and indigenous plans under the World Bank Indigenous Peoples Policy
(OP/BP 4.10). The Indigenous Peoples Plan for the Nicaragua Community and Family Health
Care Project (P106870) is currently under implementation. Consultations and activities undertaken
during Project implementation in response to indigenous peoples could be shared as models with
other countries. In addition the Government has recently inaugurated the Institute for Alternative
Therapy in Managua, and the first training session for health personnel was held in January 2015.
For nine of the ten SILAIS in the new Project, the activities in component 1 are a continuation of
the activities in the Community and Family Health Care Project (P106870) for which the IPP was
consulted, disclosed and implemented. The IPP has been reviewed, updated, consulted and
redisclosed to include the additional SILAI and ensure that there is continued broad community
support for this project. There is a project-level grievance redress mechanism that ensures that
complaints received are promptly reviewed in order to address Project-related concerns included in
the Plan.
OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment is also triggered. There will be minor rehabilitation
works in health care facilities or minor pre-installment works for the medical and non- medical
equipment to be purchased by the Project. While the effects of these activities are localized, minor
and reversible, they still, nonetheless, warrant certain care and the appropriate mitigation measures
will be put in place through the Environmental Management Plan (EMP) dated March 6,
2015which was published in the country and the World Bank's external website prior to Project
Appraisal on April 10, 2015.
Finally, as part of this project, the MoH will develop 6 Hospital Dangerous Waste Management
Plans in the main national hospitals in Managua. As mandated by law, there is a country-level
grievance redress mechanism in every hospital that ensures that complaints received are promptly
reviewed in order to address Project-related concerns included in the Plan. Finally, the capacity
building effort includes comprehensive occupational health and safety training, including exposure
to diseases, medical waste and the use of certain equipment with radiation.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Not applicable.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not relevant
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
When preparing the on-going Project (Nicaragua Community and Family Health Care Project -
P106870) an Indigenous Peoples Framework and Indigenous Peoples Plan were prepared,
consulted and disclosed. The implementation of the IPPF and IPP are being managed successfully
by the Directorate of Health, and supervised by the National Coordination of Indigenous Peoples
and Traditional Medicine (as part of the Ministry of Health). The proposed Project will benefit
from the same managerial structure which will also implement the IPP activities of the new Project
Page 5 of 8


﻿as detailed in the Project Appraisal Document (available in the Project files).
The Nicaragua Community and Family Health Care Project (P106870) is also successfully
implementing measures to address OP/BP 4.01. Based on this, an Environmental Action Plan has
O
been prepared as indicated above. In addition, a Diagnosis of the handling of dangerous waste
management was done in the main 6 Hospitals in Managua. Six Hospital Waste Management
Plans (HWMP) are under preparation and will be implemented with the new Project. The plans
will include the World Bank Environmental, Health and Safety Guidelines (EHS) for Medical
Facilities; and procedure to manage radioactive waste associated to the medical equipment to be
acquired under the project. Finally, the capacity building effort includes comprehensive
occupational health and safety training, including exposure to diseases, medical waste and the use
of certain equipment with radiation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations and implementation of activities carried out under the on-going Project and the IPP
update involve the following actors: (a) the Ministry of Health, (b) Ministry of Environment and
Natural Resources; (c) the Institute of Natural Medicine and alternative Therapy, (d) the 10
SILAIS, (e) 11 Municipalities where indigenous people live, (f) indigenous representatives, (g)
traditional medicine staff at all levels, (h) local universities, and non-governmental organizations.
For details please refer to the IPP and EMP.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              06-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Nicaragua                                                10-Apr-2015
Comments: http://www.minsa.gob.ni/index.php/repository/Descargas-MINSA/Direcci%C3%
B3n-General-Vigilancia-de-la-Salud-P%C3%BAblica/Consulta-P% C 3%BAblica-
Ambiental/Marco-de-Gesti%C3%B3n-Ambiental/
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              08-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           10-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Nicaragua                                                10-Apr-2015
Comments: https://www.minsa.gob.ni/index.php/repository/Descargas-MINSA/Columna-
Derecha/Marco-de-planificaci%C3%B3n-para-pueblos-ind%C3%ADgen a s-y-
comunidades-%C3%A9tnicas/
https://www.minsa.gob.ni/index.php/repository/Descargas-MINSA/Columna-
Derecha/Segunda-Parte-Plan-para -Pueblos-Ind%C3%ADgenas-y-Comunidades-%
C3%89tnicas/
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 6 of 8


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA[
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[      NA
a          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Amparo Elena Gordillo-Tobar
Approved By
Page 7 of 8


﻿Practice Manager/    Name: Daniel Dulitzky (PMGR)            Date: 13-May-2015
Manager:
P
Pae8o0


