INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14058
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 02-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Somalia                     Project ID:  P152241
Project Name: Somali Core Economic Institutions and Opportunities Program (SCORE)
(P152241)
Task Team       Suhail Kassim,Thilasoni Benjamin Musuku
Leader(s):
Estimated       04-Nov-2015                 Estimated    31-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTC01                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General industry and trade sector (75%), General finance sector (25%)
Theme(s):       Other Private Sector Development (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      28.50             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      0.00
Somalia Multi-Partner Fund                                                   28.50
Total                                                                        28.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to: (i) improve the enabling environment for private and
financial sector development; and (ii) catalyze private investment and job creation.
3. Project Description
The Project is a two-phased series of projects (SOPs) with the goal of supporting select core
Page 1 of 6


﻿economic institutions linked to trade, financial sector and private sector development in Somalia. The
objective of the first phase (SOP-1, USD $28.5 million) is to improve the enabling environment for
private and financial sector development and catalyze private investment and job creation. SCORE is
funded by the Somalia Multi-Partner Fund (MPF) and expands the geographic coverage of a previous
O
U        project (the USD $24 million Private Sector Development Re-engagement Phase II Project) that
began in 2011 and included project activities in Somaliland. The SCORE SOP-1 Project will
continue the process of building stronger governance and institutional foundations at some of
Somalia's most important economic institutions (the Central Banks, Port Authorities, Ministry of
Commerce and Industry). It will also support economic recovery by facilitating entrepreneurship,
improving access to formal sources of finance, strengthening skills formation and business
development services providers, and by providing fiscal incentives for inward investment.
The SCORE SOP-1 Project includes three components as follows:
Component 1 (Strengthening Core Economic Institutions) will help strengthen the economic
institutions in three critical areas of the economy: (i) central banking, to allow for the emergence of a
formal financial sector, which would improve access to finance; (ii) the Ministry of Commerce, to
support the introduction of a basic and more modem legal and regulatory framework that would
reduce transaction costs for entrepreneurs; and (iii) local port and customs authorities, to leverage
private capital, networks and expertise to improve performance of the port sector. Component 1 will
finance three sub-components including:
*      Sub-component 1A - Strengthening Central Bank Supervision and Regulation;
*      Sub-component 1B - Improving the Investment Climate; and
*      Sub-component 1 C: Developing the Port Sector.
Component 2 (Expanding Economic Opportunities) will expand economic opportunities in Somalia
through two support mechanisms: one linked to skills formation and private sector capacity building
(SME Service Facility); and another one linked to direct financial incentives aimed at crowding in
private investment in innovative and labor-intensive activities (the Somali Business Catalytic Fund).
The Catalytic Fund will be open to all commercially-oriented sectors and is designed to support the
recovery of the private sector by providing matching grants to support new investments by SMEs.
Component 2 will finance two sub-components including:
*      Sub-component 2A: Catalytic Fund; and
*      Sub-component 2B: SME Service Facility.
Component 3 (Project Management) will provide support for project implementation.
SCORE will be a Somalia-wide Program and will include activities in Puntland and Somaliland. The
project will be implemented by Project Implementation Units established in the Federal Government
of Somalia, Government of Puntland and Government of Somaliland, except where the Task Team
has requested exceptional bank execution of activities on behalf of the Recipient (including all of
Component 2).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The geographic coverage will include metropolitan areas in Somalia, Puntland and Somaliland in the
first phase. Security permitting, the project interventions supporting the private sector would then be
rolled out in more areas of the country. The project activities with potentially relevant environmental
impacts would be those of Component 2, where funding for a wide scope of economic activities
would be provided, some of which could have Environmental and Social (E&S) impacts that would
Page 2 of 6


﻿have to be managed and mitigated.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Wolfhart Pohl (GCFDR)
o
Q
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental         Yes         Sub-component 2(a) would fund a wide scope of
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               economic activities, some of which could have E&S
impacts that would have to be managed and mitigated. To
ensure that appropriate E&S due diligence mechanisms
are designed and implemented an ESMF was prepared,
which provides guidance on screening for possible
impacts, on their assessment, management and mitigation
requirements, and provides boundaries for the scope of
financing (e.g. in form of a negative list of undesirable
entrepreneurial activities).
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          The project will geographically be located in urban areas,
4.04                                where no natural habitats / protected areas are expected to
occur.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          The project will geographically be located in urban areas,
where no forests are expected to occur. If the project
finances economic activities related to forests, activity-
specific Environmental Management Plans (EMPs) would
be prepared.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          If the project finances economic activities related to pest
management, activity-specific pest management plans
would be prepared. Any activities involving the trade,
storage, handling and application of pesticides will not be
financed. These shall be included inthe project's 'negative
list' of undesirable entrepreneurial activities.
Physical Cultural       No          The project will generally not contribute to activities that
Resources OP/BP 4.11                could negatively affect physical cultural resources, and
any such activities would be included in the negative list,
and the project proposals screened for potential impacts.
If, after screening, such impacts would be deemed
significant or proper management / mitigation cannot be
guaranteed, the respective activities or sub-projects
causing the impacts would not be financed.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          No project stakeholders or affected people will qualify as
BP 4.10                             indigenous peoples.
Involuntary Resettlement No         All activities would be financed on private land, and no
OP/BP 4.12                          expropriation or other negative impacts on livelihoods are
expected. The project will install and operate a grievance
mechanism to ensure that no one suffers an economic or
personal disadvantage from the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          No dams will be financed; also it is not foreseen to
Page 3 of 6


﻿4.37                                 finance activities directly dependent on the safe operation
of an existing dam; if such a situation arouse, it would be
dealt with in an activity-specific manner, and the WBG's
dam safety specialists consulted.
Projects on International  No        No project related activities will affect international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No           Although the Somali territories have territorial disputes
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     among themselves, the project will not finance activities
directly located in disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Component 1 is expected to have no or negligible negative E&S impacts, and thus does not
warrant planning resources and measures for risk mitigation. Component 2(a) - The Catalytic Fund
- will directly fund a wide scope of economic activities, some of which could have relevant E&S
impacts that would have to be managed and mitigated. To ensure appropriate E&S due diligence
in the design and implementation of the subprojects, an environmental and social management
framework (ESMF) was produced, consulted with local stakeholders and disclosed. This ESMF
will screen for possible impacts, offer guidance on assessment, management and mitigation
requirements, and provide boundaries for the scope of financing (e.g. in form of a negative list of
undesirable entrepreneurial activities). The focus of the catalytic financial support on existing
SMEs rather than startups and business ideas will make the screening, assessment and
management process easier: the E&S track record of an SME applicant will be captured and
evaluated / categorized, and used for: (i) decision on eligibility, (ii) formulation of specific E&S
conditions for financial support, and (iii) integration of E&S compliance assistance into technical
assistance, training and advisory activities delivered to SMEs.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are specific E&S risks resulting from the project's objective of catalyzing economic
development via mobilization of individual entrepreneurship: (i) the absence of national
environmental and social regulations (and largely legislation), and (ii) the absence of, or only
rudimentary functioning of the environmental service sector (e.g. water and electricity supply,
sewage disposal, waste disposal). Thus the project needs to be conscientious of environmental
issues that could arise from the lack of water supply (e.g. private wells / boreholes outside
anyone's knowledge or control), electricity supply (private generators producing noise and diesel
fumes) and the treatment and disposal of gaseous emissions, effluents and solid waste (unregulated
emissions, pollution of air and surface water / groundwater, unregulated / unmanaged waste
disposal). To underscore this issue, none of the Somali territorial capitals has a waste management
facility designed to modem standards and operated to acceptable practice, neither a functioning
wastewater treatment plant, thus a rapid expansion of e.g. manufacturing, processing or small
industry could result in serious bottlenecks for environmental services. These above constraints
and risks have been considered in the ESMF and will impact the scope of projects as well as the
design and deployment of simple, and robust oversight arrangements.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Page 4 of 6


﻿impacts.
Alternative schemes to provide direct financing to entrepreneurs would have similar E&S risks.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Somalia is a fragile and conflict affected country emerging from a 20 year long conflict and the
recipient's institutional capacity for safeguard policies is low. Also national legislation for
environmental assessment and management is currently not existing, necessitating the reliance on
external policies and standards, such as the WBG's safeguards policies and performance standards.
Another aspect of the regulatory and institutional environment is the absence of, or only
rudimentary functioning of the environmental service sector (e.g. water supply, sewage disposal,
waste disposal). Thus the project will need to be conscientious of environmental issues that could
arise from the lack of water supply (e.g. private wells / boreholes outside anyone's knowledge or
control), and the treatment and disposal of gaseous emissions, effluents and solid waste
(unregulated emissions, pollution of air and surface water / groundwater, unregulated / unmanaged
waste disposal). To underscore this issue, none of the territorial capitals has a waste management
facility designed to modem standards and operated to acceptable practice, neither a functioning
wastewater treatment plant, thus a rapid expansion of e.g. manufacturing, processing or small
industry could result in serious bottlenecks for environmental services. A close dialogue with
utilities and municipal authorities will help to identify concrete risks and design measures to avoid,
minimize and mitigate. Also, other Bank-financed projects are addressing some of these issues, e.
g. waste and wastewater management in Hargeisa by an urban development project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders include the Catalytic Fund management team, beneficiaries of the fund as well
as public authorities. The Catalytic Fund will include E&S screening mechanisms to ensure that
projects that are funded are in line with World Bank E&S guidelines, including a review of all sub
projects approved for funding at the concept stage.
O
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                07-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                             13-Nov-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Somalia                                                   28-Nov-2015
Comments: The ESMF was disclosed in Hargeisa and Mogadishu
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Page 5 of 6


﻿Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Suhail Kassim,Thilasoni Benjamin Musuku
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)            Date: 30-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Catherine Kadennyeka Masinde        Date: 02-Dec-2015
Manager:                     (PMGR)
Page 6 of 6


