INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13113
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Sep-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ecuador                    Project ID:  P147280
Project Name: EC Ibarra Transport Infrastructure Improvement Project (P147280)
Task Team       Mauricio Cuellar,Anna R. Okola
Leader(s):
Estimated       05-Oct-2015                Estimated    08-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO4                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General transportation sector (50%), Urban Transport (50%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      91.03            Total Bank Financing:   52.50
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
O
Borrower                                                                   38.53
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                      52.50
Total                                                                      91.03
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve mobility of Ibarra and the use of
recreational spaces in the Yahuarcocha lagoon area.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Improve mobility in the city. (US$85.8 m. total; US$50.0 m. IBRD) This component
will support infrastructure investments including: (i) construction of the ring road; and (ii) associated
Page 1 of 10


﻿works supervision. The project includes the construction of a four lane ring road serving as a bypass
for east-west traffic, particularly along the northern section connecting to national roads with
important logistics characteristics for goods movement to the northern part of Ecuador. Most sections
of this corridor will be built upon existing roads, traversing some of the poorest neighborhoods in the
O
U         northern section, while forming an urban expansion perimeter in the southern section. This
component will enhance traffic flows; improve access to and around the city; relieve congestion
within the city center, including the historic core, by providing an alternate path for through traffic;
and define limit areas for the southern urban expansion which has in the past been rather unplanned.
Component 2: Improve public and tourist spaces. (US$2.5 m. total; US$1.4 m. IBRD) This
component seeks to improve the quality and quantity of public spaces including outdoor, recreational
and tourist friendly spaces. In the highly touristic and recreational area of Yahuarcocha Lagoon, the
component will finance the construction and restoration of infrastructure to support sustainable
tourism including the provision of sidewalks, footpaths, cycle infrastructure, as well as enhancing
streetscapes, urban environment, green spaces and installation of urban community equipment to
promote social interactions and potentially increase economic activities.
Component 3: Provide technical assistance. (US$1.6 m. total; US$0.9 m. IBRD) This component will
provide technical assistance to support units in the Municipality of Ibarra responsible for mobility,
public works, traffic, and urban planning. Specifically, these activities will be focused on: (i)
strengthening institutional capacity for road asset management, (ii) support for the creation of a
gender informed non-motorized transport and road safety plan, and (iii) assistance for the completion
of an integration, urban planning, densification and mobility study, that should include a
reorganization of the public transport routes.
Component 4: Provide Project Management capacity. (US$0.95 m. total; US$0.08 m. IBRD) This
component will finance targeted incremental costs associated with overall project management, such
as the hiring of a new project coordinator, project- related audits, monitoring and evaluation,
environmental and social management, beneficiary assessments, feedback mechanisms, publication
on newspapers of the procurement processes and the purchase of new equipment.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project is located in the Municipality of Ibarra. Project activities under different components will
take place in various locations in the municipality, primarily in semi-urban areas. The city of Ibarra
(pop. 182,000 in 2010, 18% of which is Indigenous and Afro-Ecuadorian; with 77% living in urban
areas and 23% in rural parishes, is a medium-sized fast growing mountain valley city with
agriculture, service industry, and tourism as its main economic activities. One of the activities to be
financed by this project will involve works near the Laguna de Yahuarcocha, which is a sensitive
environmental and tourist area. The proposed road works will involve construction in mostly peri-
urban areas, possibly requiring the acquisition of private land, as well as the removal of a number of
residential and commercial structures. The proposed works are reportedly not in any environmental
protected areas.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Claudio Luis Daniele (GENDR)
Martin Henry Lenihan (GSURR)
Robert H. Montgomery (GENDR)
Page 2 of 10


﻿6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project team proposes an environmental category of
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               B per OP/BP 4.01, as the activities in components l and 2
involve relatively standard works with no significant
long-term environmental or social negative impacts and
that can be readily prevented or mitigated with standard
measures.
An Environment Impact Assessment (EIA) has been
completed for the corridor around the city (ring road) to
assess the potential environmental and social impacts The
EIA was submitted for approved by the Ministry of
Environment (Ministerio de Ambiente del Ecuador,
MAE) and will be consulted with the public. The EIA
includes an Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The
EMP and its implementation will be subject to an
environmental audit by a third party, as part of the
Environmental License issued by the Ministry of
Environment. Complementary to this EIA, the Bank
requested the municipality an extension of EIA of this
ring road, to include additional topics (land uses, urban
development, etc.) and the assessment of cumulative
impacts and synergies in the medium and long term. A
draft version of this new expanded EIA, was already
delivered by the municipality and reviewed by the Bank.
It is expected to soon receive a new version of this
expanded EIA.
According to local legislation, the improve public and
tourist spaces in the boulevard Yahuarcocha are simpler
and do not require an EIA. On this basis, the city
developed a "Ficha Ambiental" (environmental profile),
that was sent to MAE. These document have been
approved and received the environmental license
(Licencia Ambiental) of MAE.
All project works/components are being developed and
implemented according to Ecuadorian environmental law
(e.g., obtaining environmental license, etc.). Appropriate
information disclosure and consultation (including
disclosure of EIA and EMPs) will be performed. In
addition, other actions as deemed appropriate will be
implemented (e.g., environmental clauses for construction
contracts, supervision by municipality, use of independent
environmental supervisors for some works, etc.).
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         There are no environmental protected areas in the direct
4.04                                area of influence of the proposed project works and the
Page 3 of 10


﻿project will not result in any significant conversion or
degradation of critical natural habitats. Both Components
(Ring Road and Yahuarcocha) received of the MAE, the
certificate of "no intersection" with the national system of
protected areas.
Part of the works of Component 1 and 2 will be near the
Yahuarcocha lagoon, which is a sensitive ecosystem.
However the works will likely not result in any direct or
indirect significant impacts on the lagoon since the works
are relatively minor and will be carried out in areas
already affected. The lagoon is located approximately 600
to 700 m from the Boulevard, and is separated by an area
of agriculture, residential and tourist use. The concern for
the appearance of impacts in the medium and long term,
especially by the induced tourism development led to ask
for a specific EIA and EMP of component 2. This new
EIA complements and extends the EA (Ficha Ambiental)
required by the Ministry of Environment. EIA and EMP
will provide an assessment and mitigation of these
potential environmental impacts. The EIA will also
specifically assess the potential indirect impacts that could
occur due to the proposed project, such as those caused by
increased traffic and increased tourism in the project's
area of influence.
During some of the works of the Ring Road, it may be
necessary that a few isolated trees located in one of the
new bridge area will be removed and new ones planted.
Given the types of works and planned locations, this
policy will be triggered and the assessment and mitigation
of any potential impacts will be managed by the EIA
developed under OP/BP 4.01. The relevant EMPs will
include the appropriate measures to mitigate the impacts,
including long term potential impacts due to the increased
activity in this area.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          There are no forests, as defined under OP/BP 4.36, in the
project area. Nevertheless, any potential impacts on
vegetation and habitats will be evaluated as part of the
Ring Road EIA which will include screening
mechanisms. Both Components received of the MAE, the
certificate of "no intersection" with forests, protecting
vegetation and forest heritage of the state.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The project will not involve the purchase or use of any
significant quantities of pesticides.
Physical Cultural       Yes         Component 2 will support construction and restoration of
Resources OP/BP 4.11                infrastructure for community use and cultural heritage
preservation, in the Boulevard by Yahuarcocha Lagoon.
Page 4 of 10


﻿The National Institute of Cultural Heritage declared the
Yahuarcocha as the third sacred lake of the country. The
lagoon and its surrounding area have been heavily
modified, being a major attraction of tourism, sports and
recreation, residential and agricultural use. The area is
reportedly visited by more than 20,000 people per month.
There are some existing environmental problems with the
lagoon, including water pollution (eutrophication).
Works (to more than 600 m of the lagoon) are made on a
wide Avenue in an already fully modified environment.
However, no significant or long-term negative impacts are
expected on the cultural heritage in Ibarra or of the
lagoon. Regardless, this policy will be triggered for
precautionary measures, and as required, applicable
measures included in the EIA (see OP/BP 4.01) which
will include specific screening provisions for evaluating
potential impacts on cultural resources and provide
specific guidance on chance finds procedures.
The project-related EIA/EA for works near the
Yahuarcocha Lagoon will assess potential impacts and the
relevant EMPs include appropriate mitigation measures.
The National Institute of Cultural Heritage (Instituto
Nacional de Patrimonio Cultural) has no objection to the
making both Components (Ring Road and Boulevard) .).
However, no significant or long-term negative impacts are
expected on the cultural heritage in Ibarra or of the
lagoon. Regardless, this policy will be triggered for
precautionary measures, and as required, applicable
measures included in the EIA (see OP/BP 4.01) which
will include specific screening provisions for evaluating
potential impacts on cultural resources and provide
specific guidance on chance finds procedures.
The project-related EIA/EA for works near the
Yahuarcocha Lagoon will assess potential impacts and the
relevant EMPs include appropriate mitigation measures.
The National Institute of Cultural Heritage (Instituto
Nacional de Patrimonio Cultural) has no objection to the
making of the work.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          Ibarra is a multicultural Canton with indigenous and afro-
BP 4.10                              descendent people accounting for 18% of the population.
According to the 2001 Census, 9% of the population is
indigenous. The four major indigenous groups in Ibarra
include the Karanki, Imbaya, and Natabuela, who mostly
speak Kichwi, as well as the Awd, whose language is
Page 5 of 10


﻿Awapit. Although the project will not directly impact
indigenous communities, an indigenous peoples plan was
prepared and consulted with indigenous and afro-
descendent communities closest to the city. The
indigenous peoples plan prepared in accordance with the
requirements ofOP 4.10. Specific actions recommended
under the IPP to ensure the project is culturally
appropriate include bilingual signage (Kichwa and
Spanish), an ongoing socialization campaign targeted to
indigenous residents of the Canton as well as a dedicated
grievance redress mechanism and focal person within the
citizen participation team.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        This policy is triggered because the proposed Anillo Vial
OP/BP 4.12                          road works will require the acquisition of parts of 827
properties (43 has), and the resettlement of up to 29
households, and the acquisition of 4 commercial
structures. The rehabilitation of a recreational area under
Component 2 also requires the acquisition of two parcels
of land. Given that the location of activities will be known
prior to appraisal, a resettlement plan has been prepared
and disclosed in accordance with the requirements of OP
4.12. This plan includes arrangements for the monitoring
and registering the land acquisition using a tailored
geographic information system, as well as a for an impact
evaluation (using a social survey of PAPs) of the entire
process following completion of the implementation of
the plan. The plan also includes a multi-stage grievance
redress mechanisms that allows PAPs to escalate issues to
the Mayor's office and request independent assessments
when there is a dispute related to compensation.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The Project will not support the construction or
4.37                                rehabilitation of dams nor will support other investments
which rely on the services of existing dams.
Projects on International  No       Project activities will not affect international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No          The Project will not be implemented in areas known to
Areas OP/BP 7.60                    involve disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Overall the Road Ring project will result in positive social impacts by enhancing access and
mobility. The main impacts include land acquisition and resettlement, with the project requiring
the acquisition of 43 hectares of land from 641 owners, the displacement of 25 residential
structures housing 115 people, and the removal 10 commercial structures. Improvements in
Page 6 of 10


﻿transport and accessibility will promote social and urban development, especially in marginal
sectors currently. New infrastructure will improve Yahuarcocha Boulevard current uses, reducing
the impact of current recreational activities. They will also promote more sustainable forms of
tourism.
O
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
0
Long term impacts of Ring Road may include induced urban development along the project area.
In Yahuarcocha, an inappropriate tourism development could result in deterioration of the natural
habitats of the lagoon and its surroundings.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Ring Road project preparation process has evaluated options to minimize impacts, and found
the project as proposed the best alternative.
In addition, complementing the project the university has developed a comprehensive management
plan for the Yahuarcocha watershed. This plan includes a set of programs of ecological restoration,
integrated water management, biological monitoring and tourist and recreational use. The
municipality has also prepared a plan for tourism development.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A resettlement action plan has been prepared. For both components an environmental management
plan has been prepared. Additional capacity will be required during implementation, thus the
Municipality has planned to hire consultants.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations have been held during preparation. The municipality has conducted a number of
meetings in neighborhoods in the area to socialize ring road project benefits. As part of the
environmental licensing, the MAE will be responsible for leading further socialization processes
and public consultation to local communities about the impacts of road ring.
The indigenous peoples plan has been disclosed, and received broad community support through
free, prior and informed consultation meetings with representatives of afro-descendent and
indigenous communities close to the City of Ibarra (2 meetings in Caranqui Parish and 1 meeting
in Ambuqui Parish). These meetings were conducted in March and May 2015, and were attended
by the leaders of these communities (Parochial board members). During the meetings these
representatives confirmed their support for the project and the actions outlined in the plan. The
overall project socialization process also accommodated different sub-populations within the
urban contexts, being sensitive to the needs of women, afro-descendants, and indigenous
communities in those areas.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              00000000
Date of submission to InfoShop                           00000000
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Page 7 of 10


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
O
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           00000000
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           00000000
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
The Ring Road EMP contains a program of protection of cultural heritage and archaeological finds.
The MAE will be responsible for leading a new cycle of public consultation and disclosure to local
communities about the impacts and its EMP.
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [ ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
Page 8 of 10


﻿OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes  No       NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes[X]  No[     NA
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mauricio Cuellar,Anna R. Okola
Approved By
Page 9 of 10


﻿Practice Manager/     Name: Aurelio Menendez (PMGR)            Date: 20-Oct-2015
Manager:
P
Pae10f1


