                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                        Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSR17247
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Sierra Leone                                 Project ID:           P119355
                            Project Name:     Decentralized Service Delivery Program II (P119355)
                            Task Team         Randa G. El-Rashidi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         03-Oct-2011                                  Estimated   20-Dec-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSP07                                        Lending     Adaptable Program Loan
                                                                                           Instrument:
                            Sector:           Sub-national government administration (28%), Health (24%), Other social
                                              services (16%), General education sector (16%), General wat er, sanitation and
                                              flood protection sector (16%)
                            Theme:            Decentralization (33%), Other human development (33%), Social Safety Nets/
                                              Social Assistance & Social Care Services (24%), Other soci al protection and
                                              risk management (10%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       137.57           Total Bank Financing:                                      26.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                 105.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                           26.00
                              EC European Commission                                                                               6.57
                              Total                                                                                              137.57
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?



                                                                                Page 1 of 7
                          2. Current Project Development Objectives
                         This is the second phase of an APL. The program objective remains to support decentralized
                         delivery of basic services in Sierra Leone. The development objectiv
Public Disclosure Copy




                         e of Phase II of the program is to: (a) strengthen the Recipient's capacity to m
                         anage decentralized services; (b) improve availability and predictability of fun
                         ding for LCs Councils; and (c) strengthen the Recipient's intergovernmental fisc
                         al transfer system. During this phase, the program will focus more explicitly o
                         n translating institutional and organizational capacity into better service outc
                         omes with continued focus on refining the grants system and mitigating cross-cut
                         ting constraints.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         This is the second phase of an APL. The program objective remains to support decentralized
                         delivery of basic services in Sierra Leone. The development objectiv
                         e of Phase II of the program is to: (a) strengthen the Recipient's capacity to m
                         anage decentralized services; (b) improve availability and predictability of fun
                         ding for LCs Councils; and (c) strengthen the Recipient's intergovernmental fisc
                         al transfer system. During this phase, the program will focus more explicitly o
                         n translating institutional and organizational capacity into better service outc
                         omes with continued focus on refining the grants system and mitigating cross-cut
                         ting constraints.
                          3. Project Description
                         The project aims to support the delivery of basic services in Sierra Leone and Phase II will have the
                         following components: (1) Grants to LCs to supplement the central budget transfers to LCs adding
                         some results based elements to the phase I program; (2) Capacity development and technical
                         assistance to strengthen LCs' and MDAs capacity to perform their core functions and central
                         government capacity to provide adequate strategic guidance and oversight to LCs; (3) Results and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         social accountability ; and (4) Program management. Component 1 will finance grants to Local
                         Councils in five sectors: health and sanitation, education, water supply, solid waste management,
                         and social assistance services for the disabled and other vulnerable groups. These activities may
                         involve maintenance and rehabilitation, construction of water supply systems (wells, boreholes,
                         pipes), purchase of equipment and materials, and supervision.

                         The PDO will remain unchanged.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The program will be implemented in all 19 Local Councils in Sierra Leone.

                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Franklin Kuma Kwasi Gavu (GENDR)
                         Gloria Malia Mahama (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            This policy is triggered because of the functional
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     activities (maintenance, rehabilitation and construction) of



                                                                      Page 2 of 7
                                                              the LCs that the grant supports and the prepared ESMF
                                                              under Phase I of the APL is adequate and still relevant.
                                                              Emphasis is still placed on sub-project environmental and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              social impact screening. The screening results will allow
                                                              sub-project proponents to choose alternative sites to
                                                              minimize significant negative environmental and social
                                                              impacts.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No    This policy is not triggered because project activities
                            4.04                              located within communities will cause no loss or degrade
                                                              protected areas of critical habitats or any area with high
                                                              biodiversity value
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No    This policy is not triggered because project activities
                                                              located within communities will have no impacts on the
                                                              health and quality of forests
                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No        This policy is not triggered because project will not
                                                              procure or make use of herbicides or pesticides
                            Physical Cultural           No    This policy is not triggered because project activities do
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11              not involve significant excavation, demolition, movement
                                                              of earth or located within the vicinity of recognized
                                                              cultural heritages sites
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No       This policy is not triggered because no indigenous people
                            BP 4.10                           have been identified in the project area
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes      Some of the Sub-projects under Component 1 have
                            OP/BP 4.12                        resulted in land acquisition, voluntary donated by the
                                                              communities. Various mission reports have indicated a
                                                              limited scale of land acquisition and minimal impacts on
                                                              livelihoods. Notwithstanding this Policy, OP 4.12 is still
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              triggered. The project prepared an RPF under Phase I of
                                                              the APL and safeguards requirements will still apply.
                                                              Emphasis is still placed on sub-project environmental and
                                                              social impact screening. The screening results will allow
                                                              sub-project proponents to choose alternative sites to
                                                              minimize significant negative environmental and social
                                                              impacts. Where involuntary resettlement is unavoidable,
                                                              sub-project action plan will be prepared and implemented.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No    The project does not involve the construction of dams, nor
                            4.37                              relies on dam structures
                            Projects on International   No    This policy is not triggered because the project does not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50              involve international water ways
                            Projects in Disputed        No    This policy is not triggered because the Sub-projects are
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                  not located in a disputed areas

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues




                                                                Page 3 of 7
                         1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                           Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                             The project is rated as Category B. The functional activities undertaken by the Local Councils
Public Disclosure Copy




                           under DSDP2 have included the maintenance, rehabilitation and construction of Public health
                           units, Public schools, Community water systems and the cleaning and evacuation of solid waste
                           from the community to designated sites, Additional sub-projects allowed under the project include
                           social assistance services for the disabled and other vulnerable groups.

                           The environmental impacts (noise, dust) and occupational, health and safety hazards from these
                           activities have been minimal and do not require the preparation of Safeguards instruments. From
                           the social standpoint, construction activities have in some cases resulted in the acquisition of land
                           (voluntarily donated). Various supervision mission reports has confirmed minimal impacts from
                           voluntary land acquisition with no displacement and loss of livelihood. It is anticipated that land
                           acquisition will continue to be minimal and that the impacts on livelihoods will be minor (both in
                           terms of the scale of impacts and the number of people impacted). Notwithstanding the relatively
                           low impacts, the project prepared an RPF under Phase I of the APL and the safeguards
                           requirements will still apply. No additional Safeguards policies have been triggered aside the
                           already triggered Environmental Assessment OP 4.01 and Involuntary Resettlement OP 4.12.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                             The Sub-project activity of solid waste collection and transfer to designated solid waste dumps is
                           an indirect and long term impact from the project, which is being addressed by the LCs with
                           Technical assistance from EPA and financial assistance from donors. To that effect EPA- SL has
                           provided the LCs with guidelines for the establishment of landfill sites. Subsequently a number
                           LCs have acquired lands which have been screened by SLEPA. Indeed a few LCs (Kabala in the
                           Koinadugu District) have sought donor support from NGOs (Cause Canada) to establish a landfill
                           site. The ESS at DecSec, ESOs at the LCs and SLEPA officials have embarked on regular
                           monitoring of the process. Land acquired have been voluntary donations by the communities with
Public Disclosure Copy




                           evidence of MOU signed between the LCs and the Land owning family or communities. No
                           additional indirect and long-term impacts are expected from the other Sub-project activities.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                             Involuntary resettlement and the destruction of physical and economic assets will be avoided and
                           minimized wherever possible. The screening tool (in the ESMF) will allow sub-project
                           proponents to choose alternative sites to minimize significant negative environmental and social
                           impacts.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             The ESMF and RPF from Phase II of the APL has been updated and been implemented. The
                           borrower has in place a system of environmental screening and impact mitigation mechanism at
                           the local council level. This system was first established by the IDA financed Institutional Reform
                           and Capacity Building Project (IRCBP) and been deepened under DSDPII.

                           Furthermore, an environmental and social impact checklist is used to screen all activities included
                           in the Local Development Plans whether they involve construction, maintenance and operation.
                           The screening results will allow sub-project proponents to choose alternative sites to minimize
                           significant negative environmental and social impacts. Where involuntary resettlement is


                                                                      Page 4 of 7
                          unavoidable, sub-project action plan will be prepared and implemented. Given the minimal
                          impacts of the sub-projects, no Resettlement Action Plan has been necessitated yet.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          All Local Councils received training on environmental management within the framework of
                          IRCBP in 2011. The module was adapted from a CDD program. Continuous efforts has been made
                          to support the project’s safeguards capacity over the years both at the local council and National
                          level. An Environmental and Social Specialist (ESS) position located in the Decentralization
                          Secretariat has been mainstreamed in the Ministry of Local Government and Rural Development.
                          The ESS is charged with the responsibility of monitoring the implementation of the ESMF and
                          RPF, providing capacity development for relevant project staff, and reporting on the
                          implementation of the safeguards instruments. An Environmental and Social Officer (ESO) have
                          been recruited in each LC to ensure that Local Councils comply with and implement sub-projects
                          in accordance with provisions in the RPF and the ESMF. In addition, the capacity of relevant staff
                          at the Local Government Finance Department (which will have a role in monitoring and
                          supervising all subprojects under Component 1), Local Councils and Ward Committee members to
                          identify and address environmental and social safeguards issues continues to be strengthened
                          through periodic training. Safeguards training workshop was provided for the ESS, ESOs,
                          Planning officers and works Engineers and Resident Technical Facilitator in August 2015 by the
                          World Bank and Sierra Leone EPA.

                           Notwithstanding these efforts, safeguards capacity continue to suffer from staff turnover due to
                           low remuneration and inadequate logistics. The ESS and some ESOs quit their position and the
                           process for seeking replacement has started at the Decentralization Secretariat. The Ministry of
                           Local Government and Rural Development has commenced review of HR issues within the
                           ministry. It is anticipated that the process will significantly improve staff salaries and minimize
                           transfers. This can make a huge difference in ensuring effective safeguards implementation.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Public Disclosure Copy




                             The key stakeholders are the Local Councils, communities, the Ministry of Finance and
                           Economic Development, the Ministry of Local Government and key line ministries (Ministry of
                           Health, etc.). During the preparation of the ESMF and the RPF there were consultation with
                           relevant stakeholders (May 2011). These consultations focused on experiences from the DSDP and
                           possible adjustments that could be made in preparation of the DSDP2. Consultations however is
                           still on going to facilitate smooth implementation of sub-project.

                          An Integrated National Public Services Survey (INPSS) to assess beneficiary perception of local
                          public services and local institutions has been prepared and is expected to yield the first results by
                          the end of January 2016. DecSec has continued publishing project material, producing audiovisual
                          contents (notably a documentary on the project), generating community debate by the means of
                          radio talk shows, and engaging in social media through social network accounts.

                          Civil society participation in M&E activities at the local level has been strengthened with the
                          piloting of a Grievances Redress Mechanism (GRM) and by upscaling the Community Monitoring
                          Initiative (CMI). DecSec undertook adequate actions to create and strengthen a GRM system in
                          Kambia District, Bonthe Municipal, Freetown City, Tonkolili District, and Kono District (piloting
                          districts). Communications materials have been prepared, GRM implementers and CSOs trained,
                          coordinating GRM committees established at different levels, and focal persons assigned at each
                          grievance resolution tire. DecSec has also continued to successfully pilot community monitoring


                                                                     Page 5 of 7
                           in project sectors in Bo, Kenema, Tonkolili, and Bombali Districts. Civil society monitoring has
                           also been strengthened, with CSOs recruited and trained across the country in an effort to monitor
                           LC service delivery.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The updated ESMF and the RPF were disclosed prior to appraisal. The ESMF and the RPF were
                           disclosed in Freetown at the relevant government agencies and were also disclosed at the Local
                           Council level and at relevant sites at the community level. Where possible, announcements of the
                           availability of disclosed documents were made available in the media including newspapers and
                           radio.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Jan-2012
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Sierra Leone                                                     30-Sep-2011
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2012
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   24-Jan-2012
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Sierra Leone                                                     30-Sep-2011
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [    ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?


                                                                     Page 6 of 7
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Randa G. El-Rashidi
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                        Date: 18-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Stefano Paternostro (PMGR)                     Date: 29-Apr-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 7 of 7
