INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12665
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Nov-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Dec-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Madagascar                 Project ID:   P150116
Project Name:    Public Sector Performance Loan (P150116)
Task Team        Anne-Lucie Lefebvre
Leader(s):
Estimated        12-Jan-2016                Estimated     22-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GGO13                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Central government administration (25%), Sub-national government
administration (25%), Public administration- Education (25%), Publi c
administration- Energy and mining (25%)
Theme(s):        Other public sector governance (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      35.00             Total Bank Financing:    35.00
-       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                       0.00
IDA Grant                                                        35.00
Total                                                            35.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is: "Improve revenue mobilization and public expenditure
management to enable service delivery in selected sectors."
C. Project Description


﻿1.     Adopting a problem-driven approach to public sector management, the project will be
organized into two pillars and four components to address the binding constraints that affect service
delivery. Under Pillar 1, the project will seek to expand fiscal space through components supporting
(i) improved revenue mobilization and (ii) improved expenditure management. Simultaneously,
under the Pillar 2, the project will seek to augment the effectiveness of local governments in
delivering services through components supporting (iii) the quality of services delivered in the
education sector and (iv) the service delivery capacity of local governments.
2.     The underlying logic behind the project's first pillar is that constrained fiscal space limits the
amount of resources that can be productively channeled into the provision of vital social services. To
address this constraint, the project will support reforms for more effectively collecting revenues in
order alleviate fiscal pressures. In doing so, component 1 will support tax and customs administration
reforms to secure additional internal revenues, which are presently under-collected due to capacity
constraints in tax administration. In addition, component 1 will also target mining sector governance
in order to limit leakages from the sector. To further leverage these increased revenues, component 2
will address a number of expenditure management reforms, including improved budget management,
transparency, and control in order to enhance the efficiency through which scarce fiscal resources are
managed.
3.     In addition to these upstream interventions to improve fiscal space, the project's second
pillar will simultaneously address downstream service delivery constraints that limit the effectiveness
of local governments. As the second largest recipient of annual budget allocations, the Ministry of
Education represents a critical sector through which services are delivered. Accordingly, by
enhancing the quality of educational services at the primary and secondary levels, component 3 seeks
to provide targeted support for enhancing teacher performance, payment, and improved financial
management. Underpinning these efforts will be direct support to local governments both in terms of
increased resources through the Local Development Fund (FDL) and increased management capacity
of these resources. Accordingly, component 4 will provide a resource base for local projects (e.g.
school construction/rehabilitation, health post construction, and small rural roads/markets, etc.) as
O
Q       well as enhancing the management capacity of local governments by support PFM and M&E
systems.
4.     Taken together, the increased fiscal space (pillar 1) and enhanced local government
effectiveness (pillar 2) supported by the project are expected to simultaneously address the respective
upstream and downstream constraints on service delivery. First, expanded fiscal space should allow
the government greater flexibility and capacity to provide vital social services, including those in the
education and health sectors, which in-turn will help improve sectoral outcomes and progress toward
the Sustainable Development Goals. Second, by targeting key social service delivery sectors
(education) as well as supporting local governments with the necessary resources and expertise to
manage local development projects, the project seeks to improve the mechanisms through which
services are delivered. By taking an integrated approach to service delivery which both upstream and
downs stream constraints, it is the aim of the project to sustainably improve service delivery and
development outcomes.
5.     Underpinning these aims are a number of cross-cutting themes, which have been
mainstreamed into the project design to connect and reinforce the individual project components.
First, this project will support improved accountability, including citizen feedback mechanisms and
participatory budgeting processes, by mainstreaming them across the project components. In


﻿addition, the project will provide funding to conduct "third party monitoring" of project indicators
with the objective of facilitating citizen engagement in project management. Second, support for
improved public financial management-in particular the reinforcement of control mechanisms-
will be a critical element in each of the project's four components, further enhancing accountability
U       and value-for-money. Finally, the project will support a change manage ment strategy, which may
include establishing a shared vision and ensuring effective ownership; mobilizing coalitions and
facilitating collaborative problem-solving; enhancing the ability to manage projects and deliver
short-term results aligned with long-term plans; and providing basic tools for measuring progress and
holding Government to account.
6.     The proposed operation will be financed by an Investment Project Financing (IPF) credit of
US$ 35 million to the Republic of Madagascar. The project will adopt a results-based financing
approach that allows for improving Government coordination by better aligning the incentives of
different actors and by focusing on results. The proposed approach will address coordination issues
and create an authorizing environment to address political economy constraints and resistance to
change by aligning incentives of different actors while focusing on tangible and measurable results.
Communication of the results achieved will also be an important part of the approach.
7.     Using a results based approach, the project will utilize three interrelated tools. The first tool
is the technical assistance (TA) support that will provide the necessary knowledge and capacity to
improve revenue and expenditure management with the objective of supporting service delivery. The
second tool is the Eligible Expenditure Programs (EEPs), against which loan proceeds for service-
delivery will be disbursed. The third tool is the Disbursement Linked Indicators (DLIs) that establish
a performance-based framework to measure progress in service-delivery reform implementation.
Success in meeting the project development objectives will be evaluated through these DLIs, which
will be located at the intersection of PFM and service delivery reforms.
8.     A Project Preparation Facility (PPF) will be requested to fund preliminary work. Currently,
this would include: the WCO customs audit; an assessment of potential fiscal revenues at the local
level; an institutional assessment of FDL; a typology of communes; the assessment of internal and
external audit functions; and preparatory work related to safeguards, including inter alia, an
Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and an Resettlement Policy Framework
(RPF). The duration of the project will be four years.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
1.     Since the project will only selectively focus on activities aiming at improving revenue
mobilization, public expenditure management, and teacher performance in the education sector-
focusing mainly on technical assistance with limited physical investment-there are negligible
environmental and social safeguards issues triggered by the project.
2.     However, under the fourth component, which incorporates a Local Development Fund
(FDL), the project is expected to fund sub-projects for the construction or debilitation of markets,
schools, community clinics, public offices, roads, and the like. The environmental and social impacts
of these potential sub-projects developed in the context of the FDL are minor and the impacts can be
well managed and minimized with specific mitigation measure in place. These sub-projects are not
ex ante part of the concept design and will only be selected after community grants are allocated via
participatory budgeting processes.


﻿3.     As a result of the potential environmental and social impacts, the project has a category B
safeguards rating.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
1.     The borrower has been actively responsive in addressing safeguards issues. The Ministry of
Environment has an Environmental Impact Assessment Policy as well as a National Environmental
Management Authority in place. The National Office of Environment (ONE) is responsible for
ensuring that all project impacts are evaluated by conducting reviews of environmental impact
a       studies and validating environmental management plans. In carrying out these functions, the Ministry
of Environment is represented at the local level as appropriate.
2.     The PIU, Programme pour l'Efficacit6 de l'Administration (PREA), has experience
implementing two previous Governance and Institutional Development Projects (PGDI I and II)
while also serving as the anchor unit of all donor funded public sector reform projects. However, the
PREA team was recently re-staffed and the Bank team will need to re-assess their fiduciary and
safeguards compliance capacity as the project is further developed and appraised.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Paul-Jean Feno (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         The project has a category B safeguards rating.
OP/BP 4.01
The investments under this project will focus on the
improvement of the delivery of basic services and
will result in improved living conditions. As such,
the investments are likely to be sectorally varied
given that they will be determined by local level
priorities, which will differ from one local
government to another. The types of investment are
common community development projects (e.g.
market places, schools, community clinics, public
offices, roads, etc.) whose potential environmental
and social effects are well understood, unlikely to be
significant due to their site specific nature, and are
readily manageable.
The potential social and environmental issues
associated with the project include soil erosion,
health effects to workers and surrounding beneficiary
communities related to construction, land disturbance
during construction, waste management for the
schools, markets places, and community clinics, and
noise primarily during physical construction.
As stated above, the potential sub-projects to be
financed will be selected after community grants are


﻿allocated via participatory budgeting processes.
Hence, at this very time of the preparation of the
project, these sub-projects have not yet been clearly
identified, nor have the exact characteristics (nature,
type and scope) and physical locations of sub-
projects can be clearly determined prior to appraisal;
therefore, the borrower will prepare an
Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) that will include a well-costed
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP)
for each potential subproject could be financed by
the project. This document should be in compliance
with the Environmental Law in Madagascar and the
Environmental Assessment Operational Policy (OP/
BP 4.01) for the Bank's review and approval before
the project appraisal stage.
The ESMF will be amply consulted upon, and
include an environmental and social screening form
(ESSF) and a set of social and environmental clauses
(SEC) for contractors, meant to establish a
mechanism and/or a process of (i) determining and
assessing the future potential environmental and
social risks and/or impacts of the sub-projects under
the proposed FDL, as well as (ii) ensuring that
contractor comply with the basic core requirement of
the triggered policy.
The ESMF will further help to establish mitigation,
monitoring, and institutional measures to be taken
during the planning, budgeting, implementation, and
operation of the sub-projects. This will help to
eliminate or minimize adverse environmental and
social risks and/or impacts to acceptable levels.
Finally, once cleared by the WBG, the ESMF will be
publicly disclosed both in-country and at the World
Bank Infoshop prior to appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           The policy is not triggered as following the National
Law on Protected Areas, it is not possible to build
infrastructure within the protected areas in
Madagascar and the project will consider like
ineligible all subproject could affect natural habitat;
therefore, no direct impacts on the protected areas
and/or natural habitats are anticipated.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           None of the proposed project activities/sub-activities
will be implemented in a forest or nearby a forest,
nor have an irreversible negative impact on project


﻿areas. In lights of the above reason, the policy is
therefore not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09      No           There is no indication of activities that would lead to
the use of pesticides; nevertheless, in the likely it
occurs during project implementation, the ESMF will
provide some tangible and easily implementable
guidelines to be followed by the client to ensure
adequate management of these potential risks/
impacts.
Physical Cultural Resources  No           The policy is not triggered despite the foreseen
OP/BP 4.11                                construction and debilitation works expected to occur
during the project implementation stage; nonetheless,
the ESMF will make provision for the use of
Chance-Finds measures.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           There are no indigenous peoples expected to be
4.10                                      present in the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         Land acquisition, compensation and resettlement of
BP 4.12                                   people may be inevitable for certain categories of
sub-projects. The infrastructure projects developed in
several localities by the "collectivit6s territoriales"
could result in involuntary resettlement and land
acquisition. Such relocation could occur during the
process of widening the roads, with the construction
of markets, or the rehabilitation of schools or
community clinics.
Specific subprojects are not known at this stage.
Therefore, it is proposed to prepare a Resettlement
Policy Framework for the community development
activities under the decentralization component and
to incorporate the local development fund (FDL).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project activities do not involve the construction
of new or use of existing dams.
Projects on International    No           The project activities do not involve international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The activities under this project are not expected to
BP 7.60                                   be located in disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Jan-2016
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The Borrower prepares two standalone safeguards instruments, namely Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) for review and
Bank's clearance for public disclosure before appraisal stage
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anne-Lucie Lefebvre
Approved By:
O
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)               Date: 08-Dec-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Guenter Heidenhof (PMGR)               Date: 08-Dec-2015
Manager:


