                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA16290

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Mar-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Afghanistan                        Project ID:   P152892
                                                         Parent        P122235
                                                         Project ID:
   Project Name:      AF Additional Financing: Irrigation Restoration and Development (P152892)
   Parent Project     AF Irrigation Restoration and Development Project (P122235)
   Name:
   Task Team          Toru Konishi,Christina Leb,Mir Ahmad Ahmad
   Leader(s):
   Estimated                                             Estimated   27-May-2016
   Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     GWA06                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                         Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (50%), Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and
                     forestry (10%), Flood protection (10%), General water , sanitation and flood
                     protection sector (30%)
   Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (10%), Rural services and infrastructure (50%),
                     Water resource management (40%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      70.00           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                        Amount
     Borrower                                                                                   0.00
     Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund                                                     70.00
     Total                                                                                     70.00
   Environmental A - Full Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          No
   Repeater
   project?


                                              Page 1 of 13
2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   To increase agriculture productivity and production in the project areas

   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   Improve access to irrigation in targeted areas and strengthen capacity for water resources
   management.
3. Project Description
Component A. – Rehabilitation of Irrigation Systems and River Bank Protection (Original: US$70
million, Proposed: US$120.7 million). The additional US$50.7 million will be used to: (a) cover the
financing gap for increased per ha costs of irrigation rehabilitation (US$ 33.6 million); and (b) carry
out critical river bank erosion protection works to protect agricultural land (US$17.1 million). As a
result of restructuring and additional financing, this component would support the rehabilitation of
irrigation schemes covering about 214,000 hectares and about 26.3 kilometers of erosion bank
protection. This component would have the following two subcomponents:

Component A-1: Rehabilitation of Irrigation Systems (US$103.6 million). This subcomponent will
mainly support the rehabilitation of existing traditional irrigation schemes managed by the traditional
community-based organization called mirab. Target irrigation schemes will be selected during
implementation of the project based on a set of eligibility criteria, and the majority of the schemes
will be those with a command area of above 1,000 hectares in order to prevent overlap with the
Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL), which is responsible for smaller irrigation
schemes. This component would comprise: (a) physical rehabilitation with modest modernization
(measurement and control structures) and improved flood resilience, and (b) technical assistance to
mirabs (water management and administration) to facilitate operation and maintenance.

Component A-2: River Bank Erosion Protection (US$17.1 million). This subcomponent will
comprise the following activities (a) formulation of a national policy and guidelines on riverbank
protection based on a rapid assessment, (b) protection of identified riverbanks, and (c) institutional
strengthening and capacity development. Target areas will be identified and selected during the
implementation period based on economic, technical and social criteria; the majority of the
investments will be of small scale (typically less than 1 kilometer) reinforcing the existing river bank
through appropriate technologies (gabion, re-sectioning).

Component B. – Support for Dam Development, Operation and Maintenance. (Original: US$31.3
million, Proposed: US$17.4 million).
The focus of this component would be shifted from construction of a few dams to support broader
capacity development and institutional strengthening for dam development and management, and
consequently the name of this component will be changed from the current Small Dam Development.
The physical construction of the dams, which was planned under the original project, will be
formally dropped as there is neither adequate time to complete nor capacity to manage. The
restructured component would have the following sub-components:

Component B.1: Preparation studies for a few dams identified under the original project in the
Northern River Basin. This subcomponent will continue to support the initiatives taken under the
original project, aiming at completion of feasibility studies, environmental and social impact
assessments, and detailed designs;


                                             Page 2 of 13
Component B.2: Support for Dam Safety Works. This subcomponent will support: (a) safety and
technical analysis on the existing irrigation dams, (b) development of a dam rehabilitation plan
(including possible decommissioning of some), and (c) undertaking of critical minor safety works for
a few dams such as slope stabilization and repair to the drainage channels in order to mitigate the
risks of failure.

Component B.3: Institutional Strengthening of the Dam Unit of MEW. Technical assistance will be
provided to the Dam Unit to be established by MEW to assist in developing a sound technical, fiscal,
and institutional framework for dam development and operation. The framework will include
technical documents (dam safety guidelines, operation and management plans, and asset
management plan), guidelines and practical training on dam preparation (feasibility studies, ESIAs
and detailed design), and establishment of the permanent Panel of Experts.

Component C. – Water Resources Management and Development (Original: US$8.2 million,
Proposed: US$28.9 million). The scope of the original Component C of the original project
(Improvement of Hydromet Servic es) will be expanded in order to address the emerging needs for
institutional strengthening and policy development in the broader WRM sector. In particular, this
component would have the following two subcomponents:

C.1: Improvement of Hydromet Services and WRM (USD 22.8 million). This is in principle the
scaling up of the original Component C, which focuses on improvements in hydromet services.
Additional financing is proposed to scale up on-going activities: (a) rehabilitation of existing
hydromet data collection stations and construction of new hydromet data collection stations (scale-
up); (b) development of hydrological models and flood forecasting for key river basins (new
activity); and (c) capacity building in groundwater management (new activity).

C.2: Support for Developing Legal and Institutional Framework for WRM and Strengthening River
Basin Planning (USD 6.1 million). This subcomponent follows up on the Afghanistan Water
Resources Development (AWARD) Project, which was closed in 2013. The subcomponent would
support the following activities: (a) support for water resources program, policy, and legal
framework, including development of a National Water Resources Program and amendment to the
Water Law, (b) institutional strengthening for the MEW, and (c) support for strengthening river basin
management and planning mainly focusing on the Upper Kabul River Basin, the Balkhab Basin and a
river bank protection plan for the Panju-Amu River Basin.

Component D. – Project Management and Capacity Development (Original: US$39.2 million,
Proposed: US$52.7 million). The current Project Coordination Unit (PCU) established within the
MEW responsible for implementing the original project will remain responsible for implementing the
proposed AF project. However, in order to mainstream the project implementation to the
Government structure, the following modifications would be made:

Changing the role of the FAO Technical Assistance Team from project implementation to technical
advice. Under the current arrangement, the FAO is responsible for implementation of the project,
including fiduciary management. For the restructured project and AF, the FAO Team will provide
advices to the PCU mainly regarding issues, including (a) dam development and operations, (b)
safeguards, (c) improved irrigation design (modernization and flood resilience), (d) legal issues, and
(e) hydrology modeling, all of which the MEW needs to strengthen its expertise.



                                             Page 3 of 13
Recruitment of CBR-based government staff. Currently, nearly all PCU staff are financed by the
project. MEW intends to eventually assign the PCU to implement investments in a programmatic
manner regardless of the financing sources. As the first step, the Government has agreed to replace
the current project staff by the CBR-based government staff for the identified key positions such as
Unit Director and Heads of the key sections (financial management, procurement, safeguards, and
M&E).

Engagement of the line departments. In parallel to the above-mentioned recruitment of the CBR-
based government staff for implementation of the project, implementation of the project would
formally engage the existing line departments and units as summarized in Table 1. These
departments and units will be responsible for the technical aspects of the project, including design
and supervision for the civil works, developing terms of reference (TOR) and supervise the
performance of consultants for technical assistance. While the PCU will maintain overall
responsibilities for the implementation of the project, its main role will be mainly the monitoring of
the overall performance, undertaking fiduciary and safeguards management, preparing periodical
implementation reports, and liaise with the Bank.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Rehabilitation of irrigation systems, protection of river banks and improvement of hydromet services
will be implemented nationwide through six regional centers located in Herat, Mazar, Kunduz,
Kabul, Jalalabad and Kandahar and are not expected to have significant irreversible environmental
and social impacts. The preparatory studies for the new dams will be carried out in Balkh region
and possibly elsewhere in Afghanistan.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Elizabeth Doris McCall (GEE06)
James Orehmie Monday (GEN06)
Mohammad Arif Rasuli (GEN06)
Mohammad Ateeq Zaki (GSURR)

 6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
 Environmental               Yes            This OP is triggered because the types of activities that
 Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      the AF will finance, such as the rehabilitation of existing
                                            large irrigations schemes and the preparation of studies
                                            and documents for new large dams which, when built and
                                            operated, are likely to have potential adverse
                                            environmental impacts that may be severe, wide spread
                                            and long lasting, and would require significant mitigation
                                            measures and monitoring arrangements to manage them
                                            effectively. Therefore, the IRDP-AF will retain the EA
                                            Category A, of the original project and to meet the
                                            compliance requirements of OP4.01, the MEW has taken
                                            the following action;
                                            1.       Project level - Revised and updated the original
                                            ESMF of the parent project, to align it with the project
                                            components and activities of the AF project.
                                            2.       Component A – Site specific ESMPs be prepared


                                             Page 4 of 13
                              during implementation, as per the requirements of the
                              revised ESMF.
                              3.       Component B - (TA for new Dams) – Tors for the
                              various ESIAs, RAPs, and Dam Safety Plans have been
                              prepared and are attached in annexes in the revised
                              ESMF. Initial consultations on the ESIA ToRs have been
                              carried out together with that for the revised ESMF. The
                              actual plans and documents will be prepared according to
                              these tors during implementation of the AF project.
                              Whereas, site-specific ESMPs will be prepared for the
                              minor safety works to be done on the few existing dams.
                              4.       Component C – The revised ESMF requires that
                              tors for a SESA and the SESA itself, will be prepared
                              during the implementation of the AF project. For the
                              rehabilitation/new hydromet stations, only ECOPs will be
                              required.
                              5.       Component D – For the establishment of the (six)
                              regional MEW offices, ECOPs are required.

                              Finally, consultations on the revised ESMF have been
                              held locally, in Kabul and at four provincial capitals,
                              ( Mazar, Jalalabad, Kandahar and Herat) . The ESMF has
                              been disclosed on the MEW’s website and in hard copy at
                              the six regional offices from 1 January 2016.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   There is insufficient information at appraisal to confirm
4.04                          presence of, or impacts on Natural Habitats as defined by
                              the policy as the project adopts a subproject approach
                              where investment areas are defined during
                              implementation. In order to ensure compliance with this
                              policy if found to be applicable, the ESMF includes
                              screening measures when particular irrigation schemes are
                              identified and during the preparation of the ESIA’s for the
                              new Dams under component B, to either rule out or
                              confirm the presence of, or impacts on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   The project activities are not expected to trigger this
                              policy as per the definitions and requirements of the
                              policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes   This policy was not triggered under the original project.
                              Notwithstanding that the AF project will NOT finance
                              any pesticides the policy is triggered by the AF project
                              considering that, in general, support to irrigation and
                              agriculture activities would increase the use of pesticides/
                              agro-chemicals. A Pest Management Framework (PMF)
                              has been prepared as part of the ESMF (annex 1f) and will
                              be applied to the irrigation rehabilitation schemes during
                              the implementation of the AF project.



                               Page 5 of 13
Physical Cultural           Yes   This policy is triggered because the investment activities
Resources OP/BP 4.11              to be financed under IRDP-AF project may be located in
                                  areas containing historical sites and cultural properties of
                                  significance. The revised ESMF for the proposed AF
                                  project contains specific measures relating to avoid and/or
                                  managing PCR impacts, compliant with the requirements
                                  of this policy.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   No       There are no indigenous people, as defined by policy
BP 4.10                           4.10, within the project area.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes      This policy is triggered because of potential of land
OP/BP 4.12                        acquisition in some of the large irrigation schemes to be
                                  rehabilitated under component A. It is also triggered
                                  because of potential long-term negative social and
                                  environmental impacts from a future follow up project to
                                  construct dams for which preparatory studies will be
                                  prepared under component B of the proposed project.
                                  Potential impacts may include permanent or temporary
                                  land acquisition, changes to the downstream water flow
                                  regime, resettlement resulting in disruption of community
                                  life and networks, and loss of communal and cultural
                                  facilities.
Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes   This policy is triggered because of (i) minor remedial
4.37                              works to a few existing dams to be identified during
                                  project implementation and (ii) the preparatory studies for
                                  the construction of the new large dams.

                                  MEW will constitute a Panel of Experts as part the
                                  TAsupport for the preparation activities for the new dams,
                                  providing technical oversight on all aspects of dam safety,
                                  consistent with the requirements of this policy.
Projects on International   Yes   This policy is triggered since most major rivers in
Waterways OP/BP 7.50              Afghanistan, on which the IRDP-AF investments would
                                  be located, are considered as international waterways.
                                  However, given that the proposed activities will involve
                                  rehabilitation of existing schemes and does not involve
                                  works and activities that would exceed the original
                                  scheme, change its nature, or alter or expand its scope and
                                  extent to make it appear a new or different scheme, the
                                  AF project will not adversely affect the quality or quantity
                                  of water flows to and/or water uses by other riparian
                                  countries.

                                  Also, the new Dams for which the project will support
                                  preparation are located in the Northern River Basin on
                                  rivers, which are exclusively within the territory of
                                  Afghanistan where the rivers originate in Afghanistan and



                                   Page 6 of 13
                                             drain into the desert in Afghanistan.

                                             In view of above, the exception to the notification of the
                                             riparian countries as stipulated in para. 7 of the O.P. 7.50
                                             applies. OP. 7.50 exception memo was cleared by the
                                             RVP after clearance of the LEG on January 15, 2016.
   Projects in Disputed       No             There are no Disputed Areas in the project as defined by
   Areas OP/BP 7.60                          this policy.

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     Overall, potential impacts of the proposed AF project related to the works on the irrigation
     schemes and existing dams are expected to be short term with appropriate mitigation measures
     included in ESMPs. The specific locations of planned activities will be determined during project
     implementation and thus the Framework approach from the original project will be applicable to
     the proposed project. Whereas, the TA preparation activities for the new Dams will have no
     impacts whatsoever, however if and when financing is available to construct and operate these
     new dams, then potentially significant impacts will occur at that stage. But, as part of the TA
     activities in the AF project, MEW will appoint an Environmental and Social Advisory Panel
     (ESAP) and a Dam Safety Panel (DSP), the Torso and composition to be agreed with the Bank, to
     provide advice on good international practices, adapted to Afghanistan’s circumstances, on
     managing the environment and social impacts of the proposed new dams.

    Component A: Impacts will be associated with the rehabilitation of existing irrigation schemes
    and protection of canal banks. Typical rehabilitation works would include improving canal intake
    structures, conveyance channels, wash structures (water bridges/super passages to allow safe
    passage of hill torrents over canals), siphons, aqua ducts and other river crossing structures,
    culverts, and control structures. Some very small amounts of land may be acquired to enable the
    strengthening of existing structures and river/canal banks but such acquisitions are expected to be
    small and will be addressed in accordance with the guidelines of the RPF included as an annex to
    the revised ESMF. Similarly, asset losses are expected to be small and will also be dealt with in
    line with the requirements of the RPF. The proposed project will ensure uninterrupted traffic of
    people and animals by building bridge structures where appropriate. The project will also seek to
    provide for social structures that benefit both irrigation and non-irrigation users, for example off-
    channel laundry basins, and washing places for the local population.

    Component B (i): No direct safeguards impacts are associated with the preparatory studies
    (feasibility studies and ESIAs) for the new dams. However there are significant and irreversible
    environmental and social impacts associated with an expected follow up project to construct the
    dams. These are outlined in section 2 below.
    Component B (ii): Options for minor safety works to existing dams, unknown at the time of
    project preparation, will be scrutinized for potential environmental and social safety works. Any
    safety work involving removal of sediment from existing dams may result in temporary
    environmental impacts on land and surface waters, land acquisition and permanent asset loss.
    Component C (i) Small areas of land may be bought outright ‘willing buyer-willing seller’ to


                                               Page 7 of 13
  facilitate the construction of new hydromet data collection stations as part of the scaling up of
  hydromet services under the proposed project. Willing-buyer-Willing Seller transactions will be
  undertaken with full information disclosure to ensure that landowners are informed of their right to
  refuse. The voluntary nature of such transactions will be documented. Environmental impacts
  from these works will be negligible at best or small and irreversible at worst.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  The potential impacts of the rehabilitation and protection activities are expected to be minor and
  short term. The comprehensive preparatory studies for the new dams in the closed Northern River
  Basin, to be financed under the proposed project, will not of themselves result in significant
  adverse environmental and social impacts. However, a follow up project to construct the dams
  may have unavoidable, long term and irreversible impacts on the environment and local
  communities. Impacts may include changes to the downstream water flow regime and aquatic life,
  submergence of grazing land, construction related impacts, resettlement resulting in disruption of
  community life and networks, permanent or temporary loss of land, assets and livelihoods and
  communal social and cultural facilities, e.g. cemeteries and mosques.
  There may also be adverse health issues if changes to the water flow create breeding places for
  vector borne diseases such as malaria. Potential impacts will be examined and addressed in the
  ESIAs and measures included in the corresponding ESMPs and RAPs to mitigate and avoid these
  impacts. The ESIAs will examine in detail the area of influence (both downstream and upstream)
  of each proposed dam site.

   The GHG analysis was carried out to assess the impacts of the proposed AF Project using the Ex-
  Ante Carbon-balance Tool (EX-ACT). The analysis confirmed that the proposed AF project would
  have very little impact on GHG emissions. Over a period of 20 years, the net effect would only be
  42,000 tons of CO2 equivalent emissions per year. as the project largely supports rehabilitation
  works where farming practices exist and would not lead to a major increase in fertilizer
  application (as confirmed under IRDP).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  Component A consists of a large number of sub projects, the selection of which will be informed
  by the approved environmental and social management framework in order to avoid or mitigate
  adverse environmental and social impacts. The feasibility studies for the new dams under
  component B will have various environmental and social considerations which will be examined
  in detail in the planned ESIAs which will consider all sites and make recommendations to avoid
  and or minimize adverse impacts. Various options for minor safety improvements at existing dam
  sites will be scrutinized for their possible environmental and social impacts before decisions are
  made on implementation.

  Also, the selection of the new dams will be made based on a very detailed Feasibility Study that
  has examined all options including technical, financial, environmental and social considerations.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  As with the current project, MEW has adopted a framework approach to manage the proposed
  project’s environmental and social impacts as the specific types and details of activities under
  components A,B and C, beyond their general description, are unknown at the time of project
  appraisal. The studies being planned and financed by the proposed project will determine and


                                            Page 8 of 13
inform the design of activities during implementation of the proposed project.

MEW has updated the existing Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) to
address potential environmental and social issues of the proposed project. A Mid Term Review
(MTR), conducted in May 2015, assessed safeguards performance in the original project as
satisfactory. The project team has, however, incorporated the following ‘lessons learnt’ from
safeguards implementation in the original project, into the updated ESMF.

•         Emphasing good construction practice and improving effectiveness of environmental
mitigation measures. To improve contractors understanding of required safeguards and ensure
good construction practice a generic Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) has been prepared
and will be included in the bidding and contract documents. The ECOP approach clarifies
safeguard procedures and responsibilities of contractors and project staff/consultants during
construction. It is anticipated that the ECOP will improve effectiveness of environmental
mitigation measures included in ESMPs.
•         Bolstering Citizen Engagement
o         Strengthening GRM: More emphasis will be placed on ensuring that all groups within
communities are aware of the GRM and how to access it. More training will be given to GRC
members so that they can address complaints at the local level more effectively.
o         Enhanced stakeholder engagement. Priority will continue to be given to outreach to, and
consultation with, various stakeholders especially vulnerable groups including women and
landless, and community-based traditional water user associations (mirab) and other informal or
formal water user groups on all aspects of investment projects. Activities will include pre-
construction consultation with the stakeholders and contractors presenting the content of the
ECOP and respective construction plans. Consultations on the ESMF of the parent project brought
water user groups together to discuss their grievances which is always useful to avoid potential
conflicts around water use.
•         Safeguard training and capacity building: To enhance technical and management capacity
of project staff both at HQ and regions, provision for training on safeguards and a range of social
and environmental issue, has been included in the AF project budget. For instance, inter alia,
thematic areas of training will include ground water management and protection. In addition there
will be more targeted on-the-job training on safeguards requirements for contractors, Mirabs and
community members.
•         Ensure quality of technical assistance: Project Management understands the critical
importance of enhancing compliance with safeguards requirements and deal effectively with
broader social and environmental issues in the AF. 3 key national safeguards staff will continue as
FAO employees during 2016 and their positions after transition to government will be included in
the list of MEW’s positions eligible for support from the Capacity Building for Results (CBR)
facility. Two independent panels of experts: one on environment and social safeguards (the
Environmental and Social Advisory Panel or ESAP) and one on dam safety (Dam Safety Panel or
DSP) will also be established. The ESAP and DSP will provide advice to project management on
all safeguards matters related to dam investments under the IRDP AF.
Guidance on environmental codes of conduct (ECOPs) and Pest Management have been added to
the existing guidelines which have been reviewed and updated as appropriate. The Resettlement
Policy Framework, an annex to the ESMF as well as a standalone document, has also been revised
to make it a more accessible document for safeguards staff to use. These measures, taken
together, would ensure that the rehabilitation activities under component A, the required ESIA’s,
RAPs and ESMPs for Component B, and the hydromet work under component C (i) are carried
out in a manner consistent with the regulatory requirements of Afghanistan and the World Bank’s

                                          Page 9 of 13
  own safeguards policies. Furthermore, the ESMF requires that the safeguards management
  measures to be carried out during construction will be incorporated in the bidding documents and
  contracts, as well as the ESMPs, to ensure effective implementation.

  MEW/PMU has over the years gained considerable experience and improved capacity to plan,
  manage and supervise safeguards issues in the original IRDP project. Two trained safeguards staff,
  one male and one female, are located in each of the six regional MEW offices. The safeguards
  unit at national level currently includes 3 safeguards officers. The proposed project plans to add a
  communication officer to this unit. An External Monitoring Agency will continue to be actively
  engaged in monitoring implementation of safeguards measures in the proposed project.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The major stakeholders are MEW, local communities in sub projects, NGOs and provincial and
  regional government officials from other key ministries including MAIL and MRRD. The
  regional safeguards staff from the original project will continue to be responsible for consultations
  with local communities during all stages of sub project development. The regional social
  inclusion and gender assistants will use local women’s CDCs as a primary vehicle for outreach to
  women with a particular emphasis on female-headed households. Safeguards policies will be
  translated into Dari and Pashto and disclosed through a range of communication mechanisms
  including broadcast media, MEW regional offices, local government offices, CDCs, health centers
  and mosques.

  Furthermore, consultations on the revised ESMF have been held in Kabul on 9 January, 2016 and
  regionally in Mazar, December 27th 2015, Jalalabad, December 30th 2015, Kandahar 3 January,
  2016 and in Herat 5th January 2016. The ESMF was then reviewed to ensure that it took account
  of key points made during the consultations.

  The ESMF was disclosed in Kabul and 4 regional/provincial centers on 1 January 2016 and at the
  Banks infoshop on 20 January, 2016.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         01-Jan-2016
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-Jan-2016
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         28-Jan-2016
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Afghanistan                                                         26-Jan-2016
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                         25-Jan-2016
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                      26-Jan-2016
"In country" Disclosure
  Afghanistan                                                         26-Jan-2016
  Comments:


                                            Page 10 of 13
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-Jan-2016
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   26-Jan-2016
"In country" Disclosure
  Afghanistan                                                      26-Jan-2016
  Comments: PMP is a part of the ESMF.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

  Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                            Page 11 of 13
    Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
    assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
    livelihoods)

    200 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
   OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
    Have dam safety plans been prepared?                             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
    Bank?
    Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
   OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
    Have the other riparians been notified of the project?           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
    Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
    Has the RVP approved such an exception?                          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Toru Konishi,Christina Leb,Mir Ahmad Ahmad
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)              Date: 23-Mar-2016



                                             Page 12 of 13
Practice Manager/   Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)   Date: 24-Mar-2016
Manager:




                                 Page 13 of 13
