INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15519
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Africa                      Project ID:  P153863
Project Name: Senegal River Basin Integrated Water Resources Management Project (P153863)
Task Team       Ijeoma Emenanjo, Shelley Mcmillan
Leader(s):
Estimated                                   Estimated    14-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GWAO7                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (45%), Public
administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (25%), He alth (20%),
Irrigation and drainage (10%)
Theme(s):       Water resource management (40%), Environmental policies and institutions
(25%), Other communicable diseases (20%), Regional integration (15%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      15.10             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Borrower                                                                      0.00
Free-standing TFs AFR COUNTRY DEPARTMENT, West                               15.10
1
Total                                                                        15.10
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       Yes
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of the Senegal River Basin Integrated Water Management Project is to
strengthen the capacity of OMVS and local water user associations to improve the environmental and
Page 1 of 9


﻿water quality conditions of the Senegal River's water resources.
3. Project Description
The proposed Dutch Trust Fund, which is parallel financing to the Senegal River Basin Multi-
Purpose Water Resources Development (MWRD2), is intended to address some of the issues
identified above (the proliferation of typha, which leads to the clogging of irrigation canals; upstream
erosion; and waterborne disease transmission-particularly schistosomiasis). MWRD2 is the second
phase of a 10-year Program. Phase 1 of the program (MWRD 1) has positively impacted the Basin
o        across the agriculture, health and fisheries sectors. The new activities to be supported under this
project will build upon previous Trust Funds and will be complementary to MWRD2 so as to
mutually reinforce integrated water resources management and development to improve community
livelihoods.
OMVS has previous experience working with the Dutch Government and has successfully
implemented projects supported by two previous Dutch trust funds. The previous Dutch Government
supported project provided institutional support at the regional, national and community levels and
improved knowledge and monitoring and evaluation of water resources. . The previous Dutch
Government supported project also supported: (i) the protection of public health through water
supply reinforced livelihoods; (ii) capacity building for water user associations and irrigation
cooperatives; and, (iii) river and irrigation channel clearance and slope stabilization.
Component 1- Upper Basin Sustainable Land Management (US$5.5 million)
This component aims to address the challenge of degradation in the upper basin through restoration
of the main headwaters of the Senegal River, the banks of other rivers in the basin, and the deforested
slopes in Guinea and Mali through the sustainable reversal of the process of deforestation and
erosion in the T6r6kol6/Kolimbine/Lac-Magui system (TKLM) north of Kayes. In addition, the river
banks protecting Kayes will be restored, continuing work initiated in TF2. This first component will
support the following sub-components:
Sub-component 1.1: Diagnostic studies on deforestation, erosion and sedimentation in the upper
basin (Guinea and Mali)
Diagnostic studies will be designed to: (i) determine the sensitivity of different landscapes, in the
upper basin, to deforestation and erosion due to differences in their geomorphological, geological,
and vegetation attributes and (ii) identify high erosion and deforestation risk areas in order to plan
site-specific management interventions.
Sub-component 1.2: Implementation of effective soil and water resource protection strategies
The efficiency of conservation measures may vary depending on the prevailing deforestation and
erosion processes and controlling factors determined in sub-component 1.1. This sub-component will
support the implementation of the most effective soil, vegetation and water resource protection
strategies in the upper basin, including strategies from TF2, such as: (i) slope stabilization works and
reforestation of river banks, (ii) agroforestry on slopes adjacent to low-land agricultural areas, and
(iii) training to identified communities and community groups on protection strategies.
Component 2- Management of Invasive Aquatic Plants in the Delta and the Operationalization of
Water User Associations (WUAs) (US$6.3 million):
This component aims to control and manage the proliferation of Typha to a level where it does not
constitute a threat to the ecological balance and to economic activities in the basin. This component
also aims to improve access to drinking water and to operationalize WUAs in continuity with the
Page 2 of 9


﻿activities from TF 1 and TF2. Specifically, this component will support the following sub-
components:
Sub-component 2.1: Completion of a needs assessment on the control of invasive aquatic species in
U        the Delta
The aim of this sub-component is to conduct a needs assessment to understand and synthesize the
implications of the harvesting of Typha and other invasive plants. The needs assessment proposed
will also include a cost benefit analysis (CBA) that will look at technical options for the control of
Typha and cost-recovery plans for Typha management as well as the development of maintenance
schedules. This sub-component will also support the annual inventory of the spatial distribution of
Typha through remote sensing, which is primarily being funded by MWRD2.
Sub-component 2.2: Invasive aquatic plant management
This sub-component will support the removal of Typha from infested areas. The removal mechanism
of choice will be determined by the results of the needs assessment (sub-component 2.1).
Sub-component 2.3: Installation of potable water supply stations in project area villages
This sub-component will provide support for the installation of water supply stations in pre-identified
villages in the basin, as a continuation of support from TF2.
Sub-component 2.4: Training and support to existing WUAs
This sub-component will provide training and support to WUAs on (i) organizational management,
(ii) invasive aquatic plant management, (iii) maintaining hydraulic axes, and (iv) the management of
water stations (including water quality monitoring and control).
Component 3- Institutional Support for OMVS and National Agencies (US$3.3 million)
This component aims to build the capacity and skills of OMVS and National Cellule staff through
training and the exchange of lessons learned. The component will support the management and
implementation of regional and state level activities. This will primarily target the OMVS bodies
responsible for implementing the program. The component will also target national technical services
to support the activities of the program based on areas of expertise relevant to this project, such as
environment, forestry, water resource management, and public health. This component will support
the following sub-components:
Sub-component 3.1: Strengthening of the capacity of OMVS and national agencies to lead invasive
species management efforts in the region
This sub-component will support the institutional capacity building of OMVS and national agencies
of the member states to improve their management and technical capacities to lead invasive species
management efforts in the region.
Sub-component 3.2: Strategic management of TF3.
This final sub-component relates to the management of the Trust Fund by the PCU and mainly
relates to the operating costs for the project. In addition, this sub-component covers project wide
monitoring and evaluation, including evaluations and also includes additional support to reinforce the
monitoring of safeguards.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
As with MWRD2, the proposed Project involves all the riparian countries (Guinea, Mali, Mauritania
Page 3 of 9


﻿and Senegal) of the Senegal River basin. The Senegal River basin covers a surface area of about
300,000 km2. The high plateau in northern Guinea represent 31,000 km2 (11 percent of the basin),
155,000 km2 are situated in western Mali (53 percent of the basin), 75,500 km2 are in southern
Mauritania (26 percent of the basin) and 27,500 km2 are in northern Senegal (10 percent of the
O
U        basin). The basin has three distinct parts: the upper basin, which is mountainous, the valley (itself
divided into high, middle and lower) and the delta, which is a source of biological diversity and
wetlands. Topographical, hydrographic and climatic conditions are very different in these three
regions and seasonal temperature variations are extensive.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Maman-Sani Issa (GENDR)
Salamata Bal (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The project and the parallel financed MWRD2, involves
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               some environmental management activities. The project
will rely on MWRD2 evaluations (ESMF, ESIA, RPF and
PPMP) with regard to the environmental and social
dimensions of the development of navigation on the
Senegal River Basin and the development of micro-hydro
sites etc. The Trust Fund will also conduct diagnostic
studies on the environmental and social dimensions of the
implementation of soil and water resource protection
strategies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         Riverbank erosion protection (slope stabilization) is one
4.04                                of the Trust Fund sub-project activities. This activity
could upset the natural balance in the affected rivers if not
done according to ecological principles.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes         Triggered by the reforestation activities to be carried out
in the Upper Basin, a very sensitive ecological area of the
Senegal River.
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes         Intensification of irrigated agricultural production might
increase the use of pesticides and chemical fertilizers.
Physical Cultural       Yes         OP/BP 4.11 is triggered by the feasibility studies for the
Resources OP/BP 4.11                the civil works activities in the Upper Basin.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no indigenous people in the Senegal River
BP 4.10                             Basin as defined by OP/BP 4.10.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        No physical resettlement is anticipated due to the nature
OP/BP 4.12                          of the intended rehabilitation works to be carried out
under the various 4.12 subprojects. There might be a need
to compensate for the loss of crops, trees or property
caused by the Upper Basin erosion management activities.
There may also be a restriction of access to certain fishing
grounds or during certain periods of time.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          None of the activities funded by this project are relying on
4.37                                dams.
Page 4 of 9


﻿Projects on International  Yes      The governments of the four riparian countries were
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                notified of the International Project through the OMVS, in
which all four countries are represented.
O
U         Projects in Disputed    No          The project is not located in a Disputed Area.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Trust Fund (TF3) is classified as category B in the Environmental Assessment classification
of the World Bank. TF3 sub-projects include: the implementation of effective soil and water
resource protection strategies, Invasive aquatic plant management which will have very limited
environmental and social impacts, similar in nature to the impacts under MWRD2. These impacts
and mitigation measures have been described in the ESIA prepared for MWRD2.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The capacity of OMVS and the member states for environmental and social management has been
strengthened under the Senegal River Basin Water and Environmental Management GEF Project
and even more so under the MWRD 1 project. This included building a core group of
U           transboundary environmental management expertise.
During the preparation of MWRD2, OMVS prepared an Environmental and Social Impact
Assessment (ESIA), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) and a Pest and Pesticide
Management Plan (PPMP) in compliance with the requirements of the World Bank Safeguard
Policies. These instruments have been reviewed and updated for use in TF3. The updated ESIA,
PPMP and RPF have been consulted upon and disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop prior to
appraisal.
MWRD2 has prepared an ESIA, since most sub-projects have already been defined, and updated
the RPF and the PPMP from MWRD1. It is not expected that OP 4.12 will be triggered during the
implementation of MWRD2, but if there is any involuntary resettlement, a RAP will be prepared,
consulted upon, and disclosed in-country and in the World Bank Infoshop. RAPs will need to be
cleared by the Bank. Construction can only start after Project Affected People (PAP) have been
compensated in compliance with OP/BP 4.12. The ESIA and the RAP were consulted upon by
February 2013. The ESIA and PPMP have been disclosed in-country and in the World Bank
Infoshop on 26 March 2013. The RPF was finalized and cleared for disclosure on 10 June 2013.
These instruments will be implemented and monitored by the Safeguard Specialist at the PCU.
Executing agencies will also be responsible for implementing and monitoring safeguards for
Page 5 of 9


﻿specific activities and for oversight of contractors.
There are no other environmental and social risks, which are outside the scope of the World
Bank's safeguard policies.
O
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
O
The principal stakeholders of this Project are identifiable at three levels-regional, national, and
local:
The regional stakeholders are the institutions involved in managing the Senegal River (the OMVS)
and its infrastructure (SOGEM and SOGED). These stakeholders have defined the project in
discussion with national counterparts.
Nationally, the principal stakeholders are the four national governments and the four national
OMVS cellules. Through performance management contracts, four executing agencies: Soci6t6
d'Am6nagement des Terres du Delta (SAED, Senegal), Soci6t6 Nationale de D6veloppement
Rural (SONADER, Mauritania), Direction Nationale du G6nie Rural (DNGR, Guinea), and
L'Agence de Developpement Rural de la Vallee du fleuve S6n6gal (ADRS, Mali) will implement
the agriculture and related sub-components. It is important to note that all four governments have
endorsed the Trust Fund. OMVS has demonstrated a continued interest in applying a participatory
approach to the Project design. National Project Planning Committees (NPPCs) were established
in each riparian country and these committees have participated actively in Project preparation.
National officials also provide continual assistance and participate in national and regional
workshops, steering committees and other stakeholder consultations during project preparation.
At the local level, the stakeholders include the local government, local decision-makers, rural
communities, women's groups, and schools. Local level consultations were held by OMVS in
December 2012 for all locally implemented activities; agroforestry, river bank protection and
development or rehabilitation of irrigated areas. Meetings were held in each zone of intervention
and facilitated by local committees. Photographs and meeting records were provided by OMVS.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Nov-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                           20-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-May-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                           20-Apr-2015
Page 6 of 9


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
O
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
O
Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Feb-2013
Date of submission to InfoShop                           20-Apr-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[X]  No[     NA
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Ifthe project would result in significant conversion or  Yes[X]  No[       NA
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes[   ] No[X]      NA[    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a    Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Page 7 of 9


﻿Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ]  No [X]    TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ]  No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [    ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?   Yes [ X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                  Yes [  ] No [    ]  NA [ X]
O
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
Page 8 of 9


﻿III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ijeoma Emenanjo,Shelley Mcmillan
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)           Date: 19-Nov-2015
O
Practice Manager/     Name: Alexander E. Bakalian (PMGR)       Date: 20-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


