INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                              Report No.: ISDSC 12704
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Vietnam                    Project ID:   P155260
Project Name:     Vietnam Climate Innovation Center (VCIC) RETF
Team Leader(s): Jana Malinska,Lan Van Nguyen
Estimated Date     14-Sep-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GTCID                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (25%), SME Finance (25%), Other Renewable Energy
(25%), General industry and trade sector (25%)
Theme(s):         Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (40%), Export development and
competitiveness (10%), Technology diffusion (20%), Climate change (30%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   5.18                 Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        1
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Borrowing Agency                                                               0.38
InfoDev                                                                         3.8
Environment       B - Partial Assessment
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The development objective of the project is to support entrepreneurs and small and medium
enterprises involved in developing local solutions to climate change and increase business activity in
the climate technology sector through the establishment of a locally-based climate innovation center.
C. Project Description
The proposed project will finance the establishment of a Climate Innovation Center (CIC) in
Vietnam through a three year $3.8 million RETF grant. The VCIC will be part of the global network
of 7 Climate Innovation Centers (CICs) being launched by the infoDev Climate Technology
Program. The project has three components and main activities, as below:
Component I: Establishment of VCIC and its operations. Activities under this component include:
1.     Development of VCIC and its operations:


﻿o      Developing and coordinating VCIC operation planning to implement components 2 and 3
and promote cooperation with private sector on climate change innovation (PPP model);
o      Providing finance for lease of space and purchase equipment of VCIC, costs of printing and
publishing documents;
O
o      Preparing conditions for establishment and operation of Climate incubation and innovation
fund in the future
o      Promoting cooperation between VCIC and funds of Ministry of Science and Technology;
2.     Establishment of Project Management Unit and its operations, including activities such as:
o      Setting up a Project Management Unit team and managing the project in accordance with
current regulations, after VCIC is put into operation; focusing on supervision monitoring and
coordination between VCIC with organizations under the Ministry of Science and Technology;
3.     Support policy development in cleantech innovation, including activities such as:
o      Encouraging dialogue between government and private sector to study, pilot, and develop a
policy framework to support private investment and develop climate associations;
o      Collecting feedback and lessons learnt from the deployment and implementation of the
VCIC to propose policies in supporting development of climate innovation.
Component II. Services to cleantech entrepreneurs including Grants to enterprises
Activities will include:
1.     Pre-incubation of climate innovation technologies and enterprises, including activities such
as:
o      Searching, selecting and supporting incubation for organizations and individuals with novel
ideas around climate innovation, through grant competitions ;
o      Connecting and guiding organizations and individuals with novel ideas around climate
change to participate in global grant competitions, find opportunities, and access investors around the
world;
o      Organizing workshops and fora to introduce and connect organizations and individuals with
feasible, innovative ideas around climate technologies, with investors and governmentauthorities to
solicit funding for incubation.
2.     Incubation of climate innovation technologies and enterprises, including activities such as:
o      Organizing training courses and providing professional services for start-up businesses at
o       early stage to develop and realize ideas, as well as create products with high potential for
commercialization
o      Connecting entrepreneurs with experts and research facilities in order to research and
develop new products;
3.     Commercialization support, including activities such as:
o      Performing market surveys, analysis reports, and other analyses related to opportunities in
climate innovation technology;
o      Connecting enterprises with the market, based on the understanding of location, channels,
and competitors; find the best way to help enterprises connect to the global market;
o      Supporting enterprises to develop their brand name and participate in technological
exchange;
o      Supporting the product promotion of the VCIC enterprises through VCIC's website and other
social PR activities.
o      Connecting startup businesses with angel investors and business consultants at national,
regional and global level;
o      Training business start-ups in accordance with the financial investment of VCIC business


﻿planning, financial management, business strategy, etc.;
o      Organizing and promoting investment between VCIC companies and financial experts, the
State Development Bank, and Vietnamese diaspora to enhance capacity.
o      Providing one-on-one coaching, training and consultancy services.
U       4.     Grants to the enterprises, including activities such as:
o      Providing grants for selected proposals and activities.
Component III. E-portal, online services and database on cleantech
Activities will include:
o      Creating a database on technology, enterprises, and experts working in the field of climate
change in Vietnam;
o      Developing an e-portal, with all this information gathered and centralized;
o      Disseminating, exploring and efficiently using the database on technology to support the
activities on climate innovation.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The VCIC will be established in an existing facility and site and there is no additional land
acquisition or related impacts linked to the establishment of the VCIC office. The specific location of
the project related to the sub-components activities described above, is not known at this stage. The
VCIC is designed to assist small high growth entrepreneurs and SMEs with innovative climate
technologies and so will involve sub-grants to SMEs for implementation of grant activities. The
grants are awarded on a competitive basis, on the basis of rigorous pre-set criteria to award the
projects which present the highest transformation impact. Each grant will be up to $50,000 and it
will used for further test, scale the project idea presented by the entrepreneur. Funds are eligible to be
utilized towards: operating costs, goods, service, workshops and training. No sub-projects involving
civil works or is allowed and, no land acquisition is allowed under this grant. Eligible conditions of
how the grant funding can be utilized will be clearly communicated at the off-set of the project, will
be included in all appropriate project manuals and sub-project selection criteria and will be available
on the VCIC website before the launch of a new grant competition. Projects are expected to center
on chosen focus areas including but not limited to: sustainable agribusiness (including climate-smart
agriculture) and energy efficiency. The ESMF will be detailing the categories and the screening
being put in place. These will be reflected in the Appraisal ISDS.
Even at a start up pilot scale, the financed sub-projects may generate negative environmental
impacts from the improper disposal of wastes, unsafe handling or storage of toxic or hazardous
materials, construction related impacts on worker safety, etc. The scale of the activities is expected to
be small at this early stage of development of the recipients' enterprises; but elements of sound
environmental planning and management will be built into the design.
This is the approach which has been undertaken with the other existing CICs and has received
clearances from safeguards colleagues in other countries where these centers are being implemented
(Africa and the Caribbean).
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The grant recipient for this Project is the Ministry of Science and Technology (MOST), but the
project will be implement through its unit NATEC, responsible for the Project implementation.
NATEC will constitute the PMU and will manage the day to day operations, budgets, workplan,


﻿M&E and disburse the grants to winners from Proof of Concept (PoC) grant competitions. A firm
will be hired to constitute the "VCIC" and offer incubation and business development services to
entrepreneurs.
O
U       Some of NATEC's current staff has worked on other World Bank's projects ( e.g. FIRST) and is
therefore familiar with World Bank policies related to safeguards.
O
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
a      Giang Tam Nguyen (GSP02)
Thu Thi Le Nguyen (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies            Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/  Yes           The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 because the
BP 4.01                                     proposed subproject activities in two climate
technology sectors (energy efficiency and
sustainable agribusiness) may have negative
environmental and social impacts which could
harm human health and the wider environment.
Potential examples include: improper disposal
of wastes, unsafe handling or storage of toxic or
hazardous materials, construction related
impacts on worker safety, etc. The scale of the
activities is expected to be small at this early
stage of development of the recipients'
enterprises.
As the locations of subproject works are not yet
known, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be
prepared by NATEC to screen to identify all
potential impacts to aid their avoidance,
reduction or mitigation/compensation where
necessary
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No            Natural habitats are not expected to be
significantly impacted by the subproject
activities under the identified two prioritized
technology sectors. The policy OP/BP 4.04 is
therefore not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36            No            Forests are not expected to be impacted by
subproject activities identified under the two
prioritized technology sectors of the project.
The policy OP/BP 4.36 is, therefore, not
triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes           As the VCIC will finance activities in the
sustainable agribusiness sector, there may be a
chance of increased use of pesticides by the start


﻿up companies at a small scale. While the
project will not consider procurement or use of
pesticides, this policy is triggered as a
precaution.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No           Subproject activities are not expected to result
BP 4.11                                      in any impacts on physical cultural resources.
This policy is not triggered. However a "chance
finds" clause will be included in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10  No             This policy (OP/BP 4.11) is not triggered by this
project. This was following review and per
advise of Senior Social Safeguards Specialist
Roxanne Hakim. After revieiwingreviewing the
project, she concluded that: There are no social
safeguards triggered but some social issues
largely related to training for new livelihood
techniques that could enhance livelihood will be
addressed through ESMF under OP 4.01
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No            The project does not trigger the Involuntary
4.12                                          Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12), since the
project will not include any civil works or land
acquisition nor any activities that will restrict
access to resources or services.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No             The Project will not support the construction or
rehabilitation of dams. This policy is therefore
not triggered.
Projects on International      No             The Project sub-project activities will are not
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                          expected to not affect international waterways.
This policy is therefore not triggered.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No           The Project sub-project activities are not
7.60                                          expected to be located in disputed areas and will
not involve activities in areas known to involve
or involve disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
i. Explanation
Based on the assessment being carried out by the Senior Environmental Specialist in the CMU,
Since the SMEs' or entrepreneurs' activities are not defined in this stage, an Environmental and
To ensure that any other World Bank Safeguard Policies would not be triggered in lending to th
Based on the nature of this project and the clear parameter set for the eligible funding under the
ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
10-Jul-2015


﻿B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
As the locations of subproject works are not yet known, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared by NATEC to screen to identify all potential
impacts to aid their avoidance, reduction or mitigation/compensation where necessary.
&    IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):          Name: Jana Malinska,Lan Van Nguyen
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                           Date: 07-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/        Name: Ganesh Rasagam (PMGR)                       Date: 07-Jul-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.
0


