INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR4192
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Dec-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                      Project ID:   P104164
Project Name: National Rural Livelihoods Project (P104164)
Task Team       Parmesh Shah
Leader(s):
Estimated       18-Feb-2011                Estimated     05-Jul-2011
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFAO6                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Public administration- Agriculture, fishing and forestry (28%), General
agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%), Microfinance (20%), Agro-
industry, marketing, and trade (17%), Other social services (10%)
Theme:          Rural markets (25%), Rural policies and institutions (25%), Gender (25%), Rural
non-farm income generation (15%), Climate change (10 %)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
O
U         Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     650.00            Total Bank Financing:   500.00
o        Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                             150.00
International Development Association (IDA)                    500.00
Total                                                          650.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The project development objective for the proposed NRLP is to establish efficient and effective
Page 1 of 9


﻿institutional platforms of the rural poor that enable them to increase household income through
sustainable livelihood enhancements and improved access to financial and selected public services.
The proposed NRLP intends to support systemic reform and transformation of the Ministry of Rural
Development from focusing on allocation, disbursement, and monitoring of central government
O
)         resources, to one of providing quality technical assistance to states implementing the NRLM. The
activities to be supported under the proposed NRLP intend to achieve the following key outcomes:
a)     Enhance effectiveness of public expenditure on NRLM # the proposed NRLP will help
establish rigorous and outcome-based systems and processes at the national and state level to
implement the NRLM throughout the country. The MoRD intends to adopt all the operational
manuals, financial management and procurement guidelines, and safeguard requirements that were
prepared for the proposed NRLP for all the activities to be financed under the NRLM throughout the
country.
b)     Leverage resources for the poor #substantial leveraging of resources for the poor is expected
from the proposed NRLP as evidenced by the initial three WB-financed state livelihood projects,
namely: i) group members accumulated their own savings in excess of US$1 billion; ii) leveraged
nearly US$6 billion in credit from commercial banks; iii) leveraged in excess of US$500 million in
resources from other public programs; and iv) achieved US$1 billion turnover in collective
marketing of farm and non-farm produce.
c)    Increase access to other government programs # the institutions of the poor created under the
proposed NRLP will provide greater integration with the formal panchayat system for last mile
service delivery (i.e. nutrition, health, education), enhanced access to other critical programs for the
poor (i.e.MGNREGA), and ensuring that the Gram Sabha (locally elected body) is more
representative of the poor by giving the poor and women agreater voice to reduce elite capture
opportunities.
3. Project Description
The National Rural Livelihood Project (NRLP) intends to support the implementation of the National
Rural Livelihood Mission (NRLM) of the Ministry of Rural Development (MORD), Government of
India through the transformation of MoRD from the traditional focus of expenditure-based
allocation, to one of providing quality technical assistance and results-based financing. Furthermore,
being a national level project, investments will be made in developing a wider base of implementing
partnerships with private sector, civil society, and other development institutions for bringing in new
ideas, innovations, services, and delivery mechanisms. With the exception of Component Two that
will be implemented in the 12 targeted states, the remaining components will provide support at the
national level to enable the smooth rollout of the NRLM throughout the country.
Component 1. Institutional and Human Capacity Development (US$ 39 million): The objective of
this component is to transform the role of MoRD into a provider of high quality technical assistance
in the field of rural livelihoods promotion. This component will finance primarily staff, technical
assistance consultancies, and training and related course material. Support under this component will
be for all states. To achieve the objective of this component, the project intends to support the
following activities:
a)     Technical Assistance - establish teams of high quality professionals to provide technical
assistance to the states in various thematic areas such as community mobilization, livelihood
promotion, financial inclusion, human resource management, monitoring and evaluation,
environment management, and fiduciary management, among others. This team will provide
continuous support to state governments in the implementation of the NRLM and related activities in
the rural development sector.
b)     Human Resource Development - support development of partnerships with well-established
Page 2 of 9


﻿training and research institutions in the field of rural development throughout India that can deliver
focused training programs for successful implementation of the NRLM and related activities in the
rural development sector. The activities supported will include curriculum development, design and
conduct of training programs including e-learning and distance learning. Under this feasibility of
O
establishment of a National Center for Rural Livelihoods will also be explored.
Component 2. State Livelihood Support (US$ 430 million): The objective of this component is to
support state governments in the establishment of the necessary institutional structures and
mechanisms for the implementation of NRLM activities from the state to the block level, including
support to the formation of institutions of the rural poor. The extent of financing to each state will
depend on the basis of state-specific needs as detailed in their respective State Prospective and
Implementation Plans (SPIP) which will be jointly reviewed and appraised by the MoRD and the
WB prior to the financing of any activities. This component will finance livelihood grants to the
poor rural households (i.e. SHGs/federations) to undertake productive livelihood activities as detailed
in their livelihood plans, support for higher level producer institutions, producer groups, farmer's
collectives, and/or producer companies (PCs), technical assistance consultancies, training and related
material, office equipment, and operational costs at the state level and below. To achieve the
objective of this component, the project intends to support the following activities:
a)     State Rural Livelihoods Missions (SRLM) # support the formation of an autonomous and
professionally managed mission at the state-level for the implementation of the NRLM comprising of
a multi-disciplinary team with expertise in themes like social mobilization, institution building,
capacity building, microfinance, farm and non-farm livelihoods, and job employment, among others.
In addition, the SRLM would establish implementing entities at the district level comprising of
multidisciplinary teams to further facilitate implementation of NRLM financed activities.
b)    Institution Building and Capacity Building - support the identification, selection, and
mobilization of poor rural households into self-managed institutions, such as Self Help Groups
(SHGs) and their federations. This would also include providing capacity building and training
activities for SHG members and federations in livelihood activities, bookkeeping, financial literacy,
and business education, among others. Teams of livelihood professionals trained in participatory
methodologies and community facilitation will be set up at the block/sub-block level.
c)     Community Investment Support - provide livelihood grants to the institutions of the poor to
enable them to undertake productive livelihood enhancing initiatives. In addition, the NRLP would
facilitate the establishment of higher level producer institutions, producer groups, collectives, and/or
a        companies.
d)     Special Programs - support for pilot activities that have potential for scaling-up and
replication such as last mile delivery of public services including health and nutrition, implementing
activities in high-conflict areas in partnership with civil society organizations, green opportunities,
climate change-related activities, value-chain development, using new technologies for financial
inclusion, among others. Activities under special programs will cover all States, including those
States that are not directly participating in the NRLP.
Component 3. Innovation and Partnership Support (US$ 4million): The objective of this component
is to create an institutional mechanism to identify, nurture and support innovative ideas from across
the country to address the livelihood needs of the rural poor. Support under this component will be
for all states. This component will finance pilot initiatives and technical assistance consultancies that
support innovative livelihoods activities in agriculture, livestock, youth employment, among others,
for rural poor households. Support under this component will be for all states. To achieve the
objective of this component, the project intends to support the following activities:
a)    Innovation Forums and Action Pilots - support selected innovations identified through
Page 3 of 9


﻿development marketplace-type forums that have the potential to be scaled-up in a viable manner in
partnership with development foundations.
b)     Social Entrepreneurship Development - support the development of a network of grassroots
innovators and social entrepreneurs, identified through a competitive process, at state and national
O
level.
c)    Public-Private-Community-Partnership - develop and support effective partnerships with the
private sector, foundations public corporations, and civil society organizations on livelihoods
development for the rural poor throughout India. These could include ICT, agribusiness, commercial
banks/MFIs and other financial service providers, and youth employment, among others. Process
and procedures for identification, and partnering with NGOs and social entrepreneurs under this
component may likely follow an Innovation and Partnership Development Guidelines agreed
between both MoRD and the WB.
Component 4. Project Implementation Support (US$ 27 million): The objective of this component
is to strengthen the National Mission Management Unit for effective project management at the
national level that develops key systems and processes for coordination and management of the
project and the NRLM. Given that the NRLP, and more importantly the NRLM, will be implemented
across India, there are substantial managerial requirements which are critical to ensure the
satisfactory implementation of both the NRLP and NRLM. In this regard, a dedicated National
Mission Management Unit (NMMU) has been established.
D. This component will finance technical assistance consultancies, training and related material,
office equipment, MIS development, and operational costs. Support under this component will be for
all states. To achieve the objective of this component, the project intends to support the following
activities:
a)    National Mission Management Unit (NMMU) - strengthen the various functions of the
NMMU to be able to manage, deliver and support all aspects of not only the NRLP, but also the
NRLM.
b)     Monitoring and Evaluation - given the geographic scale and magnitude of the resources and
activities to be supported by the NRLP/NRLM, a comprehensive and robust monitoring and
evaluation system will be established to not only track implementation progress but also to provide
meaningful reports on household level impacts and implementation experiences so as to enable
MoRD and state governments to take corrective actions, if necessary.
c)    Electronic National Rural Livelihoods Management System (e-NRLMS) and ICT: The
a        objective of this sub-component is to design, develop and roll out electronic National Rural
Livelihoods Management System (e-NRLMS) using state of the art IT platform for hosting and
delivering variety of project services like management information system (MIS), decision support
systems (DSS), financial management system (FMS), etc. This digital grid connecting village to the
national level will be Aadhar (UID) compliant and will be leveraged to deliver ICT based services to
rural poor households in the last mile.
d)    Governance and Accountability Framework - the NRLP would support the development and
roll-out of a user friendly and highly responsive governance and accountability mechanism by which
to ensure that all aspects of the project are being implemented in accordance with agreed principles
and procedures.
e)    Knowledge Management and Communication - incorporating lessons from experience and
communicating consistent and significant messages at both a policy and operational level, is critical
for the overall success of the NRLP/NRLM. In this regard, the project will invest in a variety of
products and services to enhance the generation and use of knowledge and communications as a key
tool for enhancing the quality of the program.
Page 4 of 9


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
9.     The Project is being implemented intensively in the more than 43,000 villages of 398
selected blocks (in approximately 1310 districts) of 13 states of the country. Some of these states
(Bihar, Madhya Pradesh, Orissa, Rajasthan and Tamil Nadu) have been chosen because of their past
experience in implementing Bank-supported livelihood projects. The other states have been
identified on the basis of their high incidence of poverty and large number of rural poor (Uttar
Pradesh), large poor tribal populations (Jharkhand and Chhattisgarh), and high poverty at the sub-
regional level, in some cases combined with a substantial pre-existing base of social capital (Gujarat,
Karnataka, Maharashtra, West Bengal). All states except Uttar Pradesh have significant tribal
populations that live mostly in highland and/or forest areas (many badly deforested) or, in the case of
Rajasthan, are nomadic desert tribes. Most areas have a mix of different tribes with unique cultural
and linguistic characteristics. All states also have substantial Scheduled Caste populations and most
also have poor minority populations. Along with tribal people, these groups are also highly excluded
socially and economically.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Varun Singh (GSU06)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The restructured project triggers the same safeguards
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               policies and follows the same requirements as the original
project
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes         As in the original project, the operational policy on Pest
management continues to be applicable.
0
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
O
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes         As in the original project, the operational policy on
BP 4.10                             Indigenous Peoples continues to be applicable.
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Page 5 of 9


﻿The restructuring is being done to reallocate funds and incorporate the creation of a dedicated
fund of 45 million USD for livelihoods initiatives, $30 million for scaling up interventions related
to skill development and $20 million for promoting financial inclusion and a special technical
assistance fund of $20 million for promoting convergence among various rural development
programs in collaboration with the PRIs.
These activities remain similar to the original project and therefore the environmental footprint
does not change. As in the previous project, activities which could have potential environmental
*           impacts are associated with livelihood enhancement activities such as sustainable agriculture,
community-managed dairy, etc. Agriculture, livestock, minor forest produce and non-farm sectors
are the predominant sectors in which rural poor households are involved. While no potential large
scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are envisaged. improper management of such
community activities could result in: (i) land degradation including soil erosion, (ii) poor water
availability and quality, depletion of groundwater, (iii) pollution of land and water due to improper
use of agro-chemicals (imbalanced use of fertilizers, unsafe use of hazardous pesticides), (iv)
decreased fodder availability due to mismanagement, and (v) degradation of forests (unsustainable
extraction of forest produce, shifting agriculture, grazing) if not controlled.
No additional social safeguard issues are associated with the restructured project mainly because
interventions on livelihoods, financial inclusion and capacity building for public service delivery
are part of the original project scope. As highlighted for the original project, the key social
safeguard issue continues to be addressing the social, financial and economic exclusion of the
indigenous peoples (Scheduled Tribes) as well as other traditionally excluded/disadvantaged social
groups such as Scheduled Castes and other backward castes, single women/women headed
households, landless and small/marginal farmers, people with disability, agriculture/migrant labor
and other communities. The need for environment and social screening of any larger scale,
infrastructure investments as part of value chains and rural enterprises also remains.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No adverse, long term environment and social impacts are expected due to SHG-based activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The original project prepared a detailed Environment Management Framework (EMF) which
detailed all the potential impacts from the project activities, defined mitigation measures and also
provide technical guidelines for improved environmental management. The EMF was regarded as
an integral aspect of the livelihoods activities and provided opportunities for greening the value
chain. This EMF will continue to be relevant and valid under the restructured project phase.
The original project found that those states that had implemented World Bank-supported
livelihood projects were more advanced with implementing the EMF and the Bank was able to
compile good case studies of environmental management from these state-level activities.
While the EMF required Environmental Focal Points and training and capacity building agencies
and sector-specific resource professionals and practitioners to facilitate implementation and
monitoring at decentralized levels, this has not been consistent and sustained across all states. In
the restructuring phase, more attention will need to be given to improving technical skills at the
Page 6 of 9


﻿SHG level to ensure environmental management gets mainstreamed into their activities. An audit
of the EMF/SMF is to be done one year before project closure.
O
MORD had prepared a social management framework (SMF) for the original project, based on a
multi-state and multi stakeholder social assessment exercise. This SMF would continue to apply to
the restructured project. Under the restructured project, the technical assistance and
implementation support would be more focused on enhancing the outreach and impact of the
dedicated funds on livelihoods, skills, financial services and convergence on the indigenous
peoples (scheduled tribes), including environment and social screening of sample rural enterprises
and value chain subprojects that have any significant infrastructure investments.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in the project include the rural poor in the Project blocks, including women
from socioeconomically excluded households, SHGs, federations, Panchayati raj institutions,
producer groups, as well as government and non-governmental organizations working on rural
poverty reduction and livelihoods advancement.
The MoRD had held extensive stakeholder consultations in order to inform the design and
implementation of the project, conduct environment and social assessment and finalize the
environment and social management frameworks. The safeguard documentation was disclosed
through a workshop Project implementation continues to involve extensive stakeholder
engagement at the levels of households, SHGs, federations, field implementation teams as well as
strategic/implementation partners at state and national levels
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Feb-2011
Date of submission to InfoShop                           02-Feb-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank //
Date of submission to InfoShop //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?
Date of receipt by the Bank //
Date of submission to InfoShop //
Page 7 of 9


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
O
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 8 of 9


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
a          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Parmesh Shah
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)            Date: 13-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: Shobha Shetty (PMGR)                Date: 13-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


