                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                         Report No.:ISDSA21381
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 10-Feb-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               09-Feb-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          Senegal                      Project ID:              P146469
    Project Name:                     Senegal Tourism and Enterprise Development Project (P146469)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Kofi-Boateng Agyen,Isabelle Celine Kane,Laurent Olivier Corthay
    Estimated Appraisal               19-Jan-2017                  Estimated Board          26-Apr-2017
    Date:                                                          Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GTC07                        Lending Instrument: Investment Project
                                                                                       Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           80.00                         Total Bank Financing: 74.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                       Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                           6.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                 74.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                0.00
    Total                                                                                                       80.00
    Environmental Category:           A - Full Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to create conditions necessary to increase private investment in
    tourism in the ‘Saly’ area and strengthen enterprise development in Senegal.
    3. Project Description
    The project is aligned to the GoS’ goal of “making the country an emerging economy by 2035” as expressed in
    the first pillar of the country’s strategic plan (PSE): “Accelerating inclusive growth and creating employment.
    This implies improving the investment climate and competitiveness of the Senegalese economy to promote
    growth, attraction of private investment, enterprise formation and growth, increased exports and the
    development of Senegal as a regional tourism hub that would bring increased employment. In order to
    contribute to achieving these objectives, this project will seek to address deep constraints that have inhibited


                                                    Page 1 of 8
enterprise creation and growth, challenges that continue to impact negatively on the competitiveness of the
tourism sector, and also complement other ongoing reforms that promote economic development. The project
will also support the GoS comprehensive coastal management strategy, which among others, aims to protect
known and viable locations of economic opportunities and integrate adaptation activities in response to climate
threats.

Component 1: Improving tourism development: This component will provide support for advisory services,
capacity building, destination planning and management activities, resilience measures to minimize coastal
erosion due to climate change, new product and market development, and a mix of destination level investments
in the Petite-Cote area of Senegal. The project will undertake targeted beach renovation works that aim to
prevent further beach losses and encourage regeneration as a result of the impact of climate change on the
Senegalese coast as outlined in the 2013 Economic and Spatial Study of the Vulnerability and Adaptation to
Climate Change of Coastal Areas.

Component 2: Supporting enterprise creation and growth: Although investment-climate reforms have recently
gained momentum in Senegal and has led to it attaining the status of “top global reformer” in DB2015, the
country is still ranked 147th out of 189 countries and 112nd out of 138 under the Global Competitiveness Index.
The objective of this component will be to further improve Senegal’s investment climate with a view to putting
in place relevant business infrastructure to facilitate government-to- business services, enhance access to finance
(risk capital) and other business development services. This component aims to contribute to the creation of
innovative firms, foster the competitiveness of local enterprises and improve their ability to strengthen their
presence and growth into domestic, sub-regional and international markets. It is also designed to directly help
increase and diversify exports by fostering better access to export markets for existing SMEs and supporting the
creation of new exporters. This component will also implement special efforts to support female enterprise
creation and development. Further, many government services offered to firms are accessible only in Dakar,
creating disparities, therefore this component supports the development of regional "one-stop shops" (OSS also
referred to as Plateformes de l’Investissement), which will offer access to streamlined government-to-business
services in the regions (e.g. Mbour/Saly in the Center Region, Ziguinchor in the Southern Region; and Saint
Louis in the Northern Region).

Component 3: Project Implementation: This component will provide support to APIX to manage and coordinate
the project and provide resources to strengthen its capacity on procurement, financial management, coastal
management, environmental and social safeguards management, communication, monitoring and evaluation
through the provision of relevant advisory services. Support will also finance operating costs, select training and
knowledge exchange visits, limited premises rental to accommodate advisors, goods and equipment for the
project office and audits.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The physical infrastructural investments of the project is at Saly-Mbour where the coastline continues to retreat
significantly and threatens hotel infrastructures, homes and economical activities located along the coast. The
tourism grants will focus on eligible enterprises across the country.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Alexandra C. Bezeredi( GSU01 )
 Ruma Tavorath( GEN07 )
 Yacouba Konate( GSU01 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply


                                                 Page 2 of 8
Safeguard Policies                       Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01      Yes            Infrastructural works related to coastal protection
                                                        have short-term positive impacts on fisheries and
                                                        tourism but can also result in short and longer-term
                                                        negative impacts on the coastline. They can
                                                        influence the configuration of the shoreline and
                                                        changed beach profile through inducing sediment
                                                        transport. Poorly designed structures can disrupt the
                                                        longshore current, in most cases, will result in
                                                        beach erosion down-drift of the last infrastructural
                                                        protection. Currents around the ends of breakwaters
                                                        and reefs can often be strong and dangerous for
                                                        swimmers. The shoreline is moved seaward into
                                                        deeper water, causing the beach to drop off quickly,
                                                        posing a hazard to swimmers.
                                                        Other project activities under the tourism
                                                        component includes provision of grants to eligible
                                                        enterprises to improve their business and export
                                                        potential. These activities can have potential
                                                        environmental impacts such as increased pollution
                                                        emissions; overuse of natural resources etc.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              Yes            The different types of man-made infrastructure tend
                                                        to provide more vertical habitats and are often made
                                                        from artificial material, such as concrete or metal.
                                                        This can change the physical properties of the
                                                        habitat, with important consequences for both
                                                        immobile andmobile species. Man-made structures
                                                        on coastal areas that are exposed to waves often
                                                        provide unnatural sheltered habitats. Beach
                                                        nourishment can cause bottom organisms and
                                                        habitats to be smothered by "turbid" water that has
                                                        sand and mud suspended in it. It could introduce
                                                        beach debris, non-indigenous sediment and/or
                                                        vegetation, potentially damaging local ecology.
                                                        Beach nourishment of beaches is tricky since if the
                                                        grains of sand are not exactly the same size as that
                                                        of the natural beach, the newly nourished beach
                                                        may erode faster than the natural beach.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No             The project will not finance activities related to
                                                        forest exploitation, harvesting, direct or indirect
                                                        forest degradation, and increase access to
                                                        designated forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No             The project will not finance acquisition, transport,
                                                        distribution, storage or use of pesticides or similar
                                                        chemicals that could threaten environmental and
                                                        human health.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes            This policy is triggered because of the nature of
                                                        civil works that will be financed under component

                                          Page 3 of 8
                                                               2.2. To prevent involuntary destruction of cultural
                                                               wealth during exploitation of quarry and sand pits, a
                                                               chance find procedure has been included in the
                                                               ESMF and will be inserted in all sub-enterprise
                                                               contracts.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10              No              There are no indigenous people in the project area.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12        Yes             The project triggers OP 4.12 (Involuntary
                                                               Resettlement). While the project is not expected to
                                                               cause permanent physical displacement, the access
                                                               routes, storage area for the materials and other
                                                               activities will disturb local residents and tourists
                                                               and affect several economic activities, including
                                                               hotels, restaurants and vacation residences. Trucks
                                                               will bring materials through existing alleyways to
                                                               the beach, where an access road will be established
                                                               between the existing structures and the beach. The
                                                               construction of the breakwaters will also affect
                                                               fishing activities. As the arrangements for the
                                                               temporary civil works to support the construction
                                                               have not been finalized, a Resettlement Policy
                                                               Framework has been prepared, consulted upon and
                                                               disclosed. The numbers of Project-affected Persons
                                                               (PAPs) are not expected to be large but
                                                               consultations with the PAPs will be critical to reach
                                                               a consensus on ways in which the economic
                                                               impacts of the project can be minimized through
                                                               careful planning and coordination. To this end, the
                                                               PIU is hiring a dedicated social specialist, along
                                                               with expert facilitators to ensure that the project-
                                                               affected communities are consulted and participate
                                                               in project implementation in a meaningful way. The
                                                               project sponsor will also ensure the project has
                                                               adequate compensation for loss of
                                                               income/livelihood due to the civil works.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                  No              The project will not finance dam works or activities
                                                               associated to existing dams.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No               The project will not finance activities that will
    7.50                                                       interfere with international watercourses; either in
                                                               terms of water withdrawal or discharge of
                                                               pollutants. The infrastructural works will be
                                                               undertaken within the national coastline.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60      No              The project intervention areas are not under dispute
                                                               or conflict.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe

                                                 Page 4 of 8
any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental and Social risks are substantial in this project due to the potential level of risk associated with
undertaking coastal shoreline protection infrastructural works. The risks associated with coastal construction are
further compounded by variable, uncertain and aggressive hydraulic conditions. Appropriateness of the
infrastructural design is critical for the cumulative and associated impacts while varying conditions of winds,
waves and tides can influence construction. Therefore the project has been classified as a Category A Project,
and has triggered 3 Operational Policies related to Environmental Safeguards.

Infrastructural works related to coastal protection have short-term positive impacts on fisheries and tourism but
can also result in short and longer-term negative impacts on the coastline. They can influence the configuration
of the shoreline and changed beach profile through inducing sediment transport. Longer-term impacts of hard
coastal protection structures can include ecological damage and disturbance to marine coastal habitats, benthic
communities and fish and possible invasion of non-indigenous species through diminished ebb tidal deltas.
Poorly designed structures can disrupt the longshore current, in most cases, will result in beach erosion down-
drift of the last infrastructural protection.

Currents around the ends of breakwaters and reefs can often be strong and dangerous for swimmers. Sand
nourishment of beaches is a costly, temporary solution, as beaches must be re-nourished on a regular basis. If the
grains of sand are not exactly the same size as that of the natural beach, the newly nourished beach may erode
faster than the natural beach. Beach nourishment can cause bottom organisms and habitats to be smothered by
"turbid" water that has sand and mud suspended in it. It could introduce beach debris, non-indigenous sediment
and/or vegetation, potentially damaging local ecology. The shoreline is moved seaward into deeper water,
causing the beach to drop off quickly, posing a hazard to swimmers.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
Infrastructural works related to coastal protection have short-term positive impacts on fisheries and tourism but
can also result in short and longer-term negative impacts on the coastline. They can influence the configuration
of the shoreline and changed beach profile through inducing sediment transport. Longer-term impacts of hard
coastal protection structures can include ecological damage and disturbance to marine coastal habitats, benthic
communities and fish and possible invasion of non-indigenous species through diminished ebb tidal deltas.
Poorly designed structures can disrupt the longshore current, in most cases, will result in beach erosion down-
drift of the last infrastructural protection. It must be recognized however, that despite the mitigation measures
built into the Environmental Management Plan, natural and/or severe weather conditions may threaten project
activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
The original design of the project included off-shore dredging of large amounts of sand to nourish the impacted
zone of fishermen village at Saly Niakh Niakhal. However there was apprehension from the stakeholders with
regard to impact on fishermen livelihoods due to possible disruption of fish catch. The project than was revised
to address the infrastructural works in a sequential manner with funding going in first into building protections
all the way down to the fishermen village at Saly Niakh Niakhal. Renourishment of beaches would be
considered over the first few years of project implementation and appropriate studies will be undertaken and
cleared by the Bank.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
A detailed Environmental and Social Impact assessment (ESIA) has been undertaken by international technical
consultants, commissioned by APIX, who also collaborated closely with the design consultants. The ESIA does
not include associated risks and impacts of beach nourishment using either terrestrial sand or from off-shore


                                                 Page 5 of 8
   dredging. It has been agreed that any such activity related to beach will require prior review and approval of the
   World Bank. The ESIA includes a baseline analysis and details the potential positive and negative impacts and
   recommended mitigation measures associated with the infrastructural works. The mitigation plan provides a
   number of recommendations, including Occupational Health and Safety measures and Environmental
   monitoring plan which will be implemented before starting construction and during the works. To reduce the
   potential impacts of temporary influx of labour, the ESIA recommends tapping into local labour force and
   incorporates mitigation measures into the civil works contracts. A Grievance Resolution Procedure has also been
   included, which describes the process whereby stakeholders can report concerns and grievances related to the
   project activities, and identifies easily accessible and transparent processes for addressing their concerns. Three
   rounds of consultations were undertaken with primary stakeholders and the ESIA was disclosed in-country and
   at the Bank Infoshop.

   APIX has also prepared an Environmental and Social Management Framework, to address the potential impacts
   related to provision of Grants to eligible enterprises under Component 1. The ESMF captures the potential
   environmental issues related to environmental performance target sectors and potential environmental impacts
   of proposed investments in the form of production scaling up or technology upgradation. It also includes a
   prohibitive list, which includes those activities which have potentially high environmental risks and significant
   impacts.
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   At the national level the Ministry of Tourism; APIX; National Parks Directorate; National Agency of Maritime
   Affairs / Ministry of Fisheries and Maritime Economy. while at the Saly level, the main stakeholders are Saly
   City Hall; Sub-Prefecture Sindia; Support Centre for Local Development at Sindia; Development Company of
   Petite Côte; Association of Hoteliers of Saly; Economic operators; Fish processing women group; Association
   of fishermen; Populations of Saly Niakh-Niakhal village; Economic operators located on access roads;
   populations of Saly Coulang village. For grievances, the project will establish a register of complaints and a
   Mediation committee. The existence of this register and the conditions of access (where it is available, when the
   complaints officers can be accessed, etc.) will be widely disseminated to the affected populations in the
   framework of the consultation and consultation activities, information. The register will be opened as soon as
   the census activities are launched. Complainants must submit their complaints to either the Evaluation and
   Reporting Committee under the cover of its President, the Prefect; or to the project team directly. The complaint
   shall be duly recorded in a notebook specially opened for this purpose. Recipients of complaints will return a
   reasoned response to the complainants within 10 days of receipt of the complaint. This means that all the
   addresses of the different resettlement management bodies will be given to the populations in anticipation of this
   eventuality.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                             25-Oct-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                          26-Dec-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive             08-Feb-2017
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




   Senegal                                                                         27-Dec-2016
   Comments:
   Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
   Date of receipt by the Bank                                          03-Jan-2017
   Date of submission to InfoShop                                       12-Jan-2017

                                                    Page 6 of 8
 "In country" Disclosure
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or        Yes []    No [X]      NA          []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or         Yes []    No []       NA          [X]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural        Yes []    No []       NA          []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the      Yes []    No []       NA          []
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                  Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards    Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes []    No []       TBD         []
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access     Yes []    No []       TBD         []
 to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
 of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a           Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 public place in a form and language that are understandable
 and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been             Yes [X]   No []       NA          []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [X]   No []       NA          []

                                                 Page 7 of 8
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []       NA           []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?


III. Approval
Task Team Leader(s):                Name:Kofi-Boateng Agyen,Isabelle Celine Kane,Laurent Olivier
                                    Corthay
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:                 Name:                               Date:
Practice Manager/Manager:           Name:                               Date:




                                              Page 8 of 8
