INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13147
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Feb-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 04-Feb-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Benin                      Project ID:   P149117
Project Name:   Benin Cross Border Tourism and Competitiveness Project (P149117)
Task Team       Magueye Dia
Leader(s):
Estimated        18-Jan-2016               Estimated     25-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCO7                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Central government administration (20%), SME Finance (15%), Agro-industry,
marketing, and trade (15%), Other domestic and internatio nal trade (15%),
General industry and trade sector (35%)
Theme(s):       Other Private Sector Development (80%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
support (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      50.00            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                     50.00
Total                                                           50.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to contribute to the expansion and enhanced competitiveness of
the cross-border tourism value-chain.
C. Project Description


﻿Component 1: Competitiveness and enabling environment ($6m).
Subcomponent 1.1: Strengthening the enabling environment for investment and development of
tourism and its related value chains
This subcomponent will finance:
0
a)     Technical assistance and Public-Private Dialogue (PPD) to update tourism-related policies
and regulations. Specifically, this activity will finance the PPD mechanism for updating tourism
regulations, such as restaurant regulations dating from 1987, Tour Operator regulations from 1985,
and the drafting of regulation of Guides (currently inexistent), the revision of which was proposed by
the National Tourism Policy (PNT) but yet to be carried out.
b)      Streamlining of the procedures for classification and licensing of tourism establishments. It
can take one year each to obtain a business license, a construction permit, and classification rating.
This activity will finance technical assistance to build capacity in the Chamber of Commerce for
quality assurance and hand holding of entrepreneurs through the licensing process, streamlining the
classification process through online portals, followed by an accredited inspection and verification
and the creation of practical guidelines for construction, renovation and classification of hotels.
c)     Updating the tourism investment code through PPD discussions and technical assistance for
drafting key aspects of the code, drawing on international experience and adapted to national
circumstances.
d)     Promote energy cost reduction measures and promote alternative energies. Due to the poor
construction, inefficient climate control systems, frequent generator use and lack of preferential
energy tariffs, one-third of hotel survey respondents cited energy as one of the highest variable costs
of their establishments, covering between 15-45% of their revenue. This activity aims to reduce these
costs by financing technical assistance to prepare issue papers for negotiations of industrial energy
tariffs to hotels, as well as a technical guide for energy conservation in hotels.
Subcomponent 1.2 Updating the institutions and programs for skills development in tourism
O
This subcomponent will provide demand-driven capacity building and skills development activities
to three main groups of beneficiaries, resulting in a comprehensive workforce development program
around tourism-related skills required to increase the competitiveness of Benin's tourism sector. The
three groups are: i) line-level tourism workers, ii) entrepreneurs and managers, and iii) public tourism
planners and developers. In order to upgrade and improve this system, this subcomponent will
finance:
a)      PPD in order to create demand-drive skills development programs as well as better integrate
graduates into the labor force. This includes consultations between ministries, private sector
associations and training institutes
b)     Creation of a National Tourism and Hospitality Institute.
c)     Updating curriculums and teaching manuals for diplomas in tourism & hospitality, including
piloting of programs in key establishments.
d)     Implementing a "training of trainers" program.
e)     Creation of professional certificates on entrepreneurship and business management in
tourism and hospitality.
f)     Training program and capacity building for government officials in tourism planning and
development (MCAAT, local officials and planners), which includes a study tour and knowledge
exchange for tourism practitioners on tourism development and management
g)     Training and capacity building for tourism associations.


﻿Subcomponent 1.3: Increasing demand through marketing, promotion and travel facilitation
Since marketing activities will upgrade general tools and systems to target international and regional
O
U       visitors, with a specific focus on the Nigerian market, this sub-component will finance the following
activities, at both national and regional levels:
a)      Supporting destination branding, marketing and improve travel trade linkages through
improving national marketing/promotion institutions and mechanisms.
b)     Embedding a tourism marketing specialist in the MCAAT in order to build marketing
management capacity and systems in the institution.
c)     Redesigning the official Benin tourism website, in French and English, targeting consumers,
tourism professionals, event planners and media.
d)     Technical assistance to engage a representative agency in Nigeria for the buildout of brand
Benin. This representative agency will be charged with public relations, media awareness raising,
organization and management of annual press trips, social media campaigns and other promotional
actions
e)     Creation of marketing and promotion collateral, including a tourism image and databank and
tourism brochures for pilot destinations.
f)     Undertaking marketing and promotional activities towards three specific Nigerian market
segments. The Nigerian Demand Assessment identified three key market segments with high
potential for visitor growth and revenue generation, which include i) MICE, ii) Shopping, and iii)
Leisure.
g)     Finance cross-border travel facilitation activities, from improving and clarify the process for
required documentation to implementing streamlined procedures and assistance for tourists.
Subcomponent 1.4 Upgrading Benin's tourism statistics and information management system
Benin's tourism statistical capacity and systems remain weak, not integrated with customs databases
and lack regular exit surveys or studies on its tourism arrivals, demographics, itineraries, destination
image, spend or satisfaction. As such, the project plans investments in upgrading Benin's Tourism
Statistics and Information Management System (TIMS) to better measure and evaluate impacts and
markets. The project will finance an assessment and creation of a program for upgrading its TIMS, as
a       well as finance priority actions for its upgrading.
Component 2: Development of Catalytic infrastructure and critical services (US$ 28 million)
The objective of this component is to finance catalytic investments in tourism destinations in order to
improve the quality and variety of tourism products and services in Benin, as well as infrastructure
improvements to remove roadblocks for the growth of related value chains. In order to maximize the
creation of agglomeration economies in the tourism sector, infrastructure and services investments
will be clustered geographically in the Southern Benin growth corridor, comprising of two hubs and
their connecting coastline, known as the "Route Des P6ches". To this end, the project will focus
investments in the following four selected areas within this pilot zone: i) Ouidah, as the cultural and
eco-tourism hub, ii) Fidjirosse, as the leisure and entertainment hub, iii) structuring and laying the
groundwork for the "Route Des P6ches" integrated coastal development project, located between
Fidlirosse and Ouidah, and iv) investments in infrastructure for the growth of value chain linkages.
The potential for investing in Benin's northern tourism Hub (Natitingou) and the Pendjari National
Park is also currently being explored.


﻿Subcomponent 2.1: Integrated destination and product development in Ouidah
The historic city of Ouidah will be developed as the cultural hub, located strategically along key
O
touristic routes (Coastal route, slave route, Voudou cradle). The project will carry out an integrated
approach to developing this destination, including investments in i) improving infrastructure, utilities
and basic services (solid waste management, public areas, lighting) in its historic core; ii) upgrading
sites/attractions and creating value chain linkages (interpretation centres, signage, asset
rehabilitation); and iii) ensuring the sustainability of products through implementing management,
operations and maintenance systems and forging local economic linkages. Sites will require
infrastructure and access upgrades in order to be transformed into products, and subsequently quality
visitor experiences.The proposed activities will improve the destination's liveability, enhance its
competitiveness as an attractive destination for visitors, conserve and revitalize its historic core and
increase private sector investments in and around the destination. Specific investments are being
identified.
Subcomponent 2.2: Pilot development of the Fidjirosse beachfront as leisure and entertainment zone
The Fidjrosse beachfront and environs is the starting point for the government anchor project "Route
Des Pches". The entire area extends along 5km with a surface area of 50 hectares. This area is
currently occupied by a number of unregulated precarious structures, suffering from coastal erosion
without solid waste management, parking, lighting or beach infrastructure and services. A pilot area
has been selected within this zone for development, with the aim of transforming it into a quality
leisure and entertainment zone, creating spaces for and facilitating events, sports, leisure and
gastronomy, active during the day and evening and accessible to a wide variety of different users in a
convivial, serene and authentic setting. This will be carried out by upgrading its public spaces and
creating opportunities for the upgrading and expansion of quality private sector establishments. The
investments will be structured in a manner to maximize the private sector participation in the
construction and management of infrastructure and services. The specific investments are being
finalized.
Subcomponent 2.3: Investments in infrastructure for the growth of value chain linkages
Infrastructure investments will be undertaken to improve the linkages to value chains related to
tourism.
Sub-Component 2.4: Support to effectively structure and implement the Route Des P6ches Integrated
Coastal Tourism Project
This subcomponent will finance comprehensive analytical work to prepare the structuring and
scaling-up of the "Route Des Pches" program beyond the pilot phase, including the following
activities:
a) Improving effectiveness of the "Route Des Pches" implementing agency. This activity will
strengthen the planning and coordination capacities of the Government unit tasked to implement the
"Route Des Pches" Program such that it can effectively deliver the tourism competitiveness
platform program. The Agence de D6veloppement Touristique de la Route des P6ches (ADTRDP) is
anchored at the MCAAT and overseen by a board including several ministries, local communities
and few private sector representatives. The mandate of the agency is to plan, regulate and develop the


﻿"Route Des Pches" Coastal Tourism Project; it is operational but is yet to produce concrete results.
The agency is a good candidate to serve as delivery unit for the competitiveness platforms program
and has volunteered to play this role. The project will support a gradual transformation of the
ADTRDP into a more flexible, agile entity able to, develop, promote and manage the tourism
O
competitiveness platform. Its board composition would be enlarged to include key players in the
implementation of government priority projects such as the Agence B6ninoise des Grands Travaux
(ABGT) but also give a more prominent role to the private sector. The project will help recruit and
finance costs associated with the management team of the new agency and any other aspect relating
the agency capacity building.
b) Structuring of the Special Economic Zone for Tourism ("Route Des Pches"): The GoB
requires assistance in drafting the regulatory texts for the development of the zone as well as
technical assistance in the structuring, phasing and rollout of the zone's development.
c)     Investment promotion support for the first phase of the zone: the ADTRDP will receive
technical support in the packaging and promotion of the zone to potential investors, including
investor strategy, conditions, identification and attraction.
For component 2, prior to the issuance of the bidding documents for the works contract for each
investment subproject, the MCAAT/PIU shall prepare and submit to the Bank for its approval: i) the
draft bidding documents, and ii) the draft contract for said works to ensure that the provisions of the
site-specific Environmental Management Plans are adequately included in said contract. If an
investment subproject requires land acquisition or resettlement, prior to the commencement of the
works under such an investment subproject, MCAAT/PIU shall ensure that the owners and users of
the land where said works are to be implemented are fully compensated in accordance with the
provisions of the Resettlement Action Plan (RAP).
The component will also support the integration of stakeholders and communities to each of the
proposed investments, in order to create ownership over the management and maintenance of the
sites. As such, the project will finance knowledge exchange and courses for tourism site
management, as well as awareness raising initiatives to include local communities.
o
Component 3: Support to SME upgrading and expansion ($1 Om)
O
Subcomponent 3.1: Support private sector development through programs targeting sub-sectors'
o constraints and increasing job creation in the tourism sector.
The main issues hindering the competitiveness of tourism enterprises in Benin are i) the lack of
quality facilities meeting international norms and standards, and specifically the needs of potential
markets, ii) the lack of effective marketing tools and approaches (websites, B2B linkages), iii)
insufficient employee training, iv) outdated accounting, purchasing, reservations and rooms
management systems and tools, v) high energy costs, and vi) the lack of linkages to local value
chains (furnishings, crafts, foodstuffs). There is also a dearth of tourism business development
service providers in Benin. At this stage, the project is exploring a number of options to address these
constraints, which include:
a)     Dedicated lines of credit.
b)     Training of business development service (BDS) providers and provision of BDS, partnering
with a Central Bank program to provide credit lines.
c)        A partial guarantee scheme.
d)     Matching Grants/Innovation fund to support the provision of BDS and investments for
facility upgrading.


﻿Subcomponent 3.2: Enhance linkages of the tourism sector with the local economy
The objective of this component is to provide an integrated support to selected value chains to
O
consolidate and expand backward linkages in the tourism sector. Proposed support aims to increase
the competitiveness of these value chains as suppliers to the tourism industry and increase value
addition in Benin. Specific value chains within the agricultural, arts and craft manufacturing, as well
as services (e.g. construction) sectors will be considered in view of the future developments under
the coastal integrated resort development project.
Proposed focus on these value chains will be mainly driven by their high potential to increase jobs in
the local economy. The component will address key bottlenecks along the selected value chains that
could include regulatory challenges, access to finance and skills, provision of appropriate
infrastructure, quality of products and linking of suppliers.
The project will help facilitate the access of supported products/value chains to the densely populated
and economically prominent Nigerian southwest. Additionally, the sub-component will finance
supplier development programs to connect the supported firms with tourism actors (hotels,
restaurants, etc.).
One related value chain that is being explored is that of supporting the crafts industry by providing
advisory, technical assistance and financing in order to better link the industries to the tourism value
chain. Interventions in the craft sector could include: i) training and capacity building of craftsmen
and their systems, ii) facilitating access to financial services through technical assistance for craft
advisors and business plan preparation, iii) the creation of a centralized purchasing platform for raw
materials.
Component 4: Project Management and Institutional strengthening ($6m)
This component aims to provide the necessary technical, advisory and financial support for the
adequate implementation, management and coordination of the Project through the financing of
equipment, consultant compensation, operating costs, organizational budgets, monitoring and
evaluation, systems development, training and communication to beneficiaries, capacity building,
and technical assistance. More specifically, this includes:
a)     The establishment and operation of a Project Implementing Unit (PIU). The PIU will include
i) PIU Director i) Senior tourism specialist (responsible for Comp 1) ii) Senior municipal Engineer/
Architect/Project Manager (responsible for Comp 2) , iii) Private sector development and local
economic linkages specialist (responsible for Comp 3), iv) Procurement specialist, v) Accountant, vi)
Communications and citizen engagement specialist, vii) M&E and tourism statistics specialist (part-
time), viii) Environmental and social management specialist.
b)     Construction supervision support by an international consulting firm partnering with a local
enterprise. It will ensure quality implementation and sustainable management of sites.
c)     Recruitment of an international tourism consulting firm for the first year to provide technical
advisory support in drafting terms of reference for project effectiveness in order to ensure timely
disbursement of initial funds
d)     Communications, citizen engagement and stakeholder coordination activities. This includes
i) the development of a comprehensive communication strategy for each Project target area as well as
the preparation of all communication materials and, where appropriate, the organization of awareness
raising events; ii) the coordination of stakeholder involvement and in project activities; and iii) the


﻿implementation of a citizen engagement plan.
e)     Secretariat services for the technical project steering committee.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The technical assistance activities (components 1.1, 1.3, 2.3, 3.1 and 3.2) will be nation-wide and do
not raise any specific safeguard concerns. In contrary, the catalytic investments under component 2
will occur in an area structured by a coastal lagoon (Ouidah and "Route des P6ches") with associated
mangrove vegetation (Racemosa sp.; Avicennia sp.) and planted palm oil trees; because of this
ecosystem contribution to fisheries, tourism development and biological conservation (Habitat of
stopover of Afrotropical and Palearctic migratory birds, habitat of Sitatunga and African manatee)
the country had designated it a Ramsar site (Ramsar no. 1017). Named "Lower valley of the Couffo,
Aho channel, coastal lagoon and Lake Aheme", Ramsar site no. 1017 is a 47,000 hectares
"continental 0" category of wetland consisting in a complex of coastal lagoon, lake and ria located
in the southern region of Benin nearby the Atlantic ocean in the eastern part of the gulf of guinea.
The area is among the country's most densely populated region (Cotonou, the country's biggest
economic metropole is located in and other medium and small cities are in the same watershed)
suggesting why primary rainforests have been replaced with man made landscapes and megafauna'
species have almost disappeared. The high population growth rate in the region will induce
increasing pressure on natural resources even in a "no project" situation. Tons of fish, crab, shrimp
and oyster are produced by these ecosystems that support tens of thousands of community jobs.
Therefore the safeguard analysis has to inform on what threats the mangrove ecosystems and the
watercourses would sustain due to the project investments and further activities though the
development objective suggest clearly a wise use of biodiversity resources for ecotourism
development.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The country's institutional and regulatory framework for environmental assessment is known among
the soundest ones in the West Africa region. The Benin Environmental Agency has good track
records in overseeing the implementation of environmental and social safeguard requirements of
donor funded projects including the World Bank ones. However, the implementation entity of the
proposed project, like many other sectoral entities in the country, still need capacity support to
handle efficiently the implementation of safeguard instruments throughout project lifecycle.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Abdoul Wahabi Seini (GSU01)
Maman-Sani Issa (GEN07)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is category A because some of the
OP/BP 4.01                              investments of component 2 will be located in the
Ramsar site no. 1017 which is a particular ecosystem
(coastal lagoon and associated mangrove vegetation)
though the activities aim at supporting tourism
development including ecotourism, thereby helping
to protect biodiversity conservation in a densely
populated area. The negative impacts of such


﻿investments, as well as of the catalytic ones are
expected to be moderate to significant if managed
poorly. So would be the indirect negative impacts of
the support to the value chains (agribusiness,
manufacturing) supported outside the Ramsar site if
poorly managed.
As a technical support to the development of the
tourism area Master Plan, a Strategic Environmental
and Social Assessment (SESA) will be financed
under component 1.2. The ToRs for will be prepared
and disclosed before appraisal.
Because, potential specific investments under
component 2 and 3 will only be known in the course
of implementation, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) and a Pest Management
Plan (PMP) will be prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed prior appraisal. The ESMF will (i) provide
guidelines and criteria for selecting the sites taking
into consideration the characteristics of the
ecosystem, and (ii) include criteria and procedures
for selecting subproject sites and designs that would
prevent selecting any subproject that could
significantly damage the natural habitats or
biodiversity of the Ramsar site. An Environmental
Impact Assessment (EIA) and Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) and, as needed a
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), of the catalytic
investments in the selected sites of Djegbadji and
Adounko or Fidjross6, will be prepared and disclosed
in-country and at the Bank Infoshop prior to
appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          The coastal area of Benin, which will host the
catalytic investments for tourism development, is a
portion of the Ramsar site no. 1017 because of its
mangrove vegetation and the lagoon that hosts
indigenous birds and receives seasonally
Afrotropical and Palearctic migratory waterfowl.
Though the project aims at supporting the
valorization through tourism development, specific
attention should be paid to the footprint this activity
would induce on the conservation of species. The
ESMF will provide guidelines to prepare an ESIA
and EMP and (i) enhance the sustainability of the
ecotourism activities to develop, and (ii) recommend


﻿support to existing conservation initiatives at national
and community levels.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The project will not finance activity in forest
degradation, forestry of forest products
commercialization.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes         Fostering agribusiness activities is likely to induce
indirect increase the use of pesticides, fertilizer and
others chemical inputs namely in horticulture, food
storage and conservation. A Pest management plan
will be developed and disclosed prior appraisal. In
any event as indicated in the project description,
only horticulture and vegetable production in support
of tourism activities will be developed. The PMP
will prescribe natural vector control and agrobiology
techniques to avoid/lower use of chemicals thereby
minimizing indirect long term pollution risk.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         The investments area was part of the ancient
OP/BP 4.11                               kingdom of Danxome famous by its contribution in
slave trade. For instance, Ouidah city was the
principal port of departure to the Americas through
the Gore/Senegal stopover. In addition, some sacred
areas punctuate the mangrove vegetation and some
portion of the coastal lagoon. Civil works may
uncover and destroy archeological artifacts or sacred
habitats if appropriate measures were not in place
during implementation. The ESMF and subsequent
ESIA/ESMPs will provide clear guidelines and
measures for handling chance find uncovered
resources as well as known religious sites.
Furthermore, activities in the historic city will
require that specific attention is paid in the ESIA to
physical cultural resources (including description of
a                                                baseline and identification of possible issues) and in
subsequent EMP/cultural management plans.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No           There are no indigenous people in the project
4.10                                     intervention area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project may trigger physical resettlement or
BP 4.12                                  temporary loss of revenues. Since the exact location
of investments are not known before the
implementation start, a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF) will be prepared, consulted upon
and disclosed prior appraisal. It will guide the
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) as
neededduring project implementation. Also, the
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) of the catalytic
infrastructures in Djegbadji and Adounko or


﻿Fidjross6 will be prepared, consulted upon and
disclosed in-country at the Bank Infoshop prior to
appraisall.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The project will not finance dam construction or
activity associated with existing dam.
Projects on International    No           The project will not finance activity located on
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      international waterways or that will directly affect
a                                                  such waterways.
&        Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The project area is not located in a disputed zone.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 31-Aug-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
The ESMF, RPF, ESIA, RAP and the PMP will be completed by end of August 2015, including
the consultation of stakeholders.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Magueye Dia
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                  Date: 04-Feb-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Jean Michel Noel Marchat (PMGR)           Date: 04-Feb-2016
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


