INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                              Report No.: ISDSC1261 1
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Bhutan                     Project ID:   P155150
Project Name:     Bhutan Institutional Capacity Development of the Royal Audit Authority
Project
Team Leader(s): Savinay Grover
Estimated Date    23-Mar-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    GGODR                      Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        General public administration sector (100%)
Theme(s):         Other accountability/anti-corruption (100%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:   0.275                Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:        0
Financing Source                                                           Amount
Supreme Audit Institutions Capacity Development Fund                          0.275
O
- Environment C - Not Required
Category:
0
B. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the proposed Grant is to enhance the effectiveness of Royal Audit Authority, the
supreme audit institution of Bhutan, by implementing the International Standards of Supreme Audit
Institutions (ISSAls).
C. Project Description
As per Article 25.1 of the Constitution of the Kingdom of Bhutan "There shall be a Royal Audit
Authority to audit and report on the economy, efficiency, and effectiveness in the use of public
resources" -Royal Audit Authority is a constitutional body that functions independently and reports
directly to the Parliament. While the core mandate of the RAA is to audit and report on the economy,
efficiency and effectiveness in the use of public resources, the Constitution also requires the RAA to
audit the accounts of all departments and offices of the government including all offices in the
Legislature and Judiciary, all public authorities and bodies administering the public funds, the police
and the defense forces as well as the revenues, public and other monies received and the advances
and the reserves of Bhutan. In line with this, the specific audit jurisdictions are outlined under
Section 39 of the Audit Act of Bhutan 2006.


﻿The Strategic Plan document of RAA for 2010 to 2015 has six programmatic goals which includes
goals to: enhance effectiveness of audit services, to improve quality & timely delivery of services
and to enhance organizational and professional development.
RAA has already formed a core group to develop its next strategic plan. Implementation of ISSAls to
O
further enhance quality, credibility and professionalism of Royal Audit Authority is one of the key
goals and issues already reflected in skeleton strategic plan document of 2015-2019/20. In a meeting
held in December, 2014 RAA has decided that the findings and recommendation of SAI PMF report
will be the core input for the upcoming strategic plan.
RAA is one of the few supreme audit institutions in the world that has volunteered to carry out the
newly developed diagnostic tool, SAI Performance Measurement Framework, on a pilot basis.
Currently the IDI and the Office of the Auditor General of Norway are assessing SAI Performance
Measurement Framework of RAA and the performance report is expected to be issued in March
2015. While the final SAI PMF report for Bhutan will be available only in March 2015, the draft
version of the report alludes to the need for capacity building of RAA staff for IS SAI
implementation.
For fulfilling this mandate and to enhance the quality of the audit reports issued, Royal Audit
Authority plans to undertake capacity building activities which will lead to effective implementation
of ISSAls.
With adoption of ISSAls, its implementation has been the top priority of the Royal Audit Authority.
As the standards are meant for public sector audits, ISSAls focus on the overall institutional audit
and non-audit standards, and best practices that entail professional, organizational and institutional
capacity building. Given the complexity, broadness and wide subject matter of ISSAls, RAA needs
resources to fully comprehend and comply with these standards. At the moment, RAA lacks
employees with capacity to comprehend ISSAls for right interpretation and for effective
implementation. As a result, different audit teams interpret ISSAls in different ways which results in
inconsistency in audit reports.
Through this project few Subject Matter Experts (SME) will be developed, along with another group
of auditors as Expert Trainers (ET) under training-of -trainers (TOT) methodology. The trained
auditors (SMEs and ETs) would work on activities like interpreting the standards, developing
professional development courses and delivering training. While the SMEs will be responsible to
validate the course contents in terms of consistency (interpretation of ISSAls) and quality, the ETs
will take care of effective design and delivery of various courses through adult learning approach and
methodology. From sustainability perspectives, RAA will ensure that SMEs and ETs continue to
a      develop and train the next set of SMEs and ETs so that the sufficient technical resources are
available at any given point in time. The SMEs and ETs will we selected as per an acceptable criteria
which would include: Somebody who is already involved in iCAT online course, Experience in
various audit and non-audit disciplines, qualification in respective fields; managerial position held
(team leader position level) and Gender representation. The task team will monitor the selection of
the SMEs and ETs and their performance through the life of the project.
This project will be aligned with other activities of RAA which includes: (a) A Professional
Development Centre (PDC) which is presently under construction at Tsirang, Bhutan and is being
funded by Government of India. The centre is expected to be launched in 2015-2016 and will aim for
continuous and sustained delivery of ISSAI and courses for RAA's employees; it will also gradually
cater courses to regional (ASOSAI) member countries. The SMEs and ETs trained under this project
will deliver ISSAI training programs at the PDC using the Courses that are developed under the
Project. (b) RAA has signed MoU with the Comptroller and Auditor General of India or SAl-India
on a specific activity whereby two slots are provided to RAA officials in a probation course for
Indian Audit and Accounts Services (IA&AS), a key training program for civil servants who will be
working in the field ofaccounts and audit. The training provided under this Project will complement


﻿the training provided by SAl-India in terms of addressing the overall training needs of RAA. (c)
Simultaneously, the RAA is revising its Continuous Professional Development Policy (CPDP) with
the aim to guide auditors in the professional development activities to update and enhance their
professional and technical capabilities which would continuously improve the performance of the
O
U       RAA resulting quality outputs. To uphold this policy, the RAA needs in-house Expert Trainers to
develop Professional Development Courses for positions at all levels and also for effective delivery
of courses. Through trainings, the ETs will also become familiar with the contributions which
training can make to organizational development as well as to improve staff performance. The
project will serve a good example of partnership between Government of India (Gol) and Kingdom
of Bhutan and their respective SAls and how this partnership can be further leveraged to help SAI
Bhutan to implement IS SAI. While Gol is providing funds for development of infrastructure, SAI
India will provide the course for the civil servants, this project will provide fund for creating
specialists on knowledge and training delivery.
The components under this Grant would include:-
Component 1: Training of Expert Trainers (ET) and Subject Matter Experts (SME)
Sub-component 1A: Training of Expert Trainers (ET)
A group of auditors will be trained as Expert Trainers using train-the-trainer (TOT) methodology in
order to understand effective adult teaching methodology i.e. methods based on case study/situations,
exercises, discussion leading skills, co-facilitation techniques and skills etc. enabling them to teach
practical job environment in classrooms. This training will focus on building environment for
effective teaching and learning in the PDC. On availing training, they will further disseminate to rest
of the auditors on what they have learned. The design and effective delivery of the courses will
depend on the effectiveness of the ETs.
Sub-component 1 B: Subject Matter Experts (SME)
To comprehend the subject matter technicalities of ISSAls, knowledge of few auditors will be
enhanced through formal trainings, and they will be identified as a group of SME. They will aid in
developing quality content of the professional development courses in a timely manner.
Currently, the RAA don't have competence to comprehend ISSAls fully which may result in diverse
interpretations of Standards that could lead to inconsistency and impact quality of audit products and
services. This scarcity could be solved by this intervention by creating a pool of employees who can
better understand the context of ISSAls and support rest of the employees.
Component 2: Professional Development Courses based on ISSAls
ET and SME will together develop Professional Development Courses based on ISSAls from basics
a      to advanced levels for the auditors at all position levels. In the subsequent years, the SMEs will
revise and update the contents of the syllabus in accordance with the changing auditing standards,
practices and environment.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


﻿Safeguard Policies              Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/    No
BP 4.01
o
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04     No
Forests OP/BP 4.36              No
Pest Management OP 4.09         No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No
Projects on International       No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):        Name: Savinay Grover
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                   Date: 18-Mar-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Fily Sissoko (PMGR)                       Date: 22-Mar-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


