                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC1119

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 11-Jan-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Sierra Leone                     Project ID:      P153437
                            Project Name:      Smallholder Commercialization and Agribusiness Development Project
                                               (P153437)
                            Task Team          Hardwick Tchale,Adesimi Freeman
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       09-Nov-2015                         Estimated        18-Feb-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GFA01                                Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (55%), General transportation
                                               sector (45%)
                            Theme(s):          Rural markets (55%), Rural services and infrastructure (25%), Other rural
                                               development (20%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:     40.00                     Total Bank Financing:         40.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                  40.00
                              Total                                                                        40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           3.      To improve agricultural production and access to markets among beneficiary farmers and
                           small and medium scale agribusinesses in Sierra Leone.
                           C. Project Description
                         The project aims to promote smallholder commercialization by fostering productive business
                         linkages between smallholder farmers and selected agribusiness firms. Agribusiness firms will be
                         selected on the basis of their innovative plans and experience working with organized farmers’
Public Disclosure Copy




                         groups or cooperatives. The project will work with selected agribusiness firms that incorporate
                         productive linkage arrangements with smallholder farmers, as part of their overall long-term business
                         plan. The project will aim at supporting at least four commodity value-chains (rice, cocoa, oil palm
                         and poultry) due to their impact on smallholder farmers and their significant potential for enhancing
                         competitiveness and creating jobs. While many projects have focused primarily on addressing
                         production constraints, this project will focus primarily on constraints affecting the overall value-
                         chain performance, such as high aggregation costs, high processing and marketing costs, as well as
                         quality issues. The project will not support land to be converted for new palm oil plantations. The
                         project will work with existing plantations and Responsible Sustainable Palm Oil production (RSPO)
                         compliance will be a requirement for support. The project will have the following components: (1)
                         Support to agribusiness-farmer linkages and SMEs along selected agricultural value chains (2)
                         Market Access Improvement; (3) Capacity Building for Government and Other Institutions relevant
                         for agribusiness development (4) Project Coordination, Monitoring and Evaluation.

                         Component 1: Support to agribusiness-farmer linkages and SMEs along selected agricultural value
                         chains (US$19 million)

                         This component is designed to strengthen linkages between agribusiness firms and farmers and
                         promote producer associations and SMEs linkages along four agricultural value-chains (rice, cocoa,
                         palm oil and poultry). The project will aim at improving access to finance through a combination of
                         matching grants scheme and/or on-lending facilities and technical assistance. The Value-Chain
                         Financing will include matching grants and/or agricultural loans and technical assistance. This will
                         be provided to out-growers (farmers) and eligible agribusinesses working with farmers in out-grower
                         schemes. The size of these grants/loans will be determined by the needs of the various beneficiaries
                         based on their business plans, but indicative amounts are included in Annex 7 of the PAD. There are
Public Disclosure Copy




                         two financial intermediaries defined in the project: (i) The Sierra Leone Agribusiness Development
                         Fund which will be managed by an Independent Fund Manager with responsibility to undertake
                         decisions on the management and utilization of the Fund (sub-component 1A) in accordance with the
                         project objectives; (ii) the APEX Bank which is the delivery mechanisms for smallholder farmers
                         who will benefit under the project (under sub-component 1B). These are defined in the PAD and
                         eligibility criteria, including the choice of value-chains to be supported are highlighted in Annex 7 of
                         the PAD.

                         Sub-component 1A: Value-Chain Financing to Selected Agribusinesses linked to out-grower
                         schemes (US$12 million)

                         This sub-component will help set-up the Sierra Leone Agribusiness Development Fund (SLADF) as
                         a facility for eligible agribusinesses to reduce cost and risk in financing required for the provision of
                         productivity enhancing services and market access to out-growers. The establishment of the SLADF
                         will benefit from experiences and lessons from the International Finance Corporations (IFC’s) and
                         World Bank in undertaking similar agribusiness investments. Various options, ranging from
                         establishment of an independent fund or using an already existing investment fund have been
                         explored, including the relevant risk-sharing and governance arrangements to be put in place.

                         Agribusiness firms linked to outgrower schemes will be supported to supply a technology package
                         and technical assistance to farmers organized in producer organizations as well as offer guaranteed
                         farm-offtake agreements with transparently set prices for crops that meet predetermined
                         specifications. The support is to finance agricultural inputs/technologies and other production needs,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         as specified in the beneficiaries proposed business plans. In return, agribusiness firms will buy
                         produce from the farmers, through an off-take agreement which is one of the preconditions for
                         support under the project. An independent Fund Manager will be hired on a competitive basis by the
                         Government of Sierra Leone and the World Bank/IFC to manage the SLADF. The fund manager will
                         be expected to have relevant experience in managing investment funds in order to enhance viable
                         competition, efficiency and transparency. The Government of Sierra Leone and the relevant
                         stakeholders, including IFC will establish an Advisory Committee to provide appropriate governance
                         and oversight over the use of the Fund in accordance with the project objectives. The SLADF
                         structure, operational framework and criteria for the selection of eligible agribusinesses are presented
                         in Annex 7. Operational details will be clearly highlighted in the Project’s Fund Manual which is
                         being formulated and the draft will be discussed at appraisal to ensure that it is approved before
                         project effectiveness.

                         Sub-component 1B: Sustainable financing for smallholder farmers and agricultural small and
                         medium scale enterprises (US$ 7 million)

                         Under this sub-component, the project will help the Government to capitalize an existing network of
                         community banks in order to improve access to finance among rural farmers, farmer-based
                         organizations and SMEs who will participate in the various out-growers schemes with
                         agribusinesses. The community banks comprise a network of 17 community banks (CBs) and 51
                         financial service associations (FSAs) located in the rural areas of Sierra Leone. This structure is
                         supported by an Apex organization. This network of rural financial institutions has been established
                         through the MAFFS’ Rural Finance and Community Improvement Programme supported by the
                         International Fund for Agricultural Development (IFAD). Through this arrangement, it is expected
                         that farmers, as individuals or in FBOs/Cooperatives and agricultural SMEs will readily access
                         matching grants and/or concessional credit to support activities that seek to overcome barriers that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         farmers, producer associations and SMEs face as a result of market failures that limit their capacity
                         to access financial and business development services, technology, knowhow, partnerships, and
                         markets. Thus, the matching grants and/or concessional credit will provide funding for producer
                         associations and SMEs to (i) implement productive partnerships, including farmer-agribusiness or
                         farmer-buyer linkages; (ii) develop linkages to markets; (iii) develop entrepreneurial capabilities; (iv)
                         consolidate supply chains; (v) access agribusiness advisory services; and (vi) access technologies,
                         technology transfer, and new institutional arrangements. Under this sub-component, arrangements
                         will be explored to help farmers pilot innovations, such as revenue sharing and price guarantee funds
                         that increase farmers’ returns from upstream value chain activities and help build their trust and
                         confidence to deal with agribusinesses.

                         Component 2: Market Access Improvement (US$26 million)

                         The objective of this component is to link high agricultural production areas to markets. This support
                         will help to link high agricultural production areas to markets. This component will support the
                         rehabilitation, spot improvements and maintenance of 500-600 km of feeder roads using
                         performance-based contracts. This sub-component also include construction of river crossing
                         structures. Specific focus will be on those rural roads that link markets to production areas with high
                         volumes of perishable crops and produce. In addition, the project will scale-up the capacity of the
                         district assemblies to undertake maintenance for the rehabilitated feeder roads using labour-based
                         methods. Special focus will be given to capacity building of specialized contractors, their work force,
                         and involved government bodies through training and provision of advisory services. To minimize
                         risks associated with migrating workers, the majority of the labour-based works will be scheduled
Public Disclosure Copy




                         when demand for farm labour is low, usually from December to March. The project will support a
                         market study to explore options to address the feeder roads maintenance budget deficit through the
                         Road Maintenance Fund Administration (RMFA). Depending on the results of the assessment, the
                         project might be restructured (not before year 3) to provide for appropriate financing towards feeder
                         roads maintenance.

                         This sub-component will also address market coordination failures that arise from the lack of
                         aggregation structures such as produce collection centers, rice drying floors, storage warehouses and
                         other such structures which serve to aggregate smallholder farmer produce, making it easier for off-
                         takers to collect the produce without incurring high aggregation costs. Where possible and
                         economically viable, the project will ensure that already existing structures, such as those in the
                         ABCs and FBOs are rehabilitated. In addition to such aggregation structures, the project will also
                         explore the use of ICT technologies for market price information in order to address the price
                         information asymmetry which is a major factor affecting efficient access to markets among
                         smallholder farmers.

                         Component 3: Capacity Building support for state and non-state institutions and producer
                         organizations (US$ 6 million)

                         The objective of this component is to strengthen the capacity of state and non-state institutions
                         responsible for the provision of services relevant for smallholder commercialization and agribusiness
                         development. This component will support capacity building among state and quasi-state institutions
                         responsible for providing public sector services, including the policy environment for the promotion
                         of agribusiness development in the country. Such support will be provided to the following
                         institutions: Ministry of Agriculture, Forestry and Food Security (MAFFS), Ministry of Trade and
                         Industry (Cooperative and Trade Facilitation Departments); Sierra Leone Agricultural Research
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Institute (SLARI); Sierra Leone Chamber for Agribusiness Development (SLeCAD); Sierra Leone
                         Investment and Export Promotion Agency (SLIEPA) and micro-finance institutions. The project will
                         selectively support activities and services that are relevant to developing the smallholder farming
                         sector in Sierra Leone (details of specific institutions are capacity building activities are presented in
                         Annex 2 of the PAD).

                         In order to address the issues related to the policy and regulatory environment, the project will
                         support the establishment of an Agribusiness Forum (AF) under SLeCAD where the agribusiness
                         companies, producer organizations, Government and the development partners will meet on a regular
                         basis to discuss and find ways of addressing policy and regulatory issues affecting the development
                         of the agribusiness sector.

                         Component 4: Project coordination, monitoring and evaluation (US$ 4 million)

                         The overall day to day running, project coordination and management will be anchored within the
                         Project Coordination Unit (PCU). The project will be implemented under the existing PCU while the
                         fiduciary capacity of the unified Project Implementation Unit under MAFFS will be built. This will
                         also help reduce the operational costs since the existing PCU has equipment and office space already.
                         Furthermore, the existing PCU has strong experience in implementing projects following the Bank’s
                         fiduciary procedures, thereby improving implementation readiness of the project. As part of project
                           preparation and appraisal, there will be need to assess and if necessary enhance the capacity of
                           MAFFS and other responsible sector ministries to provide effective project management, monitoring
                           and evaluation of project activities. As such, this component will be used to support operational costs
Public Disclosure Copy




                           required to coordinate overall project implementation as well as setting-up and implementing the
                           project’s monitoring and evaluation framework. Detailed activities and estimated costs are provided
                           under Annex 3 of the Project Appraisal Document (PAD).
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project target area is all the 13 rural districts of the country, including the western area and
                           Freetown.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The institutional capacity for safeguards is moderate but further support in environmental monitoring
                           is provided by the Sierra Leone Environmental Protection Agency (SLIEPA).
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Demba Balde (GSU01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment           Yes            The project triggers OP/BP 4.01 from the expected
                           OP/BP 4.01                                        impacts (noise, dust, traffic safety) from the
                                                                             rehabilitation and routine maintenance of at least
                                                                             500km of feeder Roads in the high agricultural
                                                                             productive areas for which an Environmental and
                                                                             Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been
                                                                             prepared with guidelines (a generic EMP) to prevent
                                                                             as a first option or mitigate any adverse impact. The
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             expected impacts from the agricultural activities have
                                                                             also been addressed as part of the ESMF. The ESMF
                                                                             will be used to screen project activities and guide the
                                                                             preparation of site specific ESIAs and EMPs as and
                                                                             when needed.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        Yes            The project triggers OP/BP 4.04 as a result of the
                                                                             farming activities, and road rehabilitation and
                                                                             maintenance, which may affect land and water
                                                                             resources (pesticides, noise, dust, traffic safety). The
                                                                             policy was triggered out of precaution because the
                                                                             project will not directly support activities which will
                                                                             have an impact on natural habitats.
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 Yes            OP4.36 has also been triggered even though all
                                                                             production activities, including replanting will occur
                                                                             on existing farms and plantations.
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            Yes            The project has triggered OP 4.09 from the likely use
                                                                             of pesticides as a result of the agricultural
                                                                             production. An Integrated Pest Management Plan
                                                                                                                        (IPM) will be prepared to provide the framework for
                                                                                                                        addressing pest management issues under the project.
                                                                                                                        The IPM will be prepared as part of the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Physical Cultural Resources                                 Yes                        The project has also triggered OP4.11 (Physical
                                 OP/BP 4.11                                                                             Cultural Resources) out of precaution in order to
                                                                                                                        have a management framework in place in case of
                                                                                                                        chance-finds during road rehabilitation works. A
                                                                                                                        Physical Cultural Resources Plan will be prepared
                                                                                                                        (as part of the ESMF) to provide the framework for
                                                                                                                        managing this.
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         This policy is not triggered since no indigenous
                                 4.10                                                                                   peoples as defined in OP 4.10 are present in the
                                                                                                                        project area.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        Even though the project will not support any
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                activities that will result in resettlement of people ,
                                                                                                                        OP4.12 has been triggered to ensure that an
                                                                                                                        appropriate Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) is
                                                                                                                        put in place to screen project activities and guide the
                                                                                                                        preparation of Resettlement Action Plans in case of
                                                                                                                        unexpected effects on people or their livelihoods as a
                                                                                                                        result of the project.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         This policy is not triggered since it is not envisaged
                                                                                                                        that streams or rivers will be dammed for irrigation.
                                                                                                                        No irrigation or use of existing dams is envisaged
                                                                                                                        under the project.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      This policy is not triggered since the project is not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   expected to impact any international waterway.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      This policy is not triggered since lands within the 13
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                rural districts are not in dispute as defined in OP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Nov-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      November - December 2015
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Hardwick Tchale,Adesimi Freeman
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                                                                                                Date: 21-Mar-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Simeon Kacou Ehui (PMGR)                                                                                               Date: 21-Mar-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
