INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13619
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Jan-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         China                      Project ID:   P149528
Project Name:    CH-Second Gansu Cultural and Natural Heritage Protection and Development
Project (P149528)
Task Team        Ji You,Guido Licciardi
Leader(s):
Estimated        07-Mar-2016                Estimated     26-May-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU08                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       Public administration- Other social services (50%), Urban Transport (30%),
General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (20 %)
Theme(s):        Cultural Heritage (60%), Other urban development (40%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     175.00             Total Bank Financing:   100.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         75.00
o         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            100.00
Total                                                           175.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a        Yes
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The objective of the project is to conserve cultural and natural heritage, enhance tourism services,
and improve community services in selected project sites in Gansu province.
C. Project Description
Project design is based on a sound analytical basis. The Gansu provincial government engaged the


﻿Northwest Normal University for the preparation of the "Longdongnan Regional Strategic Planning
Study for the Cultural and Natural Heritage Conservation and Sustainable Tourism Development
(Longdongnan Regional Study)". The study provides elements to screen project sites that can be
potentially included in the project, analyzing Strengths and Weaknesses, as well as Opportunities and
O
Q)      Threats. Sites with higher development potential, benefits in terms of attractiveness for private sector
investment, job creation, income generation for local communities, are considered with a higher
priority. Additionally, potential sites should already have a complete set of planning tools to expedite
implementation, including development and heritage conservation plans at both county and site level,
tourism development plan at county level, county master plan and site master plan.
Project sites are being carefully screened for inclusion in the project. Among the rich stock of
cultural and natural heritage in Gansu in general, and Longdongnan Region in particular, 7 potential
sites are being considered by the clients, based on the criteria defined above. Other sites could be
included during project preparation, should the selection criteria be met.
Below is a list of sites being considered by the client and their ranking:
Sites being considered by the client  Ranking
Kongtong District     Kongtong Mountain Cluster of Historic Buildings 5A
Jinchuan County      Hundred Mile Grottoes Corridor Conservation 4A
Zhuanglang County Yunya Temple Cultural Heritage and Scenic Area 4A
Jingtai County Yellow River Stone Forest Conservation 4A
Tanchang County Guan'egou Ethnic Cultural and Natural Heritage Conservation 4A
Kangxian County      Yangba Natural Heritage Conservation 4A
Hezheng County       Hua'er Traditional Music Conservation and Inheritance Program 4A
Project components would blend investments in sites and communities, together with capacity
building. The proposed project would include the following three components:
Component 1: heritage site conservation and development;
Component 2: community service delivery; and
Component 3: capacity building for project sites, institutional strengthening, and project management
support.
Component 1: heritage site conservation and development. This component would focus on
enhancing site conservation and development, tacking the sustainability of the existing tourism
sector. It would target the Scenic Areas directly, within their boundaries, and provide investment for
site management, conservation of assets, enhancing their carrying capacity and tourism access,
addressing soil erosion and landslides, creating new pathways to better control visitors flow,
appropriate interpretation of the heritage properties, etc.
Component 2: community service delivery. This component would focus on enhancing inclusiveness
of local communities in the ongoing development process in Gansu, with the goal of further
improving the enabling environment for local enterprises to grow and private sector investment to be
leveraged. It would target settlements outside the Scenic Areas, in identified buffer zones, financing
improvement of service delivery, including roads, water supply, solid waste, wastewater and street
lighting. Existing local businesses, which provide the largest share of jobs locally, including bed and
breakfasts, restaurants and handicraft shops, are all located in areas with higher services. If needed
basic services would be further extended, enabling these businesses to grow further, in both number


﻿and size, creating jobs and generating income for the local communities.
Component 3: capacity building for project sites, institutional strengthening, and project management
support. In addition to supporting project delivery and management, this component would address
U       site management issues, to make Scenic Areas Administration more responsive to the environmental
and social impacts of tourism developme nt. This component would target skills training to help local
communities in the establishment of small business. This component would also include specifics
studies for Gansu and the selected projected sites aiming to enhance the technical capacity for tourist
destination management and heritage conservation techniques. Due to its cross-cutting nature, the
task team is exploring partnership with IFC, due to their unique capacity and knowledge in private
sector development.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project is scattered in several areas in east, southeast and central area of Gansu Province, middle
west of China. The biggest concentration (Kongtong District, Jingchuan and Zhuanglang County) is
in Pingliang Prefecture, eastern part of the province on loessplateau in cold temperate zone with
semi-wet climateand annual precipitation of 420-600mm. Two project counties (Tanchang and Kang)
are in Longnan Prefecture, southeast of Gansu, at the foot of Qingling mountain with wet warm
temperate climate and annual precipitation of 580-750 mm. The reminder is located in central Gansu
on loess plateau with semi-arid to arid climate and annual average precipitation down to around
200mm. Several sites are located in natural reserves or scenic/geological parks of national or
provincial level.
The project area is relatively poor and has more than 20 ethnic minority groups.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The provincial PMO is the same one for Gansu Cultural Heritage and Tourism Development Project-
Phase I, just completed in 2015. It has adequate experience with the WB safeguard. However, most
of the project counties/sites are new to the WB project and their PMOs have little knowledge about
the WB safeguard policies and requirements. The Bank team provided training on safeguard and will
continue capacity building in safeguard preparation and implementation throughout the project cycle.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Meixiang Zhou (GSU02)
Xin Ren (GENO2)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Activities proposed include conservation of cultural
OP/BP 4.01                              relics, rehabilitation of existing roads/paths, and
construction of new roads/foot paths, tourism and
sanitation facilities in natural reserves, national
scenic/geological parks or local drinking water
protection area. Given the cultural, historical and
natural significance and sensitivity of the sites
involved, even moderate scale of activities as
proposed under the project might generate sensitive


﻿and irreversible impacts. Impacts during construction
mainly include damage to cultural resources by
improper repair, noise and dust, wastewater
discharge, vegetation loss, and off site impacts from
borrow and disposal pits. Major impacts during
operation include air pollution and noise from traffic
on new roads, sewage and solid wastes from tourist
facilities and home stay, and social and
environmental impacts induced by influx of tourists
once the project completes. Therefore, a category A
is proposed.
One Environmental Assessment (EA) report will be
prepared to consolidate all subprojects' domestic
EAs. Off-site impacts need to be assessed beyond
project's physical boundary, e.g. impacts of borrow
pit and disposal site on water and soil erosion, and
disposal of garbage and manure collected from the
tourism area. The current garbage, manure and
sewage treatment and disposal facilities in each
subproject and nearby county seats/towns need to be
investigated in the EA process with the result being
fed into the project design.
An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be
developed following the pattern of the phase I
project. It will include general mitigation measures
by major type of activity and site-specific measures
as well as monitoring for each subproject, taking into
account the WB's Environmental, Health and Safety
(EHS) Guidelines applicable to the project.
Public disclosure and consultation should be
conducted at least two rounds during EA preparation.
The public consultation should focus more on
affected people instead of local officials. Their
concerns and suggestions shall be incorporated into
the EA and the development of the EMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes          Project activities include civil work and new roads/
paths in natural reserves of national/provincial level
or national scenic/geological parks or drinking water
protection area for the nearby county towns.
According to the WB policies, the OP 4.04 will be
triggered. Details on natural habitats will be obtained
through systematic survey during EA process to
identify if any of them are critical habitats. Relevant


﻿mitigation measures and monitoring requirement will
need to be included in the EMP.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           The project doesn't involve any forest.
o
Pest Management OP 4.09     No           The project doesn't involve any use of pesticide or
change in pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         Activities proposed include conservation of national,
OP/BP 4.11                               provincial and county level physical cultural
resources as defined by this OP. A cultural resource
management plan needs to be developed and
included or annexed to the EMP. The chance find
procedure will be included to properly handle and
timely report any chance finds uncovered during
construction.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     Yes         The project will support Tanchang county for ethnic
4.10                                     cultural heritage protection and Hezheng county for
traditional music conservation and inheritance. There
are various ethnic minority groups such as Tibetan-
Qiang minorities in these project counties and others.
A social assessment will be done to confirm whether
the presence of ethnic minorities which meet the
requirements for the Bank OP 4.10 IP term. The
social assessment will also carry out a free prior
consultation with ethnic minorities in project sites,
assess social risks and impacts, and recommend
suitable action plan to mitigate social risks and
promote positive social impacts. Since the project
does not take a framework approach and the project
sites are selected, it is very unlikely to add new
project sites which might be in ethnic minority areas.
It is therefore not necessary to prepare an IPF. But
Aan IP plan (or called ethnic minority development
plan) will be prepared for Tanchang and Hezheng
counties if the Bank OP 4.10 policy is triggered by
further confirmation during project preparation. The
EMDP (or IPP) will highlight culturally appropriate
measures for the ethnic minority development. The
EMDP together with other social instruments will
also guide suitable tourism-driven commercial
development of cultural resources.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project civil works will be mostly constructed
BP 4.12                                  oin existing land in scenic areas which are already
state owned land. The project might acquire
additional land for civil works under Component 2:
community public infrastructure service
improvement. But this can willonly be confirmed


﻿during project appraisal stage. Yet Ssome of the
specific locations of land to be used for the project
can only be determined during project
implementation. Specific construction will include
creation of new paths and roads, tourism and
sanitation facilities. A resettlement policy framework
will be prepared to address potential emerging land
demands by the project appraisal and during project
implementation. The RPF and will ensure measures
and procedures to be followed so as to mitigate
negative impacts of involuntary resettlement. Wide
consultation will be done with affected people and
their rights and interest, compensation and livelihood
restoration will be properly addressed. In case
specific land acquisition and resettlement emerges
under this project by appraisal, an RAP will be
prepared to address compensation and livelihoods
restoration for affected people and community.
Implementation of the RPF and RAP (if any) shall be
monitored and evaluated.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The proposed project investment will not involve or
link to dams defiled in OP/BP 4.37.
Projects on International    No           Not applicable.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Not applicable.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
o
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 21-Dec-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Safeguard Preparation Plan > Target date October 21, 2015
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ji You,Guido Licciardi
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                        Date: 26-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                    Date: 26-Jan-2016
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


