                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                Report No.: ISDSA13780
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-Apr-2015, 01-Jun-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kosovo                             Project ID:    P149005
                            Project Name:      Education System Improvement Project (P149005)
                            Task Team          Flora Kelmendi
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          01-Jul-2015                        Estimated   10-Sep-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEDDR                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General education sector (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Other public sector governance (20%), Education for all (80%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:         11.00               Total Bank Financing:         11.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                             Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                              0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                    11.00
                              Total                                                                                          11.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to strengthen select systems that contribute to quality,
                           accountability, and efficiency improvements in education in the Republic of Kosovo.
                            3. Project Description
                           Component 1: Enhancing strategic planning, financial management, monitoring and decision –
                           making in the education sector. The objective of this component is to strengthen planning, financial

                                                                        Page 1 of 4
                         management and evaluation, and decision-making capacities at different levels of the education
                         sector, including the national level through the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
                         (MEST), the municipal level through Municipal Education Directorates (MEDs) and schools, and at
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the universities. This component is divided into three subcomponents: (1.1) Strengthening strategic
                         planning and financial management capacities. The objective of this is subcomponent is to strengthen
                         strategic planning and financial management capacities of MEST, MEDs, schools and universities to
                         improve spending efficiency and increase accountability. (1.2) Enhancing the existing Education
                         Management Information System (EMIS). The objective of this subcomponent is to enhance and
                         modernize the systems and practices of data collection and analysis in the education sector though
                         the development of an integrated EMIS. (1.3) School Development Grants. This subcomponent aims
                         to strengthen the capacity of schools to plan and manage resources, and promote citizen engagement
                         through the participation of teachers, parents and communities in educational planning,
                         implementation, and monitoring of school activities.

                         Component 2: Strengthening management capacity and accountability to enhance quality of pre-
                         university and higher education. The objective of this component is to support and institutionalize the
                         teacher career system, and facilitate the use of international best practices in assessing the quality of
                         education. The component is divided into three subcomponents: (2.1) Implementing and Improving
                         the Teacher Career System. The objectives of this subcomponent are to: (i) implement the career
                         system for teachers’ professional development, performance assessment and promotion; and (ii)
                         provide policy support to further strengthen, complement and systematize the teacher career system
                         and licensing scheme. (2.2) Strengthening capacities of key institutions for monitoring educational
                         outcomes and assessment of student learning. The objective of this subcomponent is to revise and
                         upgrade the current system of national student assessment and examination in grades 5, 9 and 12, and
                         bring it in line with international best practices. (2.3) Improving accountability and quality assurance
                         of higher education through the development of key professional licensing statutes in priority
                         economic fields. The objective of this subcomponent is to strengthen the capacities of MEST to carry
                         out professional licensing, and establish a mechanism for holding higher education institutions
                         accountable for outcomes.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component 3. Implementation and Communications Support. The objective of this component is to
                         ensure adequate support for project implementation. To this end, it would finance consultant
                         services, training directly related to project implementation, and operating costs for the Project
                         Coordination Unit. It would also support communication activities, including workshops,
                         communication materials, and outreach events to the key actors and community as a whole.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This Project would support pre-university institutions and selected universities nationwide, as well as
                         the Ministry of Education, Science and Technology, and Municipal Education Directorates. The
                         project does not trigger any Bank safeguard policy.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Bekim Imeri (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01



                                                                       Page 2 of 4
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           No
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              There are no safeguard issues or concerns foreseen under the project.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                              in the project area:
                              No direct or indirect impact is anticipated as a result of this project.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              The Project’s Operational Manual, as well as the “School Grants Manual” will include specific
                              language regarding the ineligibility of civil works under the project.
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              All school grants will be screened by MEST before approval to ensure compliance with the
                              “School Grants Manual.” Two consultants will be hired to support grant implementation,
                              including ensuring proper screening and implementation compliance.
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              The key stakeholders for the grants are school staff, students and families. A grant eligibility
                              requirement is that it be prepared and/or endorsed by the school council, which is formed by
                              school staff and parents.
                           B. Disclosure Requirements



                                                                       Page 3 of 4
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            Not applicable
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Flora Kelmendi
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Mario Cristian Aedo Inostroza                 Date: 01-Jun-2015
                            Manager:                   (PMGR)




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
