                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
.




                                                                                   Report No.:ISDSC17508
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jan-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    A. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Ghana              Project ID:                P159735
    Project Name:
    Team Leader(s):                    Menno Mulder-Sibanda
    Estimated Date                     13-Feb-2017
    of Approval:
    Managing Unit:                                              Lending                    IPF
    PHGlbPracLbl                                                Instrument:
    Financing (in USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:        2.797052                   Total Bank Financing: 0
    Financing Gap:             0
      Financing Source                                                                                Amount
      Japan Social Development Fund                                                                   2.797052
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment

    B. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve the feeding practices among targeted women
    of reproductive age (including pregnant and lactating women) and children under two (the so-called
    "first 1,000 days of life").

    The PDO will be achieved through a comprehensive and multisectoral approach of evidence-based and
    cost effective interventions at the household level and by working in partnership with communities,
    public service providers, and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to build local capacity and ensure
    the long-term sustainability of the approach to:
    - Create an innovative, social, and sustainable business model for deployment of nutritional
    supplements , reaching targeted beneficiaries who are typically underserved in hard to reach areas;
    - Improve dietary diversity through promotion of fruits, vegetables, biofortified foods (Orange-Flesh
    Sweet Potato), and animal source foods; and
    - Provide nutrition education and messaging.
    While all targeted women of reproductive age, i.e., 14-49 years, are part of the project, special attention
    will go out to adolescent, pregnant and lactating women because of their higher needs and
    vulnerabilities.

    The proposed approach for this project, and the specific activities, have been designed and informed by
    the ongoing field work of World Vision Ghana over the past several years. World Vision Ghana has
    been working in these vulnerable communities for over 10 years, and is applying lessons learned from

                                                Page 1 of 4
its nutrition-sensitive agriculture activities in Ghana.
C. Project Description


D. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
This project will take place in already existing small-holder farms/backyards. Therefore the location
doesn't represent any additional safeguards requirement.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
World Vision Ghana has experience in working with the Ghana Health Service and International Potato
Centre in supporting household agriculture, namely on bio fortified seeds and fruit trees growing and
avoiding pests and diseases. MoFA has a formal set up within the ministry focusing on environmental
and social issues (Lands and Water Management Department) and has been participating in several
World Bank Projects in safeguards matters with a moderate institutional capacity.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Ana Isabel Dos Reis E Sousa Piedade Abre (GEN01)
Demba Balde (GSU01)


II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies                           Triggered ?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 Yes                     The project will engage in a number of
                                                            activities that may have environmental
                                                            impacts on a limited scale if no appropriate
                                                            mitigation measures are incorporated in
                                                            activities design. Although project is not
                                                            funding pesticides the use might increase in
                                                            association with the project. The Pesticide use
                                                            is of small scale, but can't be ignored. Given
                                                            the small scale, the requirements in terms of
                                                            pesticides can be addressed through the
                                                            Project Implementation Manual (PIM) and a
                                                            Pest Management Plan (PMP). A project
                                                            Implementation Manual will be developed to
                                                            satisfy the World Bank requirements on
                                                            Environmental Assessment and include the
                                                            procedures that guide the implementation of
                                                            measures to address potential identified risks.
                                                            Although the project is not financing the use
                                                            of pesticides it will promote Integrated Pest
                                                            Management (IPM) in situations where
                                                            pesticide use may increase in association with
                                                            the project, such as related to inputs of citrus,
                                                            mango seedlings and bio fortified orange
                                                            sweet potato. A project specific Pest
                                                            Management Plan (PMP) will be prepared
                                                            with this in mind, to ensure that the project

                                              Page 2 of 4
                                                                         does not increase the environmental impacts
                                                                         of pesticide use, and these are managed
                                                                         responsibly, in line with sound environmental
                                                                         and human health protection objectives.
                                                                         Farmers will be trained on the application of
                                                                         pesticides, and organic farming. The PMP
                                                                         will be of simple nature to ensure that the
                                                                         project doesn't ignore the environmental
                                                                         impacts of pesticide use, and that these are
                                                                         managed responsibly in line with sound
                                                                         environmental and human health project
                                                                         objectives.
      Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                        No              Natural habitats are not expected to be
                                                                         impacted by the project.
      Forests OP/BP 4.36                                 No              Forests are not expected to be impacted by the
                                                                         project.
      Pest Management OP 4.09                            No              The project activities are micro scale activities
                                                                         at community and household level. The risk of
                                                                         any pest management issues is addressed
                                                                         under Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01.
      Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11 No                          The activities to be undertaken under this
                                                                         project are not expected to affect any physical
                                                                         cultural resources.
      Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                      No              This project does not affect indigenous
                                                                         peoples.
      Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                No              The activities envisaged under this project do
                                                                         not involve acquisition of land. The activities
                                                                         will not lead to temporary loss of land,
                                                                         livelihoods, incomes and assets.
      Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                          No              The project does not entail construction of
                                                                         dams.
      Projects on International Waterways                No              The project will not affect international
      OP/BP 7.50                                                         waterways.
      Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60              No              The activities under the project are not
                                                                         involved in disputed areas.
.




III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
.




    PHAPPRNO




               A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?:       Yes
               i. Explanation


               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
               30-Nov-2016



                                                         Page 3 of 4
  A. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
     The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
  In principle, two months will be enough to have the PIM and the PMP. However, summer months are in
  between so end October will be the target date for the two documents.

IV. Approval
 Task Team Leader(s):                     Name: Menno Mulder-Sibanda
 Approved By:
 Safeguards Advisor:                      Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                           Date: 16-Jun-2016
 Practice Manager/Manager:                Name: Trina S. Haque (PMGR)                          Date: 17-Jun-2016


  1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the

 InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
 affected persons.




                                                     Page 4 of 4
