INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
0                                              Report No.: ISDSC 14976
3 Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Aug-2015
0 I. BASIC INFORMATION
-9      A. Basic Project Data
Country:          Burkina Faso              Project ID:   P157034
Project Name:     LSMS-ISA Burkina Faso Panel Surveys
Team Leader(s): Diane E. Steele
Estimated Date    24-Aug-2015
of Approval:
Managing Unit:    DECSM                     Lending       Lending Instrument
Instrument:
Sector(s):        General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (25%), General education
sector (25%), Health (25%), Other social services (25%)
Theme(s):         Other social protection and risk management (20%), Gender (20%), Other
social development (20%), Other human development (20%), Other urban
development (20%)
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:  2.2                   Total Bank Financing: 0
Financing Gap:       0
Financing Source                                                          Amount
Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                        2.2
Environment       C - Not Required
Category:
B. Project Development Objective(s)
Two nationally representative multi-topic integrated household surveys and two experiments in
survey methodology.
C. Project Description
The first motivation for the development of this program of surveys results from the strong demand
from the Government of Burkina Faso to have a comprehensive system that permits the production
of indicators to monitor the SCADD and the new Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs). The
system must be designed in such a manner that the indicators produced are comparable and
harmonized using the international standards.
The second motivation for putting in place a comprehensive system is to consolidate the statistical
system to monitor poverty. The brief description of the system in the previous section has shown the
problems in the system for monitoring poverty, in particular the difficulty in over time comparisons


﻿because of changes in the methodology of the collection of the data. The principal ingredient to
measure poverty is household consumption and the methodology used to collect these data changed
several times. As mentioned earlier, the data on household consumption in the EICVM 2009/10
were collected in four passages with six visits per passage where five were dedicated to the collection
O
U       of data on household consumption. For the earlier surveys, this information was collected in one
single passage and one single visit. In the EMC, while the data are collected in four passages like the
EICVM, each passage had only one single visit. In other words, the period for the collection of data
has not been the same for the different surveys and the content of the questionnaire, in terms of the
consumption items has also seen important changes. All these elements are far from being neutral in
effecting the poverty figures which are produced. In the new system, the survey will be designed
under a model that facilitates future comparisons in using harmonized tools, notably surveys similar
to the LSMS-ISA survey from the World Bank.
A third motivation for developing a system of surveys is to supplement the surveys with light surveys
designed to produce monitoring indicators and which can be fielded more often than the larger
surveys. These light survey can be designed to provide relevant data in a timely manner as inputs for
better evaluation of public policies. In-depth analysis work can be conducted in a number of areas, to
better understand the impact on poverty of certain phenomena.
A fourth motivation is to provide the data for the dynamic analysis of poverty, through panel surveys.
Panel survey offer a unique opportunity to monitor the socio-economic development of households
over time and permit a more in-depth analysis that can be done with multiple surveys in cross
section. It is often interesting to study the characteristics of vulnerable households, that is those with
a strong probability of falling into poverty, because of an exogenous shock for example. Panel survey
are useful for this type of analysis. In addition, panel surveys offer the unique ability to rigorously
evaluate the impact of specific projects and programs.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
0
E. Borrower's Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
0
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies             Triggered?    Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/   No            The project is considered an environmental risk
BP 4.01                                      Category C because there are no civil works or
other investments which would have any
environmental or social impacts. Likewise, no
safeguard policies are triggered since there are
no aspects of the project which will have
implications for these policies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No


﻿Forests OP/BP 4.36              No
Pest Management OP 4.09         No
Physical Cultural Resources OP/  No
BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10   No
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP  No
4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37       No
Projects on International       No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No
7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
IV. APPROVALS
Team Leader(s):         Name: Diane E. Steele
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Glenn S. Morgan (SA)                      Date: 21-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Michael M. Lokshin (PMGR)                 Date: 21-Aug-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
U       InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
affected persons.


