                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                      RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                         Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSR18080
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Jan-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                                        Project ID:           P091031
                            Project Name:      India - Capacity Building for Industrial Pollution Management (P091031)
                            Task Team          Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          02-Dec-2008                                  Estimated   03-Jun-2010
                            Appraisal Date:                                                 Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEN06                                        Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                            Instrument:
                            Sector:            General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (67%), Public
                                               administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (33%)
                            Theme:             Environmental policies and institutions (33%), Pollution management and
                                               environmental health (67%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                                                          No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        65.42           Total Bank Financing:                                       54.18
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                  Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                   11.24
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                25.21
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                          28.97
                              Sub-borrower(s)                                                                                       0.00
                              Total                                                                                                65.42
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives


                                                                                Page 1 of 10
                         The objectives of the Project are: (i) to build tangible human and technical capacity in selected state
                         pollution control agencies of the Borrower for undertaking environmentally sound remediation of
                         polluted sites; and (ii) to support the development of a policy, institutional and methodological
Public Disclosure Copy




                         framework for the Borrower to establish a National Program for Rehabilitation of Polluted Sites.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                         To strengthen the capacity of selected state pollution control agencies in the remediation of polluted
                         sites and to support development of a framework to establish a national program for the remediation
                         of polluted sites.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project is designed as a pilot in response to the abundance of contaminated sites across India and
                         the limitations of the institutional base to tackle the problem. The scale of the project effort is also
                         conducive with the limited project resources. The implicit logic of the project approach is to expand
                         the institutional capacity at state level, ease the regulatory gaps and demonstrate appropriate clean
                         up/remediation techniques and thus to facilitate scaling up of the remediation effort in other states.
                         The project targets legacy pollution associated with specific sites, impacts on land and water, and
                         aims to prevent exposure to human health hazards. With this in mind the project also places a great
                         importance on investments in technical skills and knowledge of the responsible institutions to
                         effectively address the issues.

                         The project will have the following components:
                         Component 1- Strengthening of Environmental Institutions: Building capacity for addressing
                         pollution remediation at state level. This includes technical assistance for strengthening the planning,
                         monitoring and enforcement capacity of State PCBs in several states, including those where
                         demonstration investments will be carried out. At the state level the project will provide technical
                         assistance for improved compliance to HW Rules. On a national level the project will support
                         through the process and methodological framework for development of the National Plan for
                         Remediation of Polluted Sites (NPRPS). In this regard, high priority will be given to support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         development and application of risk based assessment of legacy pollution and prioritization of sites,
                         cleanup/remediation standards, and options and financing modalities for implementation of the
                         NPRPS. Largely, this will ensure the sustainability of project outcomes through enabling the
                         replication of ‘good practices’ demonstrated through the project. Technical assistance will be
                         provided to facilitate the knowledge sharing and dissemination of best practices from site
                         remediation pilots with the aim to build a wider expertise in pollution remediation. The project
                         support for states institutional capacity building would be in a form of a specialized training and
                         knowledge exchange. Project financing will be provided for training and technical assistance,
                         procurement of consultants, studies, environmental audits, participatory planning, community
                         outreach activities; basic laboratory infrastructure and equipment, operational and maintenance cost
                         on a declining basis; environmental monitoring and data collection, and other technical inputs and
                         materials for capacity building as necessary.

                         Component 2 - Investments in Priority Remediation and Environmental Improvements in
                         Rehabilitation of Legacy Hazardous Waste Sites. The objective of this component is to remediate or
                         minimize to acceptable and safe levels the environment and health risks by containing the migration
                         of the heavy metal and chemical bearing of contaminated soil and groundwater. Typically, in most
                         polluted sites the generation and discharge of industrial waste; domestic discharge of sewer water, as
                         well as discharge of toxic chemicals from abandoned industrial facilities and the municipal dump site
                         have contributed directly or indirectly to the overall degradation of environmental quality of soil,

                                                                      Page 2 of 10
                         surface and groundwater in the area, thus posing significant human health risks. Specifically, the
                         high concentration levels of heavy metals, exceeding the maximum permissible concentration limits,
                         create a major risk to the quality of the total surface and groundwater system, which is also used by
Public Disclosure Copy




                         both animals and humans as a source of drinking water. This component will develop a risk based
                         technical solutions to implement measures for intercepting, containing or treating as well as
                         monitoring the environment and health impacts in the project area and prevent further migration of
                         unacceptable contamination levels to sensitive areas and groundwater users. This component will be
                         implemented in three states Andhra Pradesh, Telangana and West Bengal to develop and implement
                         area-based remediation plans and undertake environmental improvements in the area. Specifically,
                         the project will provide technical assistance for detailed engineering design of site remediation plans,
                         additional sampling and validation of pollution impacts, remediation works, environmental and
                         social assessment, environmental audits, post-remediation monitoring and after-care plans for the
                         project sites and project based training.

                         The sites for pilot investment sites are located in peri-urban areas which continue to grow. As the
                         scale and complexity of development challenges continue to increase, market pressures are starting to
                         stimulate increased interest in ‘brown field’ redevelopment in and around major urban centers. This
                         issue is coming into play in the business and municipal local government decisions, triggered by the
                         growing demand for land. The project will support redevelopment of three abandoned, underutilized
                         and polluted sites. The experience of remediation and reclamation of these sites will inform the
                         existing environmental protection act (and regulations on hazardous waste management and
                         handling) for integrating risk assessment approaches in decisions for mitigation and remediation of
                         pollution from old dump sites.

                         The choice of contaminated sites in AP, Telangana and West Bengal is based on information on the
                         economic and technical feasibility of the sites identified during project preparation. The basic factors
                         that influenced the choice of sites for demonstration investments include: severity of environmental
                         impacts, number of population directly exposed to pollution hazards, including upstream-
                         downstream impact of pollution, current and planned land use; applicable choice of technology and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         potential for meeting cleanup standards within the life of the project, community buy-in, support of
                         local government, and sustainability of the investments. The sites have baseline environmental and
                         social information on the key parameters regarding level and type of contaminant, geographic
                         location and acreage, and health impacts. The feasibility study has provided the background on the
                         socio-economic, technical, financial and environmental impacts of the proposed site remediation.
                         The EMP provides recommendations on using an integrated approach to address other environmental
                         problems in the area.

                         Component 3: Project Management. The project will finance the cost of operation and maintenance
                         of the implementing agencies at national and state level during project implementation, essential
                         equipment and office supplies; operational travel expenses; hiring implementation consultants;
                         training of project implementation staff, communication cost, beneficiary surveys and audits, field
                         supervision, samples and laboratory analysis for validation of results.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The two states - Andhra Pradesh and West Bengal--have been selected for piloting remediation based
                         on a set of selection criteria designed to ensure that integrated pollution management approaches
                         covering both hazardous and solid waste management can generate significant demonstration effect
                         in terms of environmental, social and economic benefits. The legacy sites already designated for the


                                                                      Page 3 of 10
                         pilot program include:

                         (a) Remediation of Noor Mohammad Kunta (NMK Lake), Katedan Industrial Area (KIE) in Ranga
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Reddy District in Telangana (erstwhile, Andhra Pradesh)
                         (b) Rehabilitation of old municipal solid waste dump site in the District of Kadapa, in AP;
                         (c) Remediation of chemically contaminated sites along 15 km of Delhi road in Hoogly district of
                         West Bengal.
                         (d) Closure and rehabilitation of old municipal solid waste dump site at Dhapa in East Kolkata in
                         West Bengal

                         Due to the bifurcation of Andhra Pradesh State in 2014, the NMK Lake pilot (item (a) above) is now
                         in the new state of Telangana and hence the project will have three states. Further, the project
                         supported preparation of remediation plan for chemically contaminated sites in Hoogly, West Bengal
                         (item (c) above), but financing the implementation of remediation plan is being dropped through
                         restructuring, as it can not be completed within the project period.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ruma Tavorath (GEN07)
                         Sangeeta Kumari (GSU06)

                         6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental              Yes            Considering the significant impacts associated with the
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     remediation projects, the project is categorized as
                                                                   ‘Category A’ and specific environmental and social
                                                                   assessments have been carried out for each pilot sub-
                                                                   project.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP     Yes            OP 4.04 has been triggered, as two of the pilot sub-project
                         4.04                                      activities (NMK Lake, Hyderabad and Dump Site at
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   Dhapa, Kolkata) are located in natural water bodies and
                                                                   East Kolkata Wet Lands. The measures to mitigate the
                                                                   impacts (if any) on these natural water bodies have been
                                                                   included as part of the ESAs of the respective sub-project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36         No             Project activities are not located in any of the forest lands
                                                                   and will not impact in any forests. OP 4.36, hence has not
                                                                   been triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                Project activities doesn’t involve use of pesticides and
                                                                   associated policy requirements. OP 4.09, hence has not
                                                                   been triggered.
                         Physical Cultural          Yes            Structures of religious and culture importance are located
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11                      in NMK Lake area. OP 4.11, hence has been triggered and
                                                                   the sub-project ESA has formulated appropriate
                                                                   mitigation measures.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/     Yes            During project implementation phase the environmental
                         BP 4.10                                   and social assessment carried out at DPR stage for the
                                                                   'Closure and Containment of Kadapa Municipal Solid
                                                                   Waste Sub-Project' identified issues of livelihood loss to
                                                                   the Rag Picker and Pig Rearing families belonging to


                                                                    Page 4 of 10
                                                                      Yerukala Community who are classified as Scheduled
                                                                      Tribes and can be categorised as Indigeneous Peoples as
                                                                      per OP 4.10. Hence, the policy has been triggered at
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      restructuring stage. An ESMP including social mitigation
                                                                      measures and a suitable livelihood plan is developed for
                                                                      implementation under the project with the help of NGOs
                                                                      hired for the sub-projects.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              Though no land acquisition and resettlement is envisaged
                            OP/BP 4.12                                by the project, issues of livelihood and temporary impacts
                                                                      are anticipated during the implementation of remediation
                                                                      plans. OP 4.12, hence has been triggered and an ESMP
                                                                      including mitigation measures have been prepared.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project activities, does not envisage construction
                            4.37                                      and / or rehabilitation of dams. OP 4.37 hence, has not
                                                                      been triggered.
                            Projects on International   No            No project activities are envisaged in international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways and hence OP 7.50 has not been triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            No project activities are envisaged in disputed areas and
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          hence OP 7.60 has not been triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The project is expected to produce significant environmental improvements and social benefits
                              due to expected nature of project intervention to reduce environment and health risks. However,
Public Disclosure Copy




                              because of its complex nature and remediation works associated with project sites (legacy
                              pollution), the overall project continues to be assigned Category ‘A’, in accordance with the
                              Bank's Operational Policy Guidelines. The project interventions are not likely to cause any
                              adverse, large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts.

                              The environmental impacts identified in the ESMPs are of temporary nature and construction-
                              related and can be mitigated following good construction management practices. The adverse
                              social impact as a result of remediation activities are limited to loss of income streams to rag
                              pickers and pig rearing families dependent on the pilot sites. Rag Picker and Pig Rearing families
                              belonging to Yerukala Community are likely to be affected due to 'Closure and Containment of
                              Kadapa Municipal Solid Waste Sub-Project' are classified as Scheduled Tribes and can be
                              categorized as Indigenous Peoples as per OP 4.10.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               The project is expected to produce significant environmental improvements, including improved
                              quality of the ambient environment and improved quality of water used for irrigation and
                              household use. The project interventions to remediate the identified areas through a combination
                              of specific interventions will reduce the existing and future adverse environment and health
                              impacts resulting from existing excessive contaminated land and ground water. The environmental



                                                                       Page 5 of 10
                           improvements, in turn, are likely to bring economic improvements, such as increased value of
                           land/real estate and enhanced opportunities for income generation in the local community.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts.
                             The project design has considered various alternatives to avoid and minimize the adverse
                           environment and social impacts. These alternatives include: definition of area for remediation
                           (including the greater community affected by the pollution being remediated, in addition to the
                           area of the pollution hotspot itself); designs alternative for technical intervention in terms of
                           remediation verses containment; alternatives in planning and implementation arrangement.
                           Specific to the pilot sites the approach which applies is to give primacy to the principles of
                           avoidance of potential involuntary resettlement aspects, as well as issues related to cultural sites or
                           health impact on community and workers. Additionally, the project will strengthen and integrate
                           the institutional framework, including regulatory policies, management practices, compliance
                           incentives, and performance guidelines, for central and state governments in the remediation of
                           polluted sites.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                             As part of the original project preparation following safeguard policies were triggered:

                           Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) , Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Cultural Property
                           (OP 4.11). The Borrower had prepared an Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA) including
                           ESMF and ESMP for the respective pilot sites. This ESA was reviewed, approved and disclosed
                           in-country and at the World Bank InfoShop on November 28, 2008. The ESAs were required to be
                           updated based on the detailed remediation Plans during implementation phase. Accordingly,
                           detailed Environmental and Social Assessment was carried out during project implementation
                           phase and respective Environmental and Social management Plan (ESMP) for each sub-project are
                           prepared/are being prepared. The ESMP for Kadapa, one of the pilot sites has already been
                           prepared and disclosed both in country and infoshop. ESMP for the rest of the two pilot sites is
Public Disclosure Copy




                           under advanced stages of preparation. The final versions of ESMPs of the remaining pilots shall
                           also be disclosed in country and in Infoshop.

                           The ESMP defines the procedures related to specific environmental and social impacts associated
                           with handling and disposal of hazardous waste from contaminated sites, which will be mitigated
                           by using international best practices. The ESMP requirements has been integrated in the technical
                           specifications and bidding document for remediation works and monitored as part of the
                           contractual requirements in the civil works. The adverse environmental impacts identified in the
                           ESMPs are of temporary nature and construction-related and can be mitigated following good
                           construction management practices.

                           The policy on natural habitats is triggered specifically with regard to the closure and rehabilitation
                           of Dhapa old municipal waste dump site which is in the vicinity of the East Kolkata Wetlands. The
                           remediation measures at Dhapa are designed to mitigate impacts of toxic run offs from the site
                           which poses risks to community and area ecology. The closure and reclaiming of the site is
                           expected to result in decreased levels of pollution in the water and soil and thus will have
                           significant positive impacts. Any temporary impacts as a result of the remediation works will be
                           mitigated following the recommendations of the ESMP.

                           The policy on cultural property is triggered because of proximity of a Burial Ground to the NMK

                                                                      Page 6 of 10
                         remediation works sites in Hyderabad. The site management plan for NMK includes fencing of the
                         burial area and measures to ensure that the sites are not adversely affected, access is not
                         interrupted and that the relevant authorities are informed well in advance of any instance of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         potential disruption on the property. A provision for water tap has also been made as a result of
                         stakeholder consultation. The project also provides a chance finds protocol to notify relevant
                         authorities in the event of chance find occurrences and to act in compliance with relevant policies
                         of India.

                         The Contractor(s) undertaking the dumpsite closure and containment will implement the
                         environment mitigation measures, an NGO hired for the sub-project will implement the approved
                         social mitigation measures including livelihood support program and the consulting consortium
                         hired for the supervision of the sub-project execution will also supervise the implementation of
                         ESMP. APPCB and Kadpa Municipal Corporation (KMC) will monitor and ensure satisfactory
                         implementation of this ESMP. In addition, the monitoring of activities and results during and after
                         the dumpsite closure will be carried out by APPCB and KMC. Similar safeguard implementation
                         arrangements will be followed for other two sub-projects to be implemented by the project.

                         Involuntary Resettlement: It is expected that the physical activities envisaged under the project are
                         unlikely to have significantly adverse social safeguard impacts. While no physical displacement
                         needs were identified during detailed ESA, loss of income to the ragpicking and pig rearing
                         families due to their discontinued waste recycling activities in and around Kadapa and NMK pilot
                         sites were confirmed. However, no one was found solely dependent on Dhapa pilot site (12 Ha.)
                         proposed for capping as the families are deriving their income from the other close by active dump
                         piles after the pilot site got saturated. No land acquisition is expected under the project; however,
                         the project has triggered the policy on involuntary resettlement due to the loss of income streams
                         interrupted by project activities and will need to be restored. Rag-pickers on the two dump sites
                         require income restoration as well as rehabilitation (including training in safer methods of rag-
                         picking and training to acquire alternative livelihoods). Draft ESMPs prepared for the respective
                         pilots include Livelihood Management Plan for all these affected families prepared in consultation
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with them and other stakeholders. Awareness programme on health and safety and community
                         development works for the rag pickers, pig rearers, residents around the pilot sites has also been
                         proposed for all three sites.

                         The detailed environmental and social assessment carried out for Kadapa the Municipal Solid
                         Waste dumpsite, brought out the fact that the rag pickers and pig rearing families dependent on the
                         proposed closure and containment of the waste disposal site belong to the Scheduled Tribes (ST)
                         category as classified by the Government of Andhra Pradesh and can be categorized as Indigenous
                         People as per OP 4.10. It is hence proposed to additionally trigger OP 4.10 and implement
                         livelihood support programs for these communities, as recommended by the ESMP. The ESA and
                         ESMP has followed the due process of OP 4.10 including conducting Free, Prior and Informed
                         Consultations (FPIC) with the indigenous people and has developed an acceptable livelihood
                         support program for the affected families dependent on the landfill site. Specifically, the ESMP
                         provide:

                          (i) The mitigation measures required to avoid or minimize the negative impacts;
                          (ii) A monitoring mechanism with monitoring indicators for assessing effectiveness of the
                         mitigation measures;
                          (iii) Definition of the roles and responsibilities of the implementing agency, for each state, in
                         implementing the EMPs/SMPs, and areas where these roles and responsibilities can be shared with

                                                                   Page 7 of 10
                           other parties involved in the execution and monitoring of the Project;
                            (iv) Defines the requirements necessary for documenting compliance with the ESMP and
                           communicating it to all concerned regulatory agencies;
Public Disclosure Copy




                            (v) Prescribes the mechanisms for ongoing consultation with stakeholders during construction
                           and operation.
                            (vi) Characterizes the socio-economic make-up of the project-affected community and identify
                           means of educating community members about local environmental issues, raising awareness
                           about responsible and sustainable waste management
                            (vii) Identifies potential employment opportunities for local community members that arise from
                           remediation activities.
                            (viii) Recommends measures for encouraging inclusion of community-based organizations and
                           members with particular attention to females, low-income households and SCs /STs/OBCs)
                            (ix) Defines the grievance mechanism, as well as how communities/civil society will be involved
                           in the multi-stakeholder mechanism for monitoring and enforcing compliance with regulatory
                           requirements.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The key stakeholders are the Ministry of Environment, Forest and Climate Change, Central
                           Pollution Control Board, Departments of Environment and the State Pollution Control Boards in
                           AP, Telangna and West Bengal, urban local bodies in Hyderabad, Kaddapa and Kolkata. The
                           detailed Environmental and Social Assessment was carried out during project implementation
                           phase and Environmental and Social management Plan (ESMP) is prepared and disclosed for the
                           closure and containment of municipal solid waste dump sites in Kadapa and is in the advanced
                           stage of preparation for Dhapa and for NMK Lake sub-projects. Mitigation measures to comply
                           with OP 4.10 is covered in the ESMP through Free Prior Informed Consultation, Livelihood
                           management Plan, Consultation plan for Kadapa. In terms of PAPs for NMK-KIE, as PAPs belong
                           to Scheduled Tribe and Scheduled Castes, it will be ensured that the Livelihood Restoration Plan
                           included in ESMP incorporates the elements required in OP4.10 including FPIC and social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           assessment although the separate IPP would not be required.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     25-Nov-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  26-Nov-2008
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive     12-Dec-2008
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                           28-Nov-2008
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                     25-Nov-2008
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                  26-Nov-2008
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                           28-Nov-2008
                           Comments:


                                                                   Page 8 of 10
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       12-Dec-2013
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08-Jan-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                             09-Nov-2013
                           Comments: The plan was prepared for the affected Scheduled Tribe Population, as part of the
                                         detailed environmental and social assessment carried out for Kadapa Municipal Solid
                                         Waste sub-project. The ESA for this sub-project was disclosed on December 4, 2014
                                         under OP 4.01. The document has been re-disclosed on January 8, 2016 under OP
                                         4.10, as part of the current restructuring.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?


                                                                     Page 9 of 10
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [    ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                             207 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [    ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                        Date: 27-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Kseniya Lvovsky (PMGR)                         Date: 28-Apr-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 10 of 10
