                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                           RESTRUCTURING STAGE
               Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                           Report No.:ISDSR21263
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 01-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Brazil                         Project ID:                 P108443
    Project Name:                      Sao Paulo Sustainable Rural Development and Access to Markets (P108443)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Maurizio Guadagni
    Estimated Appraisal                09-Feb-2009                    Estimated Board             25-May-2010
    Date:                                                             Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GFA04                          Lending Instrument: Specific Investment
                                                                                          Loan
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP 8.00(Rapid No
    Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                                                Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           130.00                            Total Bank Financing: 78.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                          Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                      52.00
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                         78.00
    Total                                                                                                        130.00
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives
The project development objective is to increase the competitiveness of family agriculture in priority areas of
the State of Sao Paulo while improving its envir                                onmental sustainability.

This would be achieved by assisting small-scale farmers and other vulnerable rural producers to:

•Increase the productivity of their land and labor, and improve the quality of their products through enhanced
production techniques;
•Engage more actively in supply/value chains, where there is a comparative advantage, by undertaking basic
processing and marketing techniques and/or strengthen                                     ing partnerships with
larger private operators in these areas;
•Strengthen the organizational and managerial capacity of producers associations, as well as promote the
emergence of new associations/cooperatives;

                                                      Page 1 of 13
•Mainstream improved land and water management practices tested under the previous operations for more
competitive production systems.

Key Indicators are:

•Increase in sales value (unit value x quantity sold) for participating producers’ organizations
•Increase in agricultural area where improved land and water management practices are being implemented.

A long-term objective of the project is to increase small farmers’ net income, which depends on a
combination of factors including quantity, quality and costs o                                f production,
and marketing efficiency. The project will aim to make progress to                                 wards that
long-term objective by helping small farmers improve their production                                  ,
associative, and marketing techniques. It would also improve the public physic
al and institutional infrastructures to the extent needed to support the project
development objective (i.e., economic monitoring, extension services, environme
ntal management, and rural roads).
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The project development objective is to increase the competitiveness of family agriculture in priority areas of
the State of Sao Paulo while improving its envir                                onmental sustainability.

This would be achieved by assisting small-scale farmers and other vulnerable rural producers to:

•Increase the productivity of their land and labor, and improve the quality of their products through enhanced
production techniques;
•Engage more actively in supply/value chains, where there is a comparative advantage, by undertaking basic
processing and marketing techniques and/or strengthen                                     ing partnerships with
larger private operators in these areas;
•Strengthen the organizational and managerial capacity of producers associations, as well as promote the
emergence of new associations/cooperatives;
•Mainstream improved land and water management practices tested under the previous operations for more
competitive production systems.

Key Indicators are:

•Increase in sales value (unit value x quantity sold) for participating producers’ organizations
•Increase in agricultural area where improved land and water management practices are being implemented.

A long-term objective of the project is to increase small farmers’ net income, which depends on a
combination of factors including quantity, quality and costs o                                f production,
and marketing efficiency. The project will aim to make progress to                                 wards that
long-term objective by helping small farmers improve their production                                  ,
associative, and marketing techniques. It would also improve the public physic
al and institutional infrastructures to the extent needed to support the project
development objective (i.e., economic monitoring, extension services, environme
ntal management, and rural roads).
3. Project Description
The proposed lending instrument is a Specific Investment Loan of US$78.0 million over a five-year period.
The total project cost is estimated to be US$130.0 million, including US$52.0 million of counterpart funding
from the State of Sao Paulo.

                                                 Page 2 of 13
Component 1, Supporting Small Farmers’ Business Initiatives: This component provides support to small
farmers’ business initiatives through the following Sub-components:

Sub-component 1.1, Implementing Small Business Investments: This Sub-component finances selected
business initiatives, submitted by producers’ organizations, aimed at increasing their competitiveness for
products with demonstrated market viability. Direct beneficiaries and contractual partners of the project are
small producers’ organizations based on geography or products (associations, cooperatives, other forms of
organizations). It is envisaged that participating organizations enter at different levels of managerial capacity,
with some receiving initial project support to achieve minimum levels of take-off (though Sub-Component
1.2.), while others already have the capacity and experience to engage in more complex business
undertakings. The project provides financial support for productive investments only to formally constituted
organizations.

Criteria of eligibility are used to signal the focus on competitiveness and environmental sustainability.
Eligible proposals must demonstrate market viability, and preference is given to initiatives using improved
land management techniques (restoring soil fertility, reducing pollution). The selection is done through a
transparent and technically focused process involving representatives of SAA/CATI, SMA, agri-business
practitioners, academics, and municipalities.

The project assists (under Sub-component 1.2) potential beneficiaries to develop their business initiatives,
and it continues to provide technical assistance to beneficiaries (e.g. governance and organizational issues,
financial management, technical) during the implementation phase, and it would monitor progress and
performance.

This Sub-component also promotes eligible commercial and other (e.g. subsistence agriculture) initiatives
developed by indigenous and quilombola organizations, as well as those developed by women and youth
organizations.

Sub-component 1.2, Strengthening Producers’ Organizations: This Sub-component helps create or strengthen
the capacity of producers’ organizations with regards to organizational management and marketing. This
training and assistance will be delivered qualified private service providers contracted by the project and/or
by beneficiaries.

First, this Sub-component finances broad information, training, and exchange programs on agricultural
competitiveness in targeted municipalities and micro-catchments across the State to stimulate the emergence
of business ideas from potential beneficiaries and assist small farmers to identify more profitable
opportunities in specific productive chains and/or end-markets. This effort helps small producers identify
their comparative advantages on specific products and market niches.

Second, this Sub-component assists interested organizations in the preparation of business proposals for
funding under Sub-component 1.1. It assists small farmers’ organizations with the identification of possible
business opportunities; help carry out market analysis, feasibility assessments, and other financial and
technical analysis; assist in negotiations with business partners; and advice on legal issues. It also helps
existing informal producers’ groups to create legal organizations, establish basic management structures, and
formulate business proposals for possible support through Sub-Component 1.1.

Third, this Sub-component provides beneficiaries with technical assistance on organizational, financial, or
technical issues throughout the implementation phase (at least two years) and it monitors progress and
performance.


                                                  Page 3 of 13
Component 2, Strengthening Public Institutions and Infrastructures: This Component supports a set of public
functions and investments that are critical to increasing the competitiveness and sustainability of small
farming.

Sub-component 2.1, Policy Framework, Market Monitoring, and Rural Extension: This Sub-component helps
mainstream competitive small-scale agriculture within the policy, regulatory, and planning frameworks at
state and municipal levels. It finances studies and workshops to improve regulation and incentives systems
(i.e. labeling systems). It also carries out studies and assessments relevant to state-level agricultural
competitiveness (i.e. analysis of specific supply-chains) and set up an online agri-business information
center. This Sub-component helps identify opportunities in productive chains and end-markets, and adjust the
project strategy on a regular basis.

This Sub-component also strengthens CATI’s capacity to advise small farmers on production technologies,
marketing, organizational management and other areas critical to competitiveness. It accompanies CATI’s
modernization process to gradually include management and marketing as part of the extension package, in
addition to production techniques. This includes training and assessment of skills mix and future staffing
strategy. It also supports partnerships with local research centers and business organizations.

Sub-component 2.2, Rural Infrastructure: This Sub-component aims to facilitate small farmers’ physical
access to markets. It focuses on the maintenance and rehabilitation of unpaved rural roads, under the
responsibility of municipalities. It assists priority municipalities to prepare simple rural roads management
programs, devise joint financing arrangements, and strengthen partnerships with private service providers. It
also helps assessing various implementation modalities (joint acquisition of equipment, direct execution of
works, various types of outsourcing) based on local conditions, capacity, and sustainability. Where minimum
levels of technical, institutional and financial sustainability are met, the project financially contributes to the
rehabilitation and maintenance of priority sections (‘critical points’) identified in the roads management
programs so as to ensure year-round transit. The project may also support other rural investments identified
in municipal development plans when they complement investments undertaken by small farmers’
organizations (e.g. increase of supply of energy and water to enhance production systems).

Sub-component 2.3, Environmental Sustainability: This Sub-component helps strengthen small farmer’s
competitiveness over the long-term by ensuring the sustainable management of their productive resource-
base (land and water). It supports the implementation of the State’s licensing system, combined with
environmental awareness raising. It promotes sustainable agricultural practices through pilot projects at farm-
level. This Sub-component also helps extend the application of Sao Paulo’s new program of payments for
environmental services to agricultural areas, thus providing a new source of income for small farmers who
adopt agricultural practices that generate off-site environmental benefits (quality of water, storage of carbon)
and increasing their competitiveness. This also helps ensure that new agricultural practices do not result in
adverse environmental impacts. The project helps design and implement pilot programs to monitor the
impact of improved agricultural practices on water quality, and design appropriate payment mechanisms to
farmers.

Component 3, Project Management: This component finances the institutional structures, equipment, and
personnel required to manage the project activities. It supports the executive, deliberative, and consultative
functions involved in project implementation at the central and municipal levels. It ensures the fiduciary
functions (procurement, accounting, financial management), as well as the technical planning and monitoring
and evaluation of the project, including the implementation of the social and environmental safeguards
instruments. It disseminates project results and implement a pro-active communication strategy.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if

                                                   Page 4 of 13
known)
An estimated 30,000 small farming families will be reached by the project through their own producer
organizations (estimated 200-300 organizations with potential for direct involvement in the project). This
target population also includes an estimated 1,000 indigenous families and 500 quilombola families. These
small farming families are located primarily in 15 priority regions consisting of 212 municipalities covering
7.8 million hectares, or a third of the total State area, primarily congregated in the western part of the State.
The project also benefits public institutions such as the “Coordenadoria de Assistencia Tecnica Integral”
(CATI, the Rural Extension Agency for the State Secretariat of Agriculture and Supply), SMA, and
municipalities to the extent that is needed to support the small farming competitiveness agenda. Beyond the
number of families that benefit directly, the project is also envisioned to provide a demonstration effect to
the overall small farming sector in the State by better engaging family agriculture in strengthened agricultural
organizations and allowing better ac cess to markets.

Environmental Issues

For the most part, the project is expected to produce positive environmental impacts. According to the final
draft Environmental Assessment (EA) and related Environmental Management Framework (EMF), which
were reviewed and cleared by the Bank, the most significant positive impacts foreseen include watershed and
biodiversity protection, improved soil management and conservation, improved water quality, and restoration
of degraded lands. However, some activities carried out in subprojects supported under Component 1 (small
business investments) and Component 2 (rehabilitation and maintenance of unpaved roads and other
productive infrastructures under municipal responsibility) could generate small negative impacts, mostly
temporary and at the local level. No large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are foreseen. The
impacts of any misdirected support for productive investments could result in soil erosion, water pollution
and noise/air pollution, the latter from road rehabilitation works.

As sub-projects cannot be identified a priori because of the demand-driven nature of interventions, specific
impacts cannot be anticipated, but all investments under Components 1 and 2 are subjected to a rigorous
screening process to ensure maximum environmental benefits and to prevent or minimize unintended
negative environmental impacts. Investments’ environmental screening, evaluation, approval, and monitoring
procedures have been incorporated into the Project design (i.e. business initiatives and other investments
cycle). These procedures, detailed in the EMF report, are included in the Project’s Operational Manual.

The Project builds on the existing EA capacity and institutional arrangements established under the recently
closed Sao Paulo Land Management Project and the ongoing Ecosystem Restoration of Riparian Forests GEF
Project. CATI was strengthened to support its capacity to review investments. The EMF includes provisions
for strengthening EA capacity within SMA and CATI at the regional and central levels, as well as local CATI
municipal extension officers.

Social Issues

For the most part, the project is expected to produce positive social impacts. The social assessment
documents, provide further evidence of poverty indicators for most of the small family farmers of Sao Paulo,
and additional data on some of the most vulnerable rural social groups specifically indigenous people and
quilombola (descendants of ex-slaves) communities, as well as consideration of other relevant social
differentiation variables such as gender and age. Preparation included six free prior informed consultations
with indigenous people, focusing on the formulation of the project’s Indigenous Peoples Planning
Framework.

CATI also carried out numerous consultations and meetings with a broad cross-section of project

                                                  Page 5 of 13
stakeholders and beneficiaries between 2005 and 2008, including seven consultations in 2008 two of which
were with representatives of quilombola communities. Stakeholders consulted included rural producers,
leaders of associations and cooperatives, technicians from partner institutions, representatives of non-
governmental organizations, among others. Key concerns expressed focused on improving agricultural
productivity with a strong emphasis on commercialization, better delivery of technical assistance, and
improved coordination among public agencies and programs, all of which have been reflected in project
design. The project design includes specific targeting of indigenous communities, prioritization of
quilombola communities, and includes participatory processes to improve participation of women and youth.

Lastly, because road maintenance activities supported under Subcomponent 2.4 could result in the acquisition
of new land, particularly in ROWs (right-of-ways), a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) was prepared.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa( GSU04 )

6. Safeguard Policies                        Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01          Yes            The Project is expected to produce positive
                                                            environmental impacts. However, some
                                                            activities associated with subprojects supported
                                                            under Components 1 and 2 could generate
                                                            small, localized negative impacts of a
                                                            temporary nature.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                  Yes            Riparian areas are considered critical habitats
                                                            in Brazil (Areas of Permanent Preservation –
                                                            APPs). Since the Project was projected to have
                                                            positive benefits on these areas (e.g., through
                                                            rehabilitation, restoration, and protection of
                                                            degraded riparian forests), the Team agreed
                                                            (during appraisal) that this OP would apply.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                           Yes            The requirements of OP 4.36 for this project
                                                            overlap with those of OP 4.04. as the Project
                                                            supports activities that generate positive
                                                            environmental impacts by promoting the
                                                            rehabilitation and conservation of degraded
                                                            native forests (including riparian forests), as
                                                            well as by contributing to the restoration and
                                                            maintenance of ecological functions in those
                                                            areas.
Pest Management OP 4.09                      Yes            The Project does not finance the procurement
                                                            of any pesticides or other chemical
                                                            amendments that would trigger OP 4.09.
                                                            Nevertheless, small amounts of pesticides may
                                                            continue to be used by a minority of small
                                                            farmers in project areas.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11       Yes            The Project would finance small-scale works in
                                                            already established agricultural zones where
                                                            the likelihood of disturbing archaeological,
                                                            paleontological, or other culturally significant

                                                Page 6 of 13
                                                               sites is small. However, during appraisal, the
                                                               Bank Team considered that there was a need to
                                                               include a framework (in the EMF) to screen for
                                                               potential negative impacts to cultural property.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  Yes             The Project is supporting 46 Indigenous
                                                               Communities, with 1,032 families and 52
                                                               Quilombola communities, with 1,699 families.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes             The rehabilitation of roads may cause some
                                                               potential loss of assets. Given that the project
                                                               rehabilitates rural unpaved roads, this risk is
                                                               theoretical. The client prepared a Resettlement
                                                               Policy Framework (RPF) to address this.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No
7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
OP/BP 4.01 – Environmental Assessment. The Project remains classified as environmental Category B and
no additional environmental safeguard policies are triggered. No additional activities are foreseen under the
current project restructuring. The proposed changes included in the present restructuring are limited to the
reallocation of resources among cost categories and the creation of a new category for Payment of
Environmental Services (PES). The creation of this new cost category was needed to formalize the
disbursement mechanism for financing PES, which was introduced in the previous restructuring but not
formalized through the first Amendment to the Loan Agreement, dated September 29, 2015. For this reason,
the Bank team considers that there is no need to update the Environmental Management Framework (EMF).
The EA/EMF specifies the criteria and procedures that would be used during project implementation to avoid
or minimize potentially adverse environmental impacts. Key aspects regarding Bank’s safeguards included in
the EA/EMF are described below.

OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats. The project does not support or lead to the conversion of natural habitats. In
fact, it helps rehabilitate, restore, and protect degraded riparian forests which are important to preserve local
biodiversity and the quality of water resources. On-farm investments are expected to take place in areas that
have been traditionally dedicated to crop and livestock farming and does not therefore involve conversion of
natural habitats. Instead, the proposed project supports natural habitat conservation since (i) increased
agricultural productivity will be a result of sound environmental practices, (ii) it helps restore and protect
degraded riparian forests which are important to preserve biodiversity and the quality of water resources, and
(iii) the project supports conservation practices and improved land use planning and management leading to
a more sustainable use of agricultural lands, conservat ion of natural habitats, and the rehabilitation of
degraded natural habitats. The EMF explicitly forbids any project activities in areas supporting critical
natural habitats or inducing significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats. It also ensures
that any activity in the buffer zone of a protected area are designed to help reduce pressure on the protected
area itself. Moreover, the EMF provides clear guidance regarding unintended impacts on natural habitats.


                                                  Page 7 of 13
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests. The requirements of OP 4.36 for this project overlap with those of OP 4.04. The
project supports activities that generate positive environmental impacts by promoting the rehabilitation and
conservation of degraded native forests (including riparian zones), as well as by contributing to the
restoration and maintenance of ecological functions in those areas. The project also tests models of
sustainable, non-timber use of such areas in small rural properties. Despite the positive impacts foreseen
through the implementation of these activities, the EMF includes clear guidance regarding direct and indirect
impacts on native f orests. The EMF contains procedures to ensure that all project activities comply with OP
4.36, and with the national legislation, which establishes a series of measures to protect existing forests. The
project deals with the issue of Areas de Preservacao Permanente and Reserva Legal in a pragmatic manner,
helping the farmers to progressively improve the level of environmental compliance.

OP 4.09 - Pest Management. The project does not finance the procurement of any pesticides or other
chemical amendments that would trigger OP 4.09. Nevertheless, small amounts of pesticides continue to be
used by a small portion of farmers in targeted microcatchments. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been
included as an Annex to the EMF, and agreed procedures were incorporated into the Operational Manual in
order to provide guidance on how to minimize potential negative environmental impacts and on training in
safe pesticide use, handling, storage, and disposal, as well as guidelines for Integrated Pest Management
(IPM) and screening procedures against the WHO list of approved products. The need to use pesticides is
assessed on an individual subproject basis, and any approved use should comply with Brazilian Laws
7.802/89 and 9.974/00. Whenever possible, the project adopts proven IPM and economically and
environmentally sustainable measures. The project supports technical assistance for the adoption of IPM
practices, in order to reduce input costs and human health risks and minimize adverse environmental impacts
through the gradual elimination of pesticide use, without significantly affecting yields. In addition, the
project promotes training in good practices and the dissemination of IPM information.

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples. The screening and social assessment estimated that there are
approximately 5000 indigenous peoples in the rural areas of the State of Sao Paulo comprised of the
following six ethnicities: Guarani Kaiowa, Guarani M’Bya, Guarani Nhandeva, Kaingang, Krenak, and
Terena. Consultations demonstrated their strong interest in participating in the project, and indigenous
peoples are one of the project's target beneficiary populations. Socio-environmental diagnostics, site-specific
sustainable development plans, and the preparation of demand-driven subprojects for financing is carried out
under the project. Hence, the client prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework.

OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources. The Project finances small-scale works in already established
agricultural zones where the likelihood of disturbing archaeological, paleontological, or other culturally
significant sites is small. The project is not expected to have negative impacts on cultural property, including
movable or immovable objects, sites, structures, groups of structures or natural features or landscapes with
archeological, paleontological, historical, architectural, religious, aesthetic or other cultural significance. The
EMF includes a framework for screening project activities in relation to potential negative impacts to cultural
property, per national and state legislation. In any case, such impacts is avoided through the application of
subproject eligibility criteria and the safeguard screening system. The EMF also instructs that “chance find”
procedures be included in the contracts for any subproject involving works, as well as in the Operational
Manual, to comply with this safeguard and with national and state legislation on cultural property.

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement. The client has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that
addresses any potential loss of assets issues that might occur during project implementation as the result of
rehabilitation of unpaved rural roads. A satisfactory first draft of the RPF has already been publicly
disseminated.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the

                                                   Page 8 of 13
project area:
No significant indirect or long-term or cumulative impacts are foreseen under the Project. Initiatives to be
supported under Components 1 and 2 are subjected to a rigorous screening process to ensure that maximum
socioeconomic and environmental benefits are accrued and that any unintended negative environmental
impacts are avoided or minimized, including those eventually associated to secondary or indirect and long-
term effects.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Not Relevant.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The EA/EMF specifies the criteria and procedures that would be used during project implementation to avoid
or minimize potentially adverse environmental impacts. Key aspects regarding Bank safeguards included in
the EA/EMF are described below, as well as the borrower capacity and the project experience with
implementation of safeguards.

The Borrower’s institutional capacity for safeguard policies is considered adequate. The
implementation agencies - State Secretariat of Agriculture and Supply (SAA), through its Rural Extension
Agency (CATI) and the State Secretariat Environment (SMA) - have substantial experience in working with
safeguard policies through the development and implementation of EMFs for the current loan (parent Project)
and also during two previous Bank operations, including the development and implementation of EMFs for
the Sao Paulo Land Management Project (under CATI/SAA) and its associated Ecosystem Restoration of
Riparian Forests GEF Project (under SMA).

Various training workshops on EMF procedures have been provided for key staff from the implementation
agencies under the current project, including a recent training session (in November 2016) to address specific
challenges associated with the monitoring of implementation of mitigation measures foreseen under the small
business agricultural subprojects.

During the course of project implementation, SMA/CATI updated the subproject´s environmental checklists
or Listas de Verificação Ambiental (LVAs - Annex 18a and 18b of Project Operational Manual). These
checklists were updated to: (a) fine-tune the application of IPM and mitigation measures associated
agricultural subprojects; (b) improve the LVA model for road rehabilitation and associated measures to
prevent and control soil erosion and reduce sedimentation of aquatic ecosystems; and (c) add (in 2014)
specific LVAs for agro-forestry subprojects.

Two main challenges were identified during the Bank environmental supervision missions and MTR and
have been subsequently addressed. They are:

(a) Some cases of poor implementation of mitigation measures foreseen under agricultural subprojects
(Business Plans), especially when the cost of these measures was included as counterpart funding (i.e. paid
by small farmer associations). It was agreed between the Bank and the Government that the cost of mitigation
measures would have to be financed by the Bank loan. In addition, SAA/CATI monitoring of mitigation
measures associated with agricultural subprojects was considered weak and additional technical assistance
(hiring of an Environmental Consultant) and training of CAT/SAA staff were agreed to and implemented;
and
(b) With respect to the rehabilitation of unpaved rural roads, the Bank supervision mission of October 2016
identified the need to use vegetative soil stabilization (vegetative cover) in some adjacent slopes (land cuts)
where natural regeneration was not taking place as originally planned, probably due to drought and

                                                 Page 9 of 13
overgrazing. Measures to address this issue were discussed and agreed with the Government and will be
further defined and supervised during the next Bank mission scheduled for March 2017.

To strengthen safeguard capacity, particularly at the local level, specific capacity-building activities are
carried out, especially with respect to working with indigenous populations since there is little prior
experience in working with these populations. In addition, a cooperation agreement was signed with the
national Indian agency (FUNAI), and collaborative linkages are sought with other state, federal, and non-
governmental organizations already working with indigenous peoples as well as quilombola communities in
the SoSP.

The specific measures taken by the Borrower to address each of the safeguard issues are described in the
following.

OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. The Project is classified as Category B. In accordance with this
classification, an EA and related EMF have been prepared. Based on the results of the EA, the project
remains designated as Category B project. As mentioned above, the EA/EMF specifies the criteria and
procedures that are used during project implementation to avoid or minimize adverse environmental impacts.

The Project builds on the existing EA capacity established within the organizational framework of the
implementation agencies, CATI and SMA. The capacities of these agencies are strengthened to implement
the EA/EMF. In addition, environmental requirements and procedures for investment proposals are
disseminated among the beneficiaries, stakeholders, municipal authorities and other relevant organizations at
the municipal and regional levels. The PMU includes a group of environmental technical specialists in charge
of monitoring the implementation of the EMF. Proposed physical investments are categorized by the CATI
staff that are accountable for recruiting and carrying out the overall supervision of EA-related reports before
submitting investment proposals for final approval. CATI also informs concerned environmental authority
that could also monitor the EA process.

OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. The EMF explicitly forbids any project activities in areas supporting critical
natural habitats or inducing significant conversion or degradation of critical natural habitats. It also ensures
that any activity in the buffer zone of a protected area is designed to help reduce pressure on the protected
area itself. Moreover, the EMF provides clear guidance regarding unintended impacts on natural habitats.

OP 4.36 Forests. The requirements of OP 4.36 for this project overlap with those of OP 4.04. Despite the
project expected positive impacts, the EMF contains procedures to ensure that all project activities comply
with OP 4.36, and with national legislation, which establishes a series of measures to protect existing forests.
The EMF includes clear guidance regarding direct and indirect impacts on native forests. The project deals
with the issue of Areas de Preservacao Permanente and Reserva Legal in a pragmatic manner, helping the
farmers to progressively improve the level of environmental compliance.

OP 4.09 Pest Management. A Pest Management Plan (PMP) has been included in the EMF, to be
incorporated into the Operational Manual, in order to provide guidance on how to minimize potential
negative environmental impacts and on training in safe pesticide use, handling, storage and disposal, as well
as guidelines for Integrated Pest Management (IPM) and screening procedures against the WHO list of
approved products. The need to use pesticides is assessed on an individual subproject basis, and any
approved use should comply with Brazilian Laws 7.802/89 and 9.974/00. Whenever possible, the project
adopts proven IPM and economically and environmentally sustainable measures. The project supports
technical assistance for the adoption of IPM practices, in order to reduce input costs and human health risks
and minimize adverse environmental impacts through the gradual elimination of pesticide use, without
significantly affecting yields. In addition, the project promotes training in good practices and the


                                                  Page 10 of 13
dissemination of IPM information.

OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples. The client carried out a social assessment and extensive consultations
with indigenous people in rural Sao Paulo. The consultations demonstrated their strong interest in
participating in the project, and indigenous peoples are one of the project’s target beneficiary populations.
The client has prepared an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework, which complies with the requirements
of OP 4.10, and specifies the methodology by which indigenous people participate in the project and develop
future subprojects for financing. A satisfactory IPPF is publicly disseminated by the client.

OP 4.11 Physical Cultural Resources. The EMF includes a framework for screening project activities in
relation to potential negative impacts to cultural property, according to national and state legislation. In any
case, such impacts are avoided through the application of subproject eligibility criteria and the safeguard
screening system. The EMF also instructs that “chance find” procedures to be included in the contracts for
any subproject involving works, as well as in the Operational Manual, in order to comply with this safeguard
and with national and state legislation on cultural property.

OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement. The client has prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
that addresses any potential loss of assets issues that might occur during project implementation as a result of
the rehabilitation of unpaved rural roads. A satisfactory RPF has been consulted and publicly disseminated.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Main stakeholders in the Project are: (i) beneficiary stakeholders, including small-scale farmers and their
families, indigenous communities, quilombola communities, rural women and youth, and community leaders;
(ii) state and municipal institutions (mainly SAA and SMA); Municipal Rural Development Councils; CATI
extension services; national and local NGOs; universities; professional producer associations; and private
technical assistance providers.

The mechanism for consultations of civil society organizations and stakeholders are primarily workshops and
focus groups organized usually at the regional level

During project preparation, the EA/EMF report has been subjected to a virtual public consultation process
(with a broad range of key stakeholders). All safeguard documents have been disclosed since project
beginning (and 2013 restructuring). They consist of Annexes 18 to 21 indicated the aforementioned link:
http://www.cati.sp.gov.br/microbacias2/documentos-tecnicos-anexos-cati
.




B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                           30-Oct-2008
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                        21-Jan-2009
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary
of the EA to the Executive Directors
 "In country" Disclosure
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                           22-Dec-2008
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                        22-Jan-2009
 "In country" Disclosure
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                           29-Oct-2008

                                                 Page 11 of 13
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    21-Jan-2009
 "In country" Disclosure
 Pest Management Plan
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Y
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       22-Dec-2008
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    22-Jan-2009
 "In country" Disclosure
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes   []    No [X]        NA          []
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or   Yes   []    No []         NA          [X]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does
 the project include mitigation measures acceptable to the
 Bank?
PHCompliance




 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management         Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?                                Yes   []    No [X]        NA          []
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a        Yes   []    No []         NA          [X]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
 included in project design?If yes, does the project team
 include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes    [X]   No []         NA          []
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate    Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 the potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning            Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 Framework (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation
 with affected Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the    Yes   []    No [X]        NA          []
 design been reviewed and approved by the Regional
 Social Development Unit or Practice Manager?

                                              Page 12 of 13
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy              Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
          prepared?
          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for           Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                Yes []      No []       TBD   []
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or        Yes []      No []       TBD   []
          access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or
          other means of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
          Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional     Yes []      No []       NA    [X]
          issues and constraints been carried out?
          Does the project design include satisfactory measures to     Yes []      No []       NA    [X]
          overcome these constraints?
          Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,   Yes []      No [X]      NA    []
          does it include provisions for certification system?
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          the World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are
          understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
          and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
          reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):                Name: Maurizio Guadagni
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                 Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)           Date: 03-Mar-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:           Name:                                    Date:




                                                         Page 13 of 13
