INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR15941
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Nov-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-Feb-2014
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:         Maldives                   Project ID:   P108078
Project Name: Maldives Environmental Management Project (P108078)
Task Team        Darshani De Silva
Leader(s):
Estimated        10-Mar-2008                Estimated     10-Jun-2008
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN06                        Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:          Solid waste management (50%), Central government administration (50%)
Theme:           Environmental policies and institutions (33%), Pollution management and
environmental health (3 3%), Biodiversity (17%), Climate chan ge (17%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                    No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      13.88             Total Bank Financing:     13.15
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                 Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                 0.73
International Development Association (IDA)                       13.15
Total                                                             13.88
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The main aim of the Project is to provide the Republic of Maldives with the capacity to effectively
manage environmental risks and threats to fragile coral reefs as well as marine habitats resulting
from tourism development, increased solid waste disposal, fisheries and global climate change.
Page 1 of 14


﻿Accordingly, this Project has two development objectives. The first Project Development Objective
is that a solid waste management system is established and that inhabitants on targeted islands use
solid waste management facilities, reducing the risks of contamination associated with accumulated
wastes and sea dumping. The second Project Development Objective is to build human and technical
U         capacity for environmental management so that the environmental dimension is integrated in the
planning process using information and expertise developed in the Project.
3. Project Description
a        The project seeks to provide the Republic of Maldives with the capacity to effectively manage
environmental risks and threats to fragile coral reefs as well as marine habitats resulting from tourism
development, increased solid waste disposal, fisheries and global climate change. Accordingly, this
project has two development objectives. The first Project Development Objective (PDO) is that a
solid waste management system is established and that inhabitants on targeted islands use solid waste
management facilities, reducing the risks of contamination associated with accumulated wastes and
sea dumping. The second PDO is to build human and technical capacity for environmental
management so that the environmental dimension is integrated in the planning process using
information and expertise developed in the Project. The PDOs are not revised as part of the
restructuring.
The project has four components: (1) a regional solid waste management program for the North
Central Region; (2) capacity building for environmental management; (3) technical assistance for
strengthened environmental management and monitoring; and (4) project management and
communications.
Component 1: Regional Solid Waste Management Program
Solid waste is the most visible environmental threat to the tourism and fishery industries. In a recent
survey, solid waste was identified as the most important environmental issue by 24% of respondents.
The management of solid waste is especially challenging in Maldives, even more so than other small
island states. With a population spread across numerous islands, there is little scope for harnessing
economies of scale. Thus, the costs of service delivery are high. Because of restricted land
endowments, the space available for waste disposal is limited, calling for the waste stream to be
minimized through such means as recycling and composting. The country's fragile marine
ecosystem requires that special attention be given to the choice of technology and system design to
mitigate adverse impacts, particularly those that could damage the country's primary asset - its
relatively unspoiled marine environment. This combination of risks and challenges is unique to
Maldives and demands specifically tailored solutions to develop a sustainable solid waste
management (SWM) system with stringent criteria applied for site selection, engineering, technology
choice and management.
Taking account of the dispersed geography and fragile ecology, the program would operate at
multiple levels. First, the construction of Island Waste Management Centers (IWMCs) will provide
facilities for island communities to reduce the volume of waste requiring final disposal by sorting,
recycling, and composting. The residual waste will be temporarily stored in a safe and
environmentally responsible manner at the IWMC. Second, a Regional Waste Management Facility
(RWMF) will be built on an uninhabited island or one with compatible land use (e.g. an industrial
island) that will serve as the destination for residual waste from the IWMCs and participating resorts.
Community consultations, communication and involvement are key components of this
subcomponent and are essential to the successful operation of IWMCs. Third, all these will be
Page 2 of 14


﻿supported by allied services such as community programs, waste transfer and transportation facilities,
technical assistance and financial systems, all of which will be subject to government regulation and
guided by stringent environmental criteria. The facilities will be designed and built to the highest
appropriate standards to reduce the risk of contamination from solid wastes. Special attention will be
O
paid to medical wastes that will require special handling and management.
The project will support a regional solid waste management (RSWM) program in the North Central
Region, which is currently under-served by waste management facilities. It is the most significant
component, i.e., amounting to over 50% of total project costs. The "catchment" or group of atolls
and islands to be served was defined during project implementation on the basis of a comprehensive
feasibility study. The factors that influenced the choice of catchment depended on multiple
intersecting criteria: economies of scale, population distribution, geography, environmental factors
and the location of (current and planned) resort developments. Community consultations and
assessments of community needs and communication were carried out. Once the catchment was
defined, a detailed assessment of current and future needs, technology choices for waste management
and a thorough environmental and social impact assessment were conducted. Alternate sites and
technologies were weighed vis-a-vis cost and sustainability. Recognizing the significance of the
country's natural capital and reputation as an unspoiled tourist destination, environmental factors
were given high priority over economic considerations in determining both the location and design of
the system.
Component 2: Capacity Building for Environmental Management
The environmental agencies and regulators in Maldives have a broad mandate, but their capacity to
manage growing environmental pressures does not match the needs of a fragile environment on
which the economy depends. At appraisal stage, the environment section of the Ministry of
Environment, Energy and Water (MEEW) - reconstituted into the current Ministry of Environment
and Water (MEE) - had professional staff of about 35, of whom only 5 had post-secondary degrees
or the equivalent. The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) had 32 staff of which 5 had
undergraduate degrees and only 1 had a post-graduate degree. The Marine Research Center (MRC),
with 55 staff, only had 5 with tertiary qualifications of which 4 have pursued post-graduate studies.
The agencies were both understaffed and under-skilled.
o        The project was designed to partly fill - at least - the staffing gaps and capacity needs as they relate
to the project itself. It was apparent that it would be nearly impossible to build a large, permanent
cadre of environmental specialists with a reach extending over the entire archipelago and across all
sectors. Priority was therefore given to developing a core of competent generalists and specialists in
MEE, other relevant ministries and agencies (Planning, Fisheries, Tourism, and Construction) and in
the private sector (particularly NGOs and the tourism sector) to guide the environmental assessment
and decision-making process. The emphasis was on training existing government staff and others for
whom there was a reasonable expectation that their skills could be utilized in the near or medium
term.
Project support is aimed at human resource development programs integrated with action programs
already prioritized by the government. Training is oriented primarily around these objectives and
linked as much as possible with action programs both in the public and private sectors. Training
consists of a combination of: (i) in-country formal training; (ii) informal in-service training with
specialist trainers brought to help develop human resources; and (iii) specialization with graduate or
post-graduate courses abroad financed through a stream of funding for overseas training and
Page 3 of 14


﻿education; and (iv) internship programs in environmental management and coastal/marine resources
management. A certification program was designed and is under implementation. The existence of a
cadre of experts will be verified by the number of people attaining certification.
O
Component 3: Technical Assistance for Strengthened Environmental Management and Monitoring
Sparse information and the absence of baseline data remain one of the key impediments to improved
environmental management in Maldives. The evidence on the magnitude and causes of these
problems encourages the adoption of policies to arrest or reverse degradation of the key natural
assets. This component aims to expand the knowledge base regarding critical natural resources on
which the ecosystem and economy depend. Recognizing that there are insufficient resources in the
project envelope to fill all the information gaps, this component selectively targets issues and
information gaps where assistance is most urgently needed and promotes activities designed to
stimulate discussions and policy deliberations that would lead to greater community awareness and
better decision making.
Among the many environmental problems that affect Maldives, communities identify coastal erosion
as a significant threat to their assets and existence. Some estimates suggest that over 80% of
inhabited islands are threatened with erosion and this problem is expected to intensify with climate
change. Yet there is little information on the magnitude of the problem, or understanding of the
complex processes of accretion and erosion and their links to wave dynamics, terrestrial ecosystems
(mangroves) and coral reef health. A major focus of this component is on addressing the issue of
building climate resilience by improved management and stewardship of the country's coastal
resources (marine and terrestrial).
A second major concern highlighted by communities on some islands is the productivity of the tuna
fishery, which is the second largest export industry and the primary source of livelihoods on many
islands. Tuna harvests depend on, among other things, the availability of adequate bait which is
sourced from the coral reefs. Anecdotal reports from the industry suggest that (deep sea) tuna stocks
are probably not in observable decline, but the bait fish catch (per unit "effort") has been decreasing
rapidly in several atolls. There is evidence that coral reef health and recovery are linked to fish
diversity. The component involves studies on the status of the bait fishery, the interactions between
coral recovery (health) and fish stocks and the development of a bait fishery management plan.
The project supports monitoring by professional scientists that in some instances would entail
support by the communities as an effective way of creating awareness and also collecting basic data
in a systematic fashion from a large number of sites.
Component 4: Project Management and Communications
The Project Management Unit (PMU) - with the number and qualifications described in the
Operations Manual (OM) - is managing the project in accordance with the guidelines set forth in the
OM. The PMU has the following functions: overall project management, component management,
liaison with other agencies and programs, financial management, procurement, monitoring and
evaluation and project communications. The project's communication sub-component includes a
communication campaign aimed at developing environmental awareness, action, and advocacy.
Project restructuring for no cost extension to the Additional Financing.
Page 4 of 14


﻿The project was provided with additional financing which became effective on July 7, 2015 to fund
cost overruns outside of the Government's control in order to pave the way for the achievement of the
PDO related to the waste management program. This additional IDA grant is financing: (i) the
remaining civil works and operational support for the IWMCs; (ii) the remaining activities to
O
U         complete the RWMF infrastructure; (iii) the construction of the foundation pad for the incinerator;
(iv) the purchase of essential equipment for the RWMF and IWMCs; (v) the provision of operational
support, including international TA to the Fenaka Corporation - the designated entity for the
management and operation of the RSWM system; (vi) the acquisition of a second waste transfer
vessel; and (vii) minor RSWM related costs. To allow for the completion of activities related to the
integrated regional solid waste management (RSWM) system, the Government recently requested an
extension to the closing date from December 31, 2015 to June 30, 2016.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Maldives is an island nation in the Indian Ocean formed by a double chain of twenty-six atolls
oriented north-south off India's Lakshadweep Islands. The country's atolls encompass a territory
spread over roughly 90,000 square kilometers, making it one of the world's most geographically
dispersed countries. Its population of 328,536 (2012) inhabits 200 of its 1,192 islands. The average
ground level is 1.5 meters above sea level.
The atolls are composed of live coral reefs and sand bars, situated atop a submarine ridge 960
kilometers long that rises abruptly from the depths of the Indian Ocean. The reefs are composed of
coral debris and living coral. This acts as a natural barrier against the sea, forming lagoons. Other
islands set at a distance and parallel to the reef have their own protective fringe of reef.
The islands are made of 15 cm thick layer of humus forms the top layer of soil. Below the humus
layer are 60 cm of sandstone, followed by sand and then fresh water. Due to high levels of salt in the
soil near the beach, vegetation is limited to a few plants such as shrubs, flowering plants, and small
hedges. In the interior of the islands, more vegetation such as mangrove and banyan grow. Coconut
palms, the national tree, are able to grow almost everywhere on the islands and are integral to the
lifestyle of the population. The ground water of almost all inhabitant islands is polluted and the
current supply of potable water is from rainwater harvesting and/or desalination of sea water.
The temperature ranges between 24 'C and 33 'C throughout the year. Although the humidity is
relatively high, the constant cool sea breezes keep the air moving and the heat mitigated. The
weather is affected by the large landmass of South Asia to the north. The presence of this landmass
causes differential heating of land and water. These factors set off a rush of moisture-rich air from
the Indian Ocean over South Asia, resulting in the southwest monsoon. Two seasons dominate the
weather: the dry season associated with the winter northeastern monsoon and the rainy season which
brings strong winds and storms. The shift from the moist southwest monsoon to the dry northeast
monsoon occurs during April and May. During this period, the northeast winds contribute to the
formation of the northeast monsoon which reaches Maldives in the beginning of June and lasts until
the end of August. However, the weather patterns do not always conform to the monsoon patterns of
South Asia. The annual rainfall averages 254 cm in the north and 381 cm in the south.
The project's RSWM component is focused on the Northern Central Region. The RWMF is located
on the eastern end of the uninhabited island of Vandhoo identified for economic activities which is
located in Raa Atoll (Maalhosmadulu). The island has a total area of 0.38km2. A land area of
0.15km2 is set aside to build the RWMF and necessary supporting infrastructure. One half of that
Page 5 of 14


﻿area (or 0.0764km2) required for the site must be cleared of vegetation. Based on the findings of the
ESIA, the majority of biodiversity in Vandhoo are nationally common and not protected. They are
not threatened globally. Some parts of the island even provide refuge to breeding hawksbill turtles.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Q
Mokshana Nerandika Wijeyeratne (GENDR)
Susrutha Pradeep Goonesekera (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          This policy remains triggered to ensure that the impacts
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                related to the regional solid waste management program
are mitigated through the agreed actions under the ESMF
and other site-specific environmental and social
instruments.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes          This policy remains triggered because all of the country's
4.04                                 islands are surrounded by coral reefs which are significant
natural habitats. Also, with this policy, negative impacts
on the island vegetation especially at the RWMF are
reduced. The site-specific environmental instruments
(IEEs, EIAs and EMPs) include adequate measures to
reduce the impacts to the coral reefs, island vegetation
and associated fauna and flora.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           There are no areas classified as forests in Maldives. Any
potential impacts on island vegetation are covered through
OP/BP 4.04.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           It is possible that some activities may create mosquito
breeding sites due to unmanaged waste.
The risk is mitigated by the establishment of the RSWM
system with island based and regional disposal facilities.
Under the recently concluded solid waste management
pilot project administered by the Bank and funded under
the Maldives Climate Change Trust Fund, it was
confirmed that Maldives does not face the problems of
other types of pests (e. g. rodents) at waste sites. Thus, the
policy is not triggered. However, as part of the monitoring
of the site during operations, possible movement of pests
will be also monitored and recorded for potential
invasions.
Physical Cultural       No           There are no PCRs at the project sites. Hence the policy is
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 not triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no indigenous peoples in Maldives.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No          IWMCs are built for the purpose of waste management
OP/BP 4.12                           only and they are always located away from human
habitation. Because the state provides housing for all, the
country does not have squatter issues. The RWMF was
Page 6 of 14


﻿established in an uninhabited island. In addition, the
project activities have not caused and will not give rise to
any impacts to island community assets. Hence, this
policy is not applicable.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The country does not have dams and the project does not
4.37                                support water retention structures so this policy does not
apply.
Projects on International  No       The project activities are implemented on land. The
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 construction of the landing site for the RWMF does not
have any impact on international waters.
Therefore, this policy is not applicable.
Projects in Disputed    No           The policy is not applicable because there are no disputed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     areas in Maldives.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Project restructuring would not result in any changes to the environmental assessment category or
the original polices trigged, as the restructuring will only entail no-cost extension to the project
implementation period from December 31, 2015 to June 30, 2016.
The project was classified as safeguards category "A". As envisaged at appraisal in 2008, the
current project status confirms that the RSWM component involves community-based waste
recycling and resource recovery facilities at the IWMCs, composting of the organic fraction of the
waste and establishment of a RWMF for the disposal of residual municipal solid and medical
waste.
0
Island waste management centers (IWMCs): The construction and operation of IWMCs, if not
well designed and operated, could result in significant adverse environmental impacts. Some
IWMCs are existing facilities which require expansion/renovation and improvement in handling
the waste coming to the site. Based on the lessons learned from existing IWMCs, community
participation was identified to be essential for the effective operation and long-term sustainability
of the IWMCs. Community consultations and their involvement in the selection of recycling and
resource recovery activities at the IWMCs were undertaken. Consequently, the specific activities
to be undertaken at the IWMCs were decided by the relevant communities. Initial environmental
examinations (IEEs) and environmental impact assessments (EIAs) were conducted for the
IWMCs and environmental and social management plans (ESMPs) were prepared for
implementation. The assessments identified that, in many islands, there is no organized solid
waste collection system in place. Hence, some inahbitants tend to throw their waste to the
foreshore or coastal areas. There is no proper treatment of waste done in the IWMCs and open
burning of waste takes place due to absence of proper disposal methods. When the IWMCs
become congested, some islands try to transfer the waste to Thilafushi (the waste and industrial
island close to Male) bury the waste in the island to provide space for new incoming waste to the
sites or allow spillage into the lagoon, reef or sea.
Page 7 of 14


﻿The IEEs and EIAs of project-supported IWMCs indicate that the process proposed (composting
of the organic waste, recycling and recovery of the residue to be moved) for upgrading and
operating the IWMCs will not generate significant and/or irreversible adverse environmental
impacts. Community-level waste recycling and resource recovery as well as composting of the
O
organic portion of the waste will avoid/minimize the highly unsanitary open burning and ad hoc
dumping of wastes on the shorelines of the inhabited islands which are environmentally damaging
and especially destructive to coral reefs. Growing quantities of plastics and lubricants in the waste
stream often end up contaminating the sensitive reefs. As an IWMC becomes operational,
recyclable material is planned to be separated and stored in the IWMC for transport to the RWMF
for subsequent sale and medical waste will be stored securely for transport and disposal at the
RWMF. The largest component in the waste stream is the organicportion which will be
composted at the household level or at the IWMC. A model organic waste composting facility
supported under the Ari Atoll Solid Waste Management Project supported by the World Bank
which is currently operational and it is used for training IWMC staff and island communities. The
residue to be sent to the RWMF will be non-recyclable and non- degradable waste which will be
transported to the RWMF on a periodic basis to preclude any significant waste accumulation in the
IWMCsand spillage into the ocean.
Regional Waste Management Facility: The site selection and the identification of the technology
for the RWMF were carried out through a vigorous and consultative process by using the best
practicable environmental option (BPEO) methodology to reduce the environmental and social
impacts of the RWMF to the extent possible within the country context while ensuring technical
and economical soundness. Specifically, the island was selected based on the following criteria:
* Island is on a known navigable inter/intra Atoll maritime transport route;
* Island is near/ accessible to a population centre (Urban Area);
* Island has a defined land mass and a large internal lagoon area;
* Island has no obvious significant residential settlement (approved or unapproved);
* Island where other land use is compatible with solid waste management activities (agricultural
islands may be considered at this time);
* Island is not designated for a future land use which may be incompatible with solid waste
management activities (islands on a reef system des ignated for a future resort, or an island
designated for future population relocation should not be considered but islands that are designated
for industrial activity may be consider);
* Island is not protected, or designated as an environmentally significant/sensitive site (terrestrial);
and
* Island should not be part of or adjacent to a protected Reef system or designated as an
environmentally significant/ sensitive site (marine).
Based on the BPEO process, Vandhoo island was identified as the most suitable site for the
proposed RWMF. An environmental and social impact assessment (ESIA) for Vandhoo, including
the RWMF site was conducted in accordance with OP/BP 4.01 to identify and mitigate potential
adverse environmental impacts. The ESIA identified potential impacts and specified the
mitigation and enhancement measures to be put in place during the construction of the RWMF and
its operationalization.
Vandhoo is an uninhabited island identified for economic activities by the Government of
Maldives. This island has been intermittently used by the communities in the nearby islands for
recreation and agriculture activities. This was supported by the evidence collected by ESIA where
it was observed that significant continuous disturbance to the to the coral reef around the past boat
Page 8 of 14


﻿access sited used by people, remnants of fire wood cooking, and disturbed nature of the land with
agricultural perennial plants and sparse secondary growth undergrowth.
The assessment indicated that the island flora was typical for Maldivian poor soil and secondary
O
and dis-climax vegetation. Beach and rocky coast vegetation found to be lacking significance in
species variety and common in Maldives. Tropical climate forest plant species are absent. Out of
the 19 plants species on the island six were found to be invasive, only one identified as native and
the rest with no national or global information. The designated area to be opened for the RWMF
(approximately 1/3 of the island land mass) consists of an unkempt coconut grove in disuse with
sparse ground vegetation. The ground vegetation consists of Ocrosia oppositifolia with no record
of its status both locally, nationally or globally. Additionally, there is also a small (less than 0.5m
high) immature mangrove plants of the species Bruguira cylindrica outside the land area identified
for the RWMF which was proposed to be demarcated and protected together with the existing
vegetation of about 0.75km2 of land around the facility recognizing the ecosystem service that it
can produce through protection. Fauna associated with terrestrial vegetation was found to be
common to Maldives and not globally threatened.
Some parts of the beach were found to be nesting sites for hawksbill turtles (Eretmochelys
imbricata) which are common to Maldives but are considered globally to be critically endangered.
While the RWMF will not directly impact the turtle nesting sites (as there are possibilities of
indirect impacts), the ESIA identified the need to introduce necessary measures to reduce the
disturbances and protect such sites. Based on the data collected on the likely sites used by the
turtles for nesting, it was proposed that those beach areas will be demarcated and put under
protection with the agreement of the Ministry of Fisheries and Agriculture who has the mandate to
protect turtles in the Maldives. A comprehensive turtle management plan has been prepared as part
of the environmental and social management plan of the ESIA.
The coral reef biodiversity was found to be common to Maldives with no site endemics and
globally significant species. The proposed landing site which is the same site used by island
communities to access the island was found to be highly disturbed with low level of regeneration
due to continuous disturbances in the past. The permanent loss of more than 3000 m2 (0.3 ha) of
coral reef on the north side of the island due to the necessary dredging for an access channel which
goes over the already disturbed site for waste-carrying boats to enter the Vandhoo lagoon were
found to be unavoidable. Compensation is proposed as a mitigation measure where at least one
third of the reefs surrounding the entire island are set aside as a protected area or no-take fishery
zone to compensate for the dredged reef. The protected area also will help re-establish some of the
predatory fishes eliminated from Vandhoo and many of the other islands due to ongoing fishing
activities.
The only cultural/archaeological site on Vandhoo is a decomposed grave site, which was found
just outside the proposed RWMF site. According to the local communities and the National
Archives, the site is not considered to have any important cultural or archaeological significance.
However, it was proposed that the grave site is protected by clearing the overgrowth and marking
the site.
Air pollution from waste incineration activities could increase ambient levels of greenhouse gases
and heavy metals unless the chimney and the equipment used to remove these pollutants are
properly designed. However, the net effect due to the waste management option selected,
including the operations of the regional facility, when compared to current practices in the
Page 9 of 14


﻿inhabited and resort islands will be much lower. For the proposed incineration systems, waste
quantities and qualities, emissions are found to be within the acceptable World Health
Organization (WHO) and IFC-World Bank standards for all the compounds involved in this study
(N02, S02, TSP, PM10 and dioxins/furans), if the smokestack is kept at a height of 22.5 m with a
O
good pollutant removal equipment included in the incinerator design. The ESIA proposed the
inclusion of the latter to the design. By doing so, the impact on the closest inhabited island will be
lower than the WHO standards for all parameters and for dioxins/furans i.e., below the thresholds
established by international guidelines.
Current status and safeguard performance.
While construction of the RWMF facility and the IWMCs has been largely completed as of
November 1, 2015, the time available to operationalize the facilities and the RWMS will require
more time than that was anticipated due to challenges with procuring international expertise to
facilitate the operationalization process of the RWMF. Since the Maldives has no prior experience
in operation such a system, ideally the operational support of the service provider in order to test
the system and transfer knowledge and experience will require a period of at least six months. No
new activities are anticipated during the project extensions period, except completion of all
activities and ensuring full operationalization of RSWM system in North Central Region.
Project was downgraded during the last implementation review and support mission in August
2015 from satisfactory to moderately satisfactory as there was likelihood that the project will not
be able to fully operationalize the RWMF and some of the IWMCs by December 31, 2015 and for
delayed in operationalizing few of the IWMCs where construction have completed by mid 2015.
However, the project was performing satisfactorily in construction-stage activities in RFMF as per
the ESIA and IWMCs as per the ESMPs at the time of the last review and those IWMCs that was
not operating have commenced operations satisfactorily as of now.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
0
Since the project would result in an effective solid waste management system for the atolls in the
North Central Region, the long-term impacts of this intervention would be environmentally
beneficial. The Government awarded leases for several new resorts in that region and the
improved RSWM system would reduce sea dumping of waste and contamination of reef
ecosystems, the main tourist attraction of the country. Reef monitoring and other environmental
monitoring programs supported under this project are guiding the land use planning process to
help ensure better management of the environment and natural resources in Maldives. As
previously mentioned, the site selection and identification of the technology for the RWMF were
carried out through the BPEO method to reduce environmental and social impacts of the RWMF
to the extent possible under the country context.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The following alternatives were considered under the BPEO exercise. The results of the BPEO
led to the selection of eight different options:
Processing at RWMF:
* Al: Collection and transportation of waste from islands and land filling with gas management
system
* A2: Collection and transportation of waste from islands, composting of organic waste and land
Page 10 of 14


﻿filling of compost rejects
* A3: Collection and transportation of waste from islands, incineration of waste and disposal of
rejects in landfill/land reclamation
Processing at island level
O
* A4: Composting of organic waste at the island, transportation of rejects to RWMF for landfill
* A5: Composting of organic waste at the island, incineration of balance waste with waste to
energy (WTE) and land filling of rejects at RWMF
* A6: Composting of organic waste at the island level, incineration of remaining waste with WTE,
and land reclamation from rejects at RWMF
* A7: Composting of organic waste at the island level, simple incineration of remaining waste and
land filling of rejects at RWMF
* A8: Composting of organic waste at the island level, simple incineration of remaining waste and
land reclamation with rejects at RWMF
A7 was identified as the best option.
The final choice for the incineration technology to be employed has not yet been selected, and
several different alternatives are being discussed. The assessment of the air emission impacts
suggests that a system with a good air pollution control system should be included in the
incinerator design. The system should include electrostatic precipitators (ESP) and multiple
scrubbers, spray-dryer and baghouse or similar combinations. In combination with a 22.5 m high
stack, this should result in emissions found to be acceptable for all the compounds involved in this
study (N02, S02, TSP, PM1O and dioxins/furans).
The choice of Vandhoo was made after a long screening process. Given its central location vis-d-
vis other islands in that particular region and its proximity to an island dedicated for shipbuilding
yards, Vandhoo was recommended as the best option. The ESIA also found that Vandhoo to be
the most suitable for RWMF construction. The island is large enough to accommodate both waste
management and boat construction while two thirds of the island (with somewhat nutrient-rich
soils, for vegetation and wildlife) is left untouched. Boat building is a specialty of Raa Atoll (well
known for its carpenters) and the construction of fiberglass vessels is presently carried out in
nearby islands. The islanders of Innamaadhoo, In'guraidhoo and Rasmaadhoo expressed their
interest to use Vandhoo for boat building and preliminary slipway initiatives were undertaken
a          (slipway was given on a concession basis to a private contractor). The island of Alifushi is too far
to the north to benefit from boat building.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The location of the RWMF, catchment area, participating islands and technology for the RWMF
were not determined during project preparation because of the need for thorough investigation,
detailed assessments and studies. The environmental assessment could not be carried out during
project preparation. Therefore, an Environmental and Social Assessment Framework was
prepared by the Government in lieu of a project-specific EA. It served as a template for
undertaking project specific EAs once the works were identified. The framework is: (i)
comprehensive; (ii) highly detailed; and (iii) contains precise time-bound action plans to assure
compliance. Following the identification of the technology and the selection of the IWMCs and
RWMF, IEEs, EIAs, a social impact assessment for IWMCs and the ESIA for the RWMF were
undertaken to identify safeguard impacts and mitigation measures.
Page 11 of 14


﻿Maldives has a reasonably sound track record of implementing the Environmental Impact
Assessment process. The technical capacity of the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) is
reasonably good. However, a decision was reached that, during project implementation phase,
specifically when the IWMCs are operational and the RWMF is completed, a qualified consultant
O
will be recruited to help EPA undertake the regular monitoring of the system. In addition, EPA
assumed the responsibility for monitoring the implementation of the clearance conditions of the
environmental assessments associated with the project.
All safeguard instruments are currently being satisfactorily implemented.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The main stakeholders for the regional solid waste management program are the island
communities in the North Central Atolls of Raa, Baa, Noonu and Lahviyani. The primary social
issues to be dealt are related to the strong need for community participation and ownership in the
project. Public participation in waste management issues is critical, especially in the less
populated islands where participation by the local population in the separation, collection,
management and disposition of wastes is essential. Previous experience in Maldives indicates that
participation is crucial to the success of waste management in outlying islands with small
populations. This would depend not only on effective communication but also on getting the
incentives right, which is a focus of this project. In addition, the resorts are key stakeholders
because they would benefit from improved solid waste management. Other stakeholders are the
island officials, atoll administrations and the Ministry of Environment and Energy (MEE).
The project is being implemented with a strong participatory approach. As part of the Social
Impact Assessment, extensive consultations were undertaken with communities of the 46 islands
in the North Central Region. Subsequently, as part of the BPEO, a number of consultations were
held to identify the suitable technology and site for the RWMF. The ESIA entailed consultations
with stakeholders in islands close to Vandhoo and other stakeholders. The RWMF operator,
Atolls Office, MEE and EPA are making reasonable efforts to consult relevant stakeholders in the
implementation of the RWMF activities during the construction and operational phases. The
consultations have been carried out appropriately with consideration for cultural, gender based and
O
other differences among stakeholders.
The public consultation process is continuing, particularly in relation to developing island waste
management plans, identifying user fees for the waste management service at the island level and
siting and management of the IWMCs.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              16-Dec-2008
Date of submission to InfoShop                           20-Mar-2008
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  25-Feb-2008
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Maldives                                                 17-Mar-2008
Comments: The ESIA prepared for the RWMF during the project implementation was disclosed
on January 19, 2014
Page 12 of 14


﻿If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [    ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Darshani De Silva
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                   Date: 17-Nov-2015
Page 13 of 14


﻿Practice Manager/    Name: Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (PMGR)          Date: 17-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 14 of 14


