INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR13971
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 12-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Nepal                      Project ID:  P087140
Project Name: Project for Agriculture Commercialization and Trade (PACT) (PO87140)
Task Team       Patrick Verissimo
Leader(s):
Estimated       11 -Apr-2009               Estimated    04-Jun-2009
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFA12                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (56%), General agriculture, fishing and
forestry sector (28%), Public administration- Agricultur e, fishing and forestry
(16%)
Theme:          Rural markets (90%), Trade facilitation and market access (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
Emergencies)?
0
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      64.50            Total Bank Financing:   60.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
o           Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                               4.50
International Development Association (IDA)                     32.71
IDA Grant                                                       27.29
Total                                                           64.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective remains largely unchanged, but in order to recognize a) very
Page 1 of 8


﻿high demand for the project and b) comprehensively address the value chains of important
commodities the PDO is proposed to be revised as follows: to improve the competitiveness of
smallholder farmers and the agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains supported by the
project. The revised PDO removes the restriction of 25 districts but maintains the focus on selected
O
U         commodity value chains so that the project can have a meaningful impact on developing a few,
commercially viable value chains.
O
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
o        The Project Development Objective remains largely unchanged, but in order to recognize a) very
high demand for the project and b) comprehensively address the value chains of important
commodities the PDO is proposed to be revised as follows: to improve the competitiveness of
smallholder farmers and the agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains supported by the
project. The revised PDO removes the restriction of 25 districts but maintains the focus on selected
commodity value chains so that the project can have a meaningful impact on developing a few,
commercially viable value chains.
3. Project Description
The Project Development Objective is to improve the competitiveness of smallholder farmers and the
agribusiness sector in selected commodity value chains in districts supported by the project. This will
be achieved by: (i) helping farmer groups and cooperatives engage in profitable market-oriented
production and improved access to markets through the provision of technology and information
services and critical public infrastructure and linkages to agribusiness; (ii) creating and strengthening
industry-wide partnerships along the value chain, thus forging linkages between producers, traders,
processors, and other stakeholders and, (iii) reducing existing obstacles to agriculture and food trade
thereby increasing the ability of farmers and agribusiness to respond to sanitary and phytosanitary
(SPS) and food-quality standards to meet domestic and international market requirements.
Project components:
1. Component 1 (Agriculture and Rural Business Development) will finance demand-based sub-
projects proposed by farmer groups, cooperatives, agribusinesses and other value chain participants
to build strategic linkages with a view to increase competitiveness, productivity, quality and market
access. The component will also finance the facilitation of value chain plans, sub-project proposal
development and monitoring of sub-projects.
The objective of this component is to enable farmers to engage in profitable market-oriented
production and to promote partnerships and market linkages with other value chain participants and
agribusinesses. The component will help agro enterprises, commodity associations, cooperatives and
farmer groups to actively engage in the development of commodity value chains by partially
financing demand-driven investment proposals through a competitive matching grant. The
component will also support investments aimed at creating viable enterprise-based farmer institutions
that are linked to other value chain participants and are actively engaged with the markets.
The specific activities supported under this component are: (i) providing pre-investment and advisory
support to enable FOs and value chain participants to prepare subproject proposals and business
plans for grant funding under the project; (ii) direct financing of approved subproject proposals in
technology and information support and market infrastructure; (iii) agribusiness development
through partial financing of demand-driven investment proposals by agro enterprises, commodity
associations and cooperatives that are actively engaged in the development of commodity value
chains.
Page 2 of 8


﻿All three types of activities noted above will be supported after a consultative process of value chain
development. Value chain development plans will be developed through a consultative process
involving different stakeholders.
o
2. Component 2 (Support for Sanitary and Phytosanitary Facilities and Food Quality Standards) will
finance activities to strengthen the efficiency and effectiveness of sanitary and phyto-sanitary
services in order to reduce existing obstacles to agricultural and food trade. It will also support the
private sector's efforts to gain market advantage through improved food quality management. As
such it provides critical backing to the value chain investments being supported by component 1 and
other related projects by Development Partners.
The component will finance (i) food quality and safety enhancing activities through improving
laboratory facilities and certification capabilities and (ii) technical assistance and capacity building
measures to meet food safety and quality standards. It will also provide technical assistance to
industries to help them meet hygiene requirements so as to earn the confidence of importing country
authorities and private sector importers.
3. Component 3 (Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation) will finance overall project
management, monitoring and evaluation and reporting. This component will also support a Project
Management Unit (Team) comprising of a Project Director, a Monitoring and Evaluation Officer,
Finance Officer, Procurement Officer, Accounts Officer and two accountants. A Technical
Assistance service provider, recruited as a firm, will provide support to the PMT and regional/district
offices in the field. A public awareness company will be hired to manage local and national level
awareness activities for the project.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Unlike the original project, the Additional financing removes the restriction of 25 districts but
maintains the focus on selected commodity value chains so that the project can have a meaningful
impact on developing a few, commercially viable value chains.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Annu Rajbhandari (GENDR)
Bandita Sijapati (GSURR)
Drona Raj Ghimire (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Yes
Page 3 of 8


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/
Bdt1ditary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
U         Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The PACT is an EA Category "B" project, given that significant adverse environmental and
social impacts are not expected as a result of project activities. The social and environmental
assessment carried out in sample districts reveal that the project activities proposed related to
production, processing, testing, trading and marketing of different agro-based commercial
commodities are relatively small in size with limited adverse social and environmental impacts.
The Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), prepared by the GoN and
endorsed by the Bank, is currently being used in the ongoing PACT. Progress on the
implementation of social issues in the project has been satisfactory to date. The additional
financing activities will continue to use the established frameworks for the mitigation of social
impacts like the Framework for Indigenous People Development Plan and the Resettlement and
Rehabilitation Policy Framework.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Land Acquisition and Resettlement: To date, land has been made available for the sub-project by
farmers and members of cooperatives at market price thus preempting the need for land
acquisition, compensation and resettlement. However, as large scale projects are envisaged to be
supported through additional financing, it is likely that the provisions contained in the
Resettlement and Rehabilitation Policy Framework will become more paramount. This will
require closer scrutiny and enhanced social assessment and implementation capacity through: (i)
additional human resources and training; (ii) incorporation of social issues in the Environmental
Codes of Practice by developing a joint 'Environmental and Social Codes of Practice'; and (iii)
periodic social auditing/third-party monitoring of sub-project activities to check for social
safeguards compliance.
Small Ethnic and Vulnerable Communities: In accordance with the Framework for Small Ethnic
and Vulnerable Communities Development Plan, the project, to the extent possible and applicable,
has been organizing regular consultations with members of farmer's organizations and
cooperatives, including with Dalits, Janajatis, and women. However, for the additional finance,
documentation and reporting on social management needs to be strengthened through: (i) regular
monitoring and supervision of sub-projects to ensure implementation of the Small Ethnic and
Vulnerable Communities Development Plan; (ii) documentation of findings from monitoring and
Page 4 of 8


﻿supervision visits to examine progress, record good practices and lessons learnt which if
necessary, can be used to take corrective actions; and (iii) systematic analysis of beneficiary data
to monitor and ensure that women and other disadvantaged groups are benefiting from the project.
The latter can be done effectively through the comprehensive MIS system that PACT has
O
developed.
Similarly, as per the ESMF, there is also the need to continue focusing on developing the capacity
of vulnerable groups by defining training/income generation activities based on the identified
needs and priorities of vulnerable people in the subproject area, providing targeted assistance/
training to vulnerable groups aimed at enhancing their participation in PACT subprojects, and
increasing their access to resources to carry out commercial agriculture.
Environmental Safeguards: The additional financing activities will also be subject to the existing
ESMF's provisions, processes and procedures for environmental screening, assessment and
monitoring. Activities supported under the ongoing PACT until MTR (July 2012) have been
relatively small scale and have low environmental risks: none of the activities required
Environmental Assessments beyond screening and preparation of Environmental Code of Practice.
The type and size of investments/activities being considered under the proposed additional
financing such as rehabilitation of the Kalimati Wholesale Fruit and Vegetable Market a cut
flower market and larger agribusinesses, are larger in size and may also have higher environmental
risks than the ongoing activities. It is likely that these activity/subprojects require either Initial
Environmental Examination (IEE) or Environmental Impact Assessment (EIA) depending on the
location and activities. This needs be confirmed by conducting a formal environmental screening
of the proposed activity/subproject once more detailed information about the subproject/activity
and location is known. The provisions in the ESMF of the parent project are adequate to provide
environmental guidance to the type of subprojects being considered. However, considering the
higher environmental risks of the proposed larger size activities, a provision needs to be made for
adequate support from environmental specialist in addition to orientation and training. The
Government has provided for this specialist in the additional financing budget.
O
Q)        3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Based on an assessment of legal and regulatory framework and institutional arrangements for
social and environment management, and the observed environmental and social
issues in agriculture sector at large, the borrower has prepared an Environment and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) with the objective of minimizing project risks and
impacts through design suggestions and/or mitigation and management measures. The ESMF is
developed through a consultative process with potential beneficiaries in selected
district and subproject site. The assessment included primary beneficiary survey of 450
households, focus group discussions with various stakeholders including vulnerable
members of the community, group meetings, institutional surveys, and consultations with local
government bodies, private and civil society organizations, and secondary
stakeholders at district and village levels. SWOT analysis was carried out to fully realize the
strengths and weaknesses, and constraints and opportunities of the existing
institutions both at national and local level.
Page 5 of 8


﻿Stakeholders' consultation: As part of IESA, stakeholder consultations were held prior to the start
of the original project with different social groups, NGOs, local government bodies and staff of
relevant line agencies. Feedback from these consultations provided input to the development of the
ESMF. The process of stakeholder consultations will continue during implementation. The ESMF
O
Q)          prepared for the project takes into account the field level situation and the existing GON policies
and requirements of the Bank's operational policies. The guidelines included in the ESMF relate to
(i) environmental and social screening of subprojects; (ii) environmental codes of practices; (iii)
integrated pest and nutrition management plan; (iv) social policies and strategies on resettlement
and rehabilitation, indigenous or vulnerable people development plan, strategy for gender
development, and community consultation and communication, (vi) institutional arrangement, and
(vii) monitoring and evaluation. All subprojects proposed to be covered under the project will
undergo environmental and social screening to determine their inclusion under the project. For
subprojects that may result in negative environmental and social impacts activities, appropriate
Environmental and Social Management plans (ESMP) would be prepared and implemented.
Planning and implementation capacity is weak with the Borrower both within the project
executing Ministry and its major departments. By and large there is lack of trained manpower with
basic knowledge on emerging environmental and social issues, weak linkage between agricultural
and other institutions directly or indirectly involved in ESMP and weak monitoring and
evaluation. Therefore, the project includes an institutional strengthening component to develop
and strengthen technical and managerial capacity both within the Ministry and its associated
institutions and agencies.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are potential value chain participants including farmer organizations and
farmer groups (commodity associations, cooperatives, women groups, etc.), traders, processors,
input suppliers, agribusinesses and other service providers. Public sector entities such as the
MOAD and its departments, local government authorities, private sector entities and NGOs, are
also important stakeholders. As part of project preparation and undertaking IESA, specific
consultations were held with various stakeholders including potential affected communities,
farmers' organizations, traders, processors, exporters, transporters and project implementers and
facilitators.
Besides making this available to farmer organizations who might participate in project activities,
ESMF will be available at the District Development Councils, District Agriculture, Livestock
Services Offices, District Chamber of Commerce and Industry, etc. The public and private sector
entities will have access to copies of the ESMF for distribution among their staff who will be
involved in project implementation.
During project implementation, the Borrower will continue to hold consultations with various
stakeholders at different levels on planning and implementing project activities. A major
awareness campaign about the project is envisaged at the district level involving potential value
chain participants and this will also be used as a forum for disclosure and consultation. In addition,
the TA component (supporting subproject planning, formulation and implementation) that is
aimed at strengthening the capacity of farmer groups and participants in the value chain will
continue to be a vehicle for consultation on social and environmental issues.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Page 6 of 8


﻿Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal                                                    07-Apr-2009
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal                                                    07-Apr-2009
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank
Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal                                                    07-Apr-2009
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank
& Date of submission to InfoShop
"In country" Disclosure
Nepal                                                    07-Apr-2009
Comments:
o        If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                            Yes [  ] No [   ]   NA [   ]
Page 7 of 8


﻿If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [   ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ ] No [ ] NA[ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
0          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
a          the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Patrick Verissimo
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)             Date: 24-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Martien Van Nieuwkoop (PMGR)         Date: 12-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


