                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSA12989
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-May-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Marshall Islands                    Project ID:    P155257
                            Project Name:      Pacific Resilience Program (P155257)
                            Task Team          Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          16-Mar-2015                         Estimated   19-Jun-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSURR                               Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):         General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (70%), Public
                                               administration- Water, sanitation and flood protection (30%)
                            Theme(s):          Natural disaster management (60%), Climate change (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:         1.65           Total Bank Financing:   1.50
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                            0.15
                              IDA Grant                                                                                     1.50
                              Total                                                                                         1.65
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objective of the Project is to strengthen the financial protection of the Republic of Marshall
                           Islands.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Republic of Marshall Islands is one of the most geographically isolated countries in the world,

                                                                         Page 1 of 4
                         with a high vulnerability to climate change. Their 370km coastline, which 99% of the population live
                         on, is exposed to regular typhoons and rising sea levels. Despite recent progress in terms of national
                         level plans and policy to respond to disaster and climate risk (i.e. the National Action Plan for
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Disaster Risk Management, 2008-2018 and the National Climate Change Policy Framework, 2011),
                         translating national climate resilience and DRM policy into sector policies and resilient investments
                         has been a significant challenge. The PREP will complement existing initiatives which aim to
                         minimize the impact of climate change and natural hazards in across the Pacific Region, and in
                         particular, support the continuation and expansion of the Pacific Catastrophe Risk Assessment and
                         Financing Initiative (PCRAFI) pilot insurance program, of which RMI is a participant.

                         RMI will participate only in PREP Component 3.1.2, which will finance part of the Government’s
                         Insurance Premium for disaster risk financing or transfer products. This will enable the continuation
                         of the Pacific catastrophe risk insurance pilot which provides catastrophe risk insurance coverage for
                         high and medium risk layers to participating PICs (including RMI) through a regional pooling
                         mechanism

                         The Project will assist the Government of RMI to pay the catastrophe insurance premium through
                         IDA after the third year of the ongoing pilot. The estimated cost of the premium for RMI is US
                         $0.5million/year for three years to provide insurance coverage for RMI against tropical cyclones and
                         earthquakes/tsunamis until 31st October 2018. The Government of RMI will provide counterpart
                         funding in the amount of US$40,000 to partially finance the premium for the year commencing
                         November 2015, US$50,000 for the year commencing November 2016, and US$ 60,000 for the year
                         commencing November 2017
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The main office for the project will be on Majuro Atoll, Republic of Marshall Islands. Due to its
                         nature as a financing project, it will have no salient physical characteristics which would be relevant
                         to a safeguards analysis.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Nicholas John Valentine (GSURR)
                         Ross James Butler (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               No             The project involves financial assistance only. There will
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      be no environmental or social interactions.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                          Physical Cultural           No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                          BP 4.10



                                                                       Page 2 of 4
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will have no potential safeguards issues because it is a financing project only.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                              RMI may choose to participate more fully in the PREP in future. Should this eventuate, a separate
                              project will be assessed
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies


                                                                       Page 3 of 4
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Denis Jean-Jacques Jordy,Michael Bonte-Grapentin
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                Date: 27-May-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 4 of 4
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
