                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                           Report No.:ISDSA19685
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                 05-Feb-2018
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed               07-Feb-2018
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                          China                         Project ID:              P154716
    Project Name:                     Anhui Aged Care System Demonstration Project (P154716)
    Task Team Leader(s):              Elena E. Glinskaya,Dewen Wang
    Estimated Appraisal               14-Dec-2017                   Estimated Board          26-Apr-2018
    Date:                                                           Date:
    Managing Unit:                    GSP02                         Financing                Investment Project
                                                                    Instrument:              Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                    Recovery) or OP            No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           197.88                         Total Bank Financing: 118.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                        Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                      79.88
    International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                       118.00
    Financing Gap                                                                                                     0.00
    Total                                                                                                       197.88
    Environmental Category:           B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?       No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objective (PDO) is to support the government of Anhui province in developing and
    managing a diversified, three-tiered aged care service delivery system for the elderly, particularly those with
    limited functional ability.
    3. Project Description
    The project has four components: (i) Supporting the development of government stewardship capacity for the
    elderly care system; (ii) Strengthening the delivery and management of community and home-based services);
    (iii) Strengthening the delivery and management of nursing care; and (iv) Project management, monitoring and
    evaluation.



                                                     Page 1 of 9
Component One: Supporting the Development of Government Stewardship Capacity (Total Cost: US$10.45
million, IBRD financing US$10.40 million)

This component will (a) support development of a unified information system to facilitate both the development
and management of the aged care service system, (b) design and pilot an assessment of functional ability and
needs to improve the effectiveness and quality of care services, (c) establish a set of quality standards for aged
care services, and (d) support training and building a professional workforce (managers and administrators) for
aged care services. This set of activities to support government stewardship capacity is a strong and innovative
feature of this project.

Component Two: Strengthening Community-based and Home-based Care Services (Total Cost: US$42.67
million, IBRD financing: US$40.87 million)

This component will strengthen the delivery and management of urban community-based and home-based care
services in two project cities - Anqing and Lu’An. This component will finance civil works, equipment, and
payments to providers of home-based care.

Subcomponent 2.1. Upgrading Community-based Service Stations System. Community-based stations will be
developed (built, upgraded, refurbished, and equipped) in Anqing and Lu’An Municipalities. The preliminary
assessment of the service stations’ design and cost estimates show that construction and equipment needs vary
across individual facilities because of the differences in their initial conditions. At this stage, the locations for
the majority of service stations have been identified. There may be new locations to be identified during project
implementation, and, given the fast pace of urbanization in Anhui, the already identified locations may change.
There will be no land acquisition for the development of the new stations and the sites will be selected through
purchasing, repurposing, and leasing of the existing infrastructure. These stations will provide daycare and
overnight care for the elderly in their communities.

Subcomponent 2.2. Purchasing of Community-based and Home-based Care Services. IBRD funds will be used
to purchase aged care services in Anqing and Lu’An Municipalities. Initially, following the current government
regulations, Sanwu, Dibao, low-income empty nesters, and the oldest elderly will comprise the eligible groups
whose functional ability and care needs will be assessed. The basket of services for the initial phase of
implementation will also follow current local practices and include (among others) such items as visits to empty
nester elderly, respite services, and personal care.

Component Three: Strengthening the Delivery and Management of Nursing care (Total Cost: US$136.90
million, IBRD financing US$58.88 million)

This component will (a) strengthen the delivery and management of urban skilled and semi-skilled nursing
facilities in three project cities, (b) increase the capacity of government-run urban welfare homes in one project
city, and (c) strengthen the capacity of government-run rural welfare homes in two project cities or counties.

Subcomponent 3.1. Urban Skilled Nursing Facilities. Construction of skilled nursing facilities will take place in
Lu’An, Anqing municipalities. The design and location of facilities conforms to good international and local
practice of concentrating facilities in places with high population density and focusing on elderly people with
significant limitations of their functional ability. In Lu’An and Anqing, nursing facilities will be attached to
public hospitals. In Lu’An (a 500-bed facility), the nursing facility will be attached to a tertiary traditional
Chinese medicine (TCM) hospital; in Anqing (a 1,000-bed facility) the nursing facility will be attached to the
Renmin hospital and will have a hospice ward (in addition to other services).

Subcomponent 3.2. Urban Welfare Homes. This subcomponent will enhance the provision of skilled and semi-


                                                  Page 2 of 9
skilled nursing care and long term care services in welfare homes by improving infrastructure and equipment in
these homes. The clients of these services are both the indigent poor elderly (Sanwu, Wubao, Dibao, Beyond
Dibao, low-income empty nesters, the oldest old elderly) and self-paying customers who have significant
limitations of their functional ability. The two project sites are located in the Ningguo (county-level city) and
Xuanzhou districts, which are under the administration of Xuancheng city. In Ningguo, about 260 beds would
be added in the existing welfare home, while in Xuanzhou the project will relocate the existing residential
welfare home to a new location and increase its capacity to 400 beds.

Subcomponent 3.3. Rural Welfare Homes. Project activities will focus on upgrading these facilities. As is the
case with the urban welfare homes, these facilities will accept self-paying customers, but the government will
assure the priority admittance of wu-bao seniors and will continue providing for their cost. 35 facilities located
in Suzhou municipality will be upgraded and equipped in accordance with the relevant national and provincial
construction standards.

Component Four: Project Management, Monitoring and Evaluation (Total Cost: US$2.68 million, all IBRD
Financing) This component will (a) support project management and build capacity in general management and
planning to ensure an effective and efficient project implementation; (b) provide technical guidance through an
expert panel to support project implementation; and (c) support the monitoring of the implementation of project
activities and the achievements of the intended results.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The Project will be implemented in Anhui province at the provincial, city and county levels, specifically the
project cities and counties are Anqing municipality, Lu'An municipality, Suzhou Municipality (including one
district and four counties - Yongqiao, Lingbi, Dangshan, Xiaoxian, Sixian), Ningguo county-level city and
Xuanzhou district of Xuancheng municipality.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Feng Ji, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
 Meixiang Zhou, Social Safeguards Specialist
 Zhefu Liu, Social Safeguards Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             It is confirmed that Environmental Assessment (OP
                                                               4.01) is triggered. The proposed physical
                                                               investments mainly include the construction or
                                                               improvement of aged care facilities in Anhui
                                                               Province (e.g. community base stations, urban and
                                                               rural welfare homes, and nursing facilities). The
                                                               scale and size of the new construction vary, ranging
                                                               from community-based stations (dozens of small
                                                               buildings with several stories) to institutional
                                                               nursing facilities (two multistory building each with
                                                               500-600 beds). The rehabilitation work is to finance
                                                               small scale civil work and equipment for existing
                                                               community- based and home-based care facilities.

                                                               The project is proposed as a category B project

                                                 Page 3 of 9
                                                        considering the type, location, sensitivity, and scale
                                                        of the project as well as the nature and magnitude
                                                        of its potential environmental impacts. Details are
                                                        in Section II.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No             The proposed project activities are located in the
                                                        urban and sub-urban areas which have been heavily
                                                        influenced by human activities. The project
                                                        activities will not affect any protected reserves,
                                                        known as natural habitats, or established or
                                                        proposed critical natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No             The project will not have impacts on the health and
                                                        quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people
                                                        and their level of dependence upon or interaction
                                                        with forests, or aims to bring about changes in its
                                                        management or protection.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No             The project will not include procurement of
                                                        pesticides or pesticide application equipment, nor
                                                        lead to substantially increased pesticide use and
                                                        subsequent increase in health and environmental
                                                        risk, or could maintain or expand present pest
                                                        management practices that are unsustainable.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No             The project will not cause adverse impacts on the
                                                        Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs) in the project
                                                        influence area.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No             The Task Team reviewed the information provided
                                                        by the engaged cities and had discussions with the
                                                        officials who are responsible for the ethnic minority
                                                        affairs in relation to any ethnic minority community
                                                        in the project areas and the community to be
                                                        affected by the activities of the project. A social
                                                        assessment was also done by a professional
                                                        consulting team to determine whether or not the IP
                                                        policy needs to be triggered. The team concluded
                                                        that the project areas in the cities are predominantly
                                                        Han Chinese and there is no ethnic minority group
                                                        as defined by OP4.10. The Bank OP 4.10 policy is
                                                        not triggered and Ethnic Minority Development
                                                        Plan (EMDP) is not required. The social assessment
                                                        was also undertaken to analyze elderly people's
                                                        needs and public demands for aged care services,
                                                        specific to citizen engagement and supports to poor
                                                        families. The findings of asocial assessment are
                                                        integrated into the project design and policy reform
                                                        of aged care system in Anhui province.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes            It is confirmed that some collective land and
                                                        structures in Xuanzhou District of Xuancheng will
                                                        be required. Other civil works are of small scale
                                                        and on existing public land. An experienced social

                                          Page 4 of 9
                                                                   safeguards consulting team has been contracted by
                                                                   the Project Management Office (PMO) to conduct
                                                                   the resettlement impact assessment of the entire
                                                                   project areas. A Resettlement Action Plan (RAP)
                                                                   has been prepared for Xuanzhou subproject
                                                                   recording that 29 households ( 94 people in total)
                                                                   will be affected by the project activities.
                                                                   Specifically, 28 households (92 people) will be
                                                                   affected by land acquisition; 5 households (19
                                                                   people) will be affected by both land acquisition
                                                                   and house demolition, and 1 household (2 people)
                                                                   will be affected by house demolition. Xuanzhou
                                                                   District Social Welfare Home Relocation and
                                                                   Reconstruction Works (the "Works" for short) will
                                                                   require 61.35 mu permanent land acquisition in
                                                                   Xiadu Community. The house demolition will
                                                                   affect 1,268.64 sqm of land where 6 households (21
                                                                   people) reside. In case of any additional land
                                                                   acquisition or resettlement emerging during project
                                                                   implementation, a Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                   (RPF) is also prepared to guide future land
                                                                   acquisition and resettlement in building community
                                                                   service stations which are foreseeable to be mostly
                                                                   located among existing residential buildings. For
                                                                   hospitals in Lu’An and Anqing which include
                                                                   institutional elderly care facilities, a due diligence
                                                                   review was done. It showed that there is a legacy
                                                                   issue of 111 households in Lu'An and 195
                                                                   households in Anqing waiting for resettlement
                                                                   houses that are under construction. The resettlement
                                                                   houses are planned to be ready for these to-be-
                                                                   resettled people in 2018. This resettlement will be
                                                                   monitored and ensured during the project
                                                                   implementation.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                     No               The project will not finance construction or
                                                                   rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                   policy. This polices is not triggered.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                   The project is not on international waterways.
    7.50
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No               The project is not in disputed areas.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project will bring positive social benefits to local communities. It will not have any significant adverse
    environmental or social impacts given that the investments are mainly for the rehabilitation of the existing aged
    care facilities which are distributed across five cities/district (i.e. Xuanzhou, Ningguo, Lu'An, Suzhou, Anqing)

                                                     Page 5 of 9
in Anhui Province. The rehabilitation is to finance small scale civil work and provision of equipment for the
existing communities-based and home-based care facilities. The scale and size of the new construction vary,
ranging from community-based stations (dozens of small buildings with several stories) to institutional nursing
facilities (three multistory building each with 500-600 beds). Potential principal adverse impacts are
construction-related impacts including dust, noise, wastewater and short disturbance to local communities.
Potential adverse impacts during project implementation include disposal of domestic waste and wastewater
from facilities, and limited amount of medical waste from the nursing facilities (approximately 87 tons/year in
total). Due diligence was conducted confirming that these waste and wastewater could be collected and disposed
by the existing treatment facilities in accordance with relevant Chinese regulations.

OP4.12 is triggered because land acquisition and resettlement will be required for a welfare home reconstruction
in Xuanzhou. Project activities will affect 29 households (94 people), through land acquisition and house
demolition. Specifically, 28 households (92 people) will be affected by land acquisition; 5 households (19
people) will be affected by both land acquisition and house demolition, and 1 household (2 people) will be
affected by house demolition. Xuanzhou District Social Welfare Home Relocation and Reconstruction Works
(the "Works" for short) will require 61.35 mu permanent land acquisition in Xiadu Community. Of these
61.35mu, 42.475 mu is the area of paddy fields, 1.83 mu is the area of vegetable plots, 2.96 mu is the area of
woodland, 1.12 mu is the area of dry land, 8.04 mu is the area of ponds, 0.925 mu is the area of homestead, 0.53
mu is the area of bamboo forests, 0.07 mu is the area of roads, 0.74 mu is the area of ditches, and 2.66 mu is the
area of river channels. The project activities will require demolishing private houses of 6 households (21 people)
and the total construction area will be 1,268.64m². Among these 6 households, 5 households (19 people) will be
also affected by land acquisition.

Due diligence reviews were conducted for hospitals in Anqing and Lu'An which would add institutional elderly
care facilities as project activities. The due diligence review concluded that most compensation and resettlement
has been completed by December 2015. At the same time, in Lu'An hospital as a consequence of 31.7 mu land
acquisition, there remain 111 households waiting to be placed in resettlement houses. The resettlement site
called Lijing Yuan has been generally completed (by the time of this project appraisal) and it is planned that it
will be ready for living in July 2018. In Anqing hospital case, the construction started in 2014 and major works
have been completed in 2016. Now the construction is nearly finished and the Bank-financed activities will
include equipment and internal decoration of an aged-care facilities within the hospital. As a consequence of 282
mu land acquisition for the Anqing hospital, there are 195 affected households waiting to be placed in
resettlement houses. The resettlement site called Nanshan Xiaoqu has resettlement buildings that have been
completed. This resettlement site has enough houses for all to-be-resettled households and they are planned to be
ready for living in 2018. The displaced people have been receiving transitional living subsidies, are satisfied
with the compensation package and are willing to wait for the resettlement sites which are nearly completed will
be ready for living in 2018.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
N/A
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
Most of the physical investments are for rehabilitation/upgrading of existing aged-care facilities.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
An Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) has been developed for the project as a stand-alone
document. The ESMP summarizes key environmental impacts and risks, proposes site-specific mitigation
measures for design, construction, and operation, including (i) provision of collection and/ treatment facilities
for wastewater, and waste to be generated at the aged care facilities; (ii) provision of fire-fighting facilities; (iii)

                                                    Page 6 of 9
requirements for universal access design of the facilities to be rehabilitated and constructed under the project;
and (iv) ECOPs for construction (see ESMP’s Annex 1). These measures for construction phase will be entered
into bidding documents and the implementation of the mitigation measures will be supervised by relevant
institutions. Specific mitigation measures during operation include (i) disposal of waste and wastewater from
these facilities; and (ii) maintenance of safety facilities and emergency plan for accidents. The ESMP also
includes a social impact management plan, and specifies monitoring plan (e.g. monitoring requirements for
waste, noise etc..), institutional arrangements (e.g. roles and responsibilities for provincial PMO, city PMOs,
civil work contractors, on-site supervisors etc..), capacity building (e.g. environmental training), and estimated
budget of the ESMP implementation.

A resettlement action plan (RAP) is prepared and approached avoidance to land acquisition and resettlement
relocations. Only Xuancheng city will have land acquisition and resettlement. The RAP described the adverse
impacts related to land-taking, structure demolition by an aged care center. Consistent with World Bank Policy
OP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement, the objectives of resettlement planning have been to ensure that incomes
and living standards are improved (or at least restored) for all persons adversely affected by the project. Special
care has been taken in resettlement planning to ensure that rehabilitation measures are sufficient for land loss
people in those areas where the land-taking from peri-urban are comparatively high.

For the legacy issues of remaining resettlement sites identified by the due diligence review, further monitoring
and evaluation for the distribution of remaining resettlement houses, responding actions of assurance of full
compliance of resettlement policies and regulations in Lu’An and Anqing are planned to continue until the
resettlement is entirely completed during the project implementation. This is included in the RAP of this project.

Given that the project may consist of some activities for which impacts cannot be determined until the activity
details have been identified during project implementation, an ESMF and RPF have been prepared, setting out
the guidelines and procedures to address the environmental and social impacts of the project activities.

The implementing agency is the Department of Civil Affairs (DOCA) of Anhui Province, that is responsible for
overall project implementation. A provincial project management office (PMO) has been established and housed
in DOCA, Under PPMP, municipality, city, or county levels PMO have been established. The PPMO will be
responsible for overall coordination with local PMOs through the project preparation and implementation
periods. Experienced safeguards consultants have been engaged by provincial PMO during project preparation
to prepare safeguards. External consultants will be engaged to monitor the implementation of safeguards
documents. The borrower capacity to plan and implement the safeguards measures are deemed satisfactory.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
In accordance with OP4.01, public consultations have been conducted during the EA process, including
meetings with project affected people and local Environmental Protection Bureaus. The consultation on the EA
safeguards document was undertaken from 2016 to July 2017. Feedback and concerns from the consultation
have been addressed in the project design and in the EA documents. The draft EA documents were locally
disclosed at the governmental website on July 21, 2017 with a notice published at local newspaper on July 20,
2017. The final ESMP and ESMF were disclosed in-country on December 21, 2017. The ESMP and ESMF was
disclosed on the World Bank's external website on December 27, 2017 and December 28, 2017 respectively.

In line with OP 4.12, public consultations have also been conducted in the affected areas with the affected
farmers and other stakeholders from 2016 to July 2017, and relevant assessment has been done with the detailed
mitigation measures agreed and arranged for land acquisition and resettlement, social impact assessment was
done based on field investigation, interviews and surveys with local official and residents in project sites as well.
The Social Assessment (SA) was disclosed on the government website on November 23, 2017 and the Bank's


                                                  Page 7 of 9
   external website on the same day. The final documents of Resettlement Action Plan (RAP), Due Diligence
   Review (DDR), Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) were disclosed at the government website and the World
   Bank's external website on January 3, 2018.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                               23-Oct-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                            27-Dec-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    China                                                                         21-Dec-2017
 Comments: The Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Environmental and Social
 Management Framework (ESMF) were disclosed on the government website on December 21, 2017. The ESMP
 and ESMF was disclosed on the World Bank's external website on December 27, 2017 and December 28, 2017
 respectively.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      27-Oct-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   03-Jan-2018
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 China                                                                      03-Jan-2018
 Comments: The Social Assessment (SA) was disclosed at both the government website and the World Bank's
external website on November 23, 2017. The final RAP, RPF and DDR were disclosed both in-country and the
World Bank’s external website on January 3, 2018.
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::
 n.a.


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)             Yes [X]    No []         NA    []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice            Yes [X]    No []         NA    []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                     Yes [X]    No []         NA    []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                       Yes [X]    No []         NA    []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards         Yes [X]    No []         NA    []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                         Yes [X]    No []         TBD   []

          21 Provide estimated number of people affected to date, or
          to be affected.

                                                         Page 8 of 9
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes [X]     No []   TBD   []
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)

          94 Provide estimated number of people affected to date, or
          to be affected.
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]     No []   NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]     No []   NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []   NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]     No []   NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]     No []   NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]     No []   NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                  Name:Elena E. Glinskaya,Dewen Wang
         Approved By:
         Safeguards Advisor:                   Name:                                Date:
         Practice Manager/Manager:             Name:                                Date:




                                                         Page 9 of 9
