                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA16678
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Apr-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Turkey                            Project ID:    P128605
                            Project Name:      SUSTAINABLE CITIES (P128605)
                            Task Team          Soraya Goga
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          31-Mar-2016                       Estimated   29-Sep-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSU09                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Sub-national government administration (15%), Other Renewable Energy (20%),
                                              Urban Transport (15%), Wastewater Collection and Transpo rtation (25%),
                                              General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (25%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (50%), Urban Economic
                                              Development (30%), Municipal governance and institution building (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     172.20           Total Bank Financing:                 138.70
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    5.50
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     138.70
                              Free-standing TFs for ECA CU4 Country Unit                                                 28.00
                              Total                                                                                     172.20
                            Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to improve quality, efficiency and sustainability of service


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         delivery in participating municipalities.
                          3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The proposed project will be implemented through three Components.

                         a) Component A: Sustainable City Planning and Management Systems provides technical assistance
                         to ensure comprehensive and integrated planning including support for spatial, social, environmental
                         and capital investment planning and management. This would allow municipalities to improve each
                         of their dimensions of sustainability (environment, social and financial/economic) as they move
                         along the spectrum from a planned city to a smart city. It also provides financing for feasibility
                         studies, environmental assessments and designs for sustainable investments identified through the
                         planning processes.

                         b) Component B: Municipal Investments finances sustainable investments identified through the
                         technical assistance under Component A or proven ‘no regret’ investments that support
                         environmental, social or financial sustainability.

                         c) Component C: Project Management provides financing for the management of the project.

                         The proposed project is expected to be the first in a series of projects (SOP). The SOP approach
                         allows Iller Bank (IB) and the World Bank to expand the approach vertically and horizontally as
                         investments are identified under Component A and subsequently also allows municipalities to access
                         financing as they meet eligibility requirements.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Three municipalities have been identified for participation in both Component A and B of this first
                         SOP (Mugla, Malatya and Gaziantep). Seven additional metropolitan municipalities have indicated
                         their interest in participating in Component A of the project and these were selected through
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Government of Turkey – Ministry of Environment and Urbanization priorities. These include
                         Balikesir, Kahramanmaraş, Tekirdağ, Hatay, Samsun, Ordu, and Erzurum.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Arzu Uraz (GSU03)
                         Esra Arikan (GEN03)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The project will include municipal investments for the
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      delivery of public goods, such as water, wastewater, solid
                                                                     waste, urban transport infrastructure etc. These
                                                                     investments will have primarily positive environmental
                                                                     impacts. However, these sub-projects are expected to have
                                                                     temporary environmental impacts (wastewater discharge,
                                                                     generation of dust and noise, etc.) during the construction
                                                                     and operation phases. Relevant environmental issues
                                                                     associated with the construction and operation of each
                                                                     type of subproject has been elaborated in an ESMF
                                                                     prepared by Iller Bank and approved by the World Bank.



                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                                                        Site-specific issues/impacts will be determined by Iller
                                                        Bank during the screening process, as described in the
                                                        ESMF. Sub-project EIAs, partial EIAs, and EMPs will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        prepared by the municipalities as required.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Although most of the sub-projects will be implemented in
                         4.04                           urban areas, the policy is triggered in the event that a
                                                        project site is selected in a natural habitat as defined by
                                                        the policy. The ESMF of the project states clearly that any
                                                        investment in a critical natural habitat will be ineligible
                                                        and the ESMF also stipulates that any impact on habitats
                                                        should be identified in the respective ESIA/partial ESIA/
                                                        ESMP of the sub-project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                         Physical Cultural        Yes   Exact locations of proposed sub-projects have yet to be
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           identified, but are likely to be in built-up urban areas. To
                                                        mitigate risks, OP 4.11 will be triggered. The ESMF of
                                                        the project addresses national laws and regulations
                                                        concerning investments taking place in any culturally
                                                        sensitive areas and will identify measures if any gaps are
                                                        observed between national regulations and OP 4.11. The
                                                        ESMF states that issues related to physical cultural
                                                        resources will be assessed in detail (if necessary) within
                                                        the sub-project EIA/EMPs. All construction contracts
                                                        with excavation works will have ‘chance find’ provisions
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        as a requirement of the contractor. ‘Chance find’
                                                        procedures will be discussed in the EF document.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Relevant social impacts associated with the construction
                         OP/BP 4.12                     and operation phase of each type of subproject and
                                                        corresponding entitlement and mitigation measures have
                                                        been elaborated in the LARPF that has been prepared by
                                                        Iller Bank and approved by the World Bank. The LARPF
                                                        details the institutional implementation arrangements
                                                        between Iller Bank and the municipalities and the
                                                        reporting format. The project will finance infrastructure
                                                        investments which could have temporary and permanent
                                                        land acquisition, and potential minor resettlement
                                                        impacts. Site-specific impacts will be determined by Iller
                                                        Bank and the municipalities, and sub-project RAPs or
                                                        ARAPs will be prepared and implemented by the
                                                        municipalities as required. Iller Bank will supervise the
                                                        implementation of RAPs.



                                                         Page 3 of 9
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes            Some of the potential water supply projects under
                            4.37                                       Component B, may access water from an upstream dam.
                                                                       Iller Bank and the sub-borrower municipality will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                       asked to review the existing dam according to the
                                                                       requirements of Bank's OP.
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The World Bank’s (WB) environmental and social safeguards policies require that the borrower
                              country prepare an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), integrated with
                              the Regulation on Environmental Impact Assessment (henceforth “EIA Regulation”) and WB's
                              Operational Policy for Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01) for the project. Since the exact sub-
                              project locations are not known and engineering designs not finalized at the time of appraisal, the
                              ESMF is the key document to be shared with stakeholders prior to the start of implementation.
                              Iller Bank (IB) has prepared the draft ESMF and disclosed its Executive Summary on the IB's
                              website on August 25, 2014. The draft ESMF was submitted to WB’s Board on September 17,
                              2014. The final ESMF has been disclosed on the Client’s website on March 28, 2016 (IB) and on
                              the WB’s Infoshop on March 29, 2016.

                             The ESMF provides the scope of a comprehensive environmental and social management
Public Disclosure Copy




                             approach for acknowledging the potential environmental and social impacts of the project.
                             Furthermore, it provides technical inputs and guidance for the project from an environmental and
                             social management perspective. Therefore, the application and implementation of the ESMF will
                             guide the integration of social and environmental aspects into the decision-making process of all
                             stages related to planning, design, execution, operation and maintenance of sub-projects, by
                             identifying, preventing and/or minimizing adverse social and environmental impacts early in the
                             project cycle.

                             Finally, the ESMF guides the sub-borrowers on the requirements for meeting the WB safeguards
                             standards which were triggered during appraisal stage, which are: Environmental Assessment (OP
                             4.01), Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11), Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) and Safety of
                             Dams (OP 4.37).

                             The policy on Natural Habitats (OP 4.04) is triggered in order to allow for an opportunity to assess
                             the biodiversity and proposed activities in proximity to or in natural habitats. The ESMF states
                             clearly that activities will be ineligible if they are assessed to have any impact on critical natural
                             habitats.

                             World Bank safeguard policies also apply to technical assistance studies and will apply to
                             Component A of the project. The safeguards requirements should be part of the Terms of


                                                                        Page 4 of 9
                         Reference for consultancy services financed under the Project. With respect to the technical
                         assistance outputs, in the event that the World Bank finances the implementation of the outputs,
                         World Bank safeguards policies would apply to the implementation. In the event that the World
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Bank does not finance implementation of the technical assistance outputs, the World Bank would
                         not be responsible for the use or non-use of the outputs.

                         With regard to policy on International Waterways (OP 7.50), IB is responsible for ensuring that
                         the sub-projects financed are located and dependent on national waterways only. The waterways
                         identified as NOT an international waterway (do not trigger OP 7.50) in Turkey are the following:
                         Susurluk, North Aegean, Gediz, Kuçuk Menderes, Buyuk Menderes, Western Mediterranean,
                         Antalya, Sakarya, Western Black Sea, Yesilirmak, Kizilirmak, Konya Kapali, Eastern
                         Mediterranean, Seyhan, Ceyhan, Eastern Black Sea, Burdur, Afyon, Orta, Anadolu, and Van.

                         Iller Bank has prepared a separate document (Land Acquisition and Resettlement Policy
                         Framework – LARPF) (for which the details are provided in the section below) to address the
                         Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP 4.12).

                         Site specific EIA's for category A projects will be sent to the World Bank's Board for information.

                         Social Impacts (including Safeguards)
                         Social Impacts: Anticipated social impacts include temporary and permanent land acquisition and
                         temporary and permanent potential resettlement under Component B: Infrastructure Investments.
                         In the pre-appraisal stage, project specific potential social and economic issues were identified as:
                         (i) access issues in new water schemes for areas where drinking water facilities are introduced; (ii)
                         vicinity of discharge units of waste-water facilities to residential areas and houses (without permits
                         most probably) located at the edge of river beds where discharge is planned; and (iii) economic
                         resettlement of minibus drivers in modernization of urban transport. Municipalities will address
                         these issues in a timely manner and take measures to minimize the potential negative impact
                         incurred by new investments under Component B.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Safeguard Policies: The project may involve land acquisition and related impacts which triggers
                         OP/BP 4.12 “Involuntary Resettlement”. The relevant Turkish legislation and World Bank OP
                         4.12 will both be followed. In cases where there are gaps between the legal regimes, measures will
                         be taken to meet the standards set in OP 4.12.

                         The LARPF outlines, in detail, the expropriation procedures for land acquisition in Turkey, World
                         Bank’s OP 4.12 policy on Involuntary Resettlement, a gap analysis, steps to bridge these gaps and
                         institutional responsibilities. The final LARPF has been disclosed on the client’s website on March
                         28, 2016 (Iller Bank) and on the World Bank’s Infoshop on March 28, 2016. All site specific
                         environmental and social documents prepared for each sub-project will be consulted with the
                         relevant stakeholders according to the process defined in the ESMF and LARPF.

                         Citizen Engagement (CE): The project finances investments in services such as sewage treatment
                         and public transport that citizens expect municipalities to provide. Furthermore, some of the
                         participating municipalities have reported significant public pressure for the provision of these
                         services. Based on a Diagnostic Assessment, all municipalities currently proposed for
                         participation in this first in the series of projects (SOP) have active Grievance Redressal
                         Mechanisms in place. Balikesir uses ‘sms’ and online tracking in responding to queries or
                         complaints from residents. Malatya uses an online service and a telephone line to receive

                                                                    Page 5 of 9
                           complaints and to provide appointments to citizens to meet with municipal officials. The response
                           time to citizens is approximately one week, and 60 days, at most. For Mugla, when a complaint is
                           submitted through the call center, citizens receive a tracking number on their cell phones. Actions
Public Disclosure Copy




                           can be tracked online using this number. Gaziantep also utilizes a ‘sms’ and online mechanism
                           where people can use either phone or internet.

                           Nevertheless, Grievance Redress Committees (GC) will be formed under the project by the
                           Metropolitan Municipalities and municipal water and wastewater utilities. These will include
                           representatives from the municipalities and/or municipal water and wastewater utilities, and
                           representatives of the affected people. The representatives will be chosen from the affected
                           community in a participatory, accessible and transparent manner. The GC will mediate with the
                           affected party to resolve the issues brought to its attention to avoid or minimize, to the extent
                           possible, the need for involvement of the formal channels for dispute resolution such as courts.
                           Information on the GC will be included in the Land Acquisition and Resettlement Action Plans
                           which would be site specific.

                           Under Component A, technical assistance could be provided for municipalities to strengthen
                           citizen engagement and enhance social assessment capabilities for urban planning. Component A
                           may also support mechanisms to measure beneficiary feedback indicators for investments under
                           Component B.

                           Gender-disaggregated data will be collected at all levels. The project monitoring mechanism will
                           also disaggregate beneficiary-based indicators on gender. Regarding land and compensation
                           issues, although land ownership is mostly in favor of men in Turkey, women-land owners will be
                           given extra attention to ensure that they receive a fair amount of compensation.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Since the final designs of the sub-investments are not complete and the exact locations of the sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           projects are not known at appraisal stage, the environmental impacts will be assessed during the
                           sub-project's ESIA/ESMP stage, as detailed in the ESMF document.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Project location and technical (process) alternatives will be detailed in sub-project specific ESIAs.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The LARPF and the ESMF acceptable to WB has been prepared by IB. Both the ESMF and
                           LARPF are also integrated into the Project Operations Manual. In accordance with this ESMF, IB
                           will be responsible for screening sub- projects based on the WB’s environmental categories of A,
                           B, and C. The municipalities will be responsible for carrying out the environmental assessments.
                           Based on the magnitude of impacts, municipalities will be responsible for preparing an ALARAP
                           or LARAP. They will send these documents to IB for review and clearance. IB will then send
                           these documents to the WB for approval.

                           OP 4.12 also applies if land was acquired in anticipation of or in preparation for a project and the
                           land is directly linked to the WB-financed project. If land acquisition procedures were completed
                           at the time the LARPF is approved, a retroactive Audit Report will be prepared by the
                           Municipality and submitted to IB to be submitted to the WB to ensure that land acquisition was


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           completed in accordance with the objectives and principles of OP 4.12.

                           As the borrower and FI, IB has gained extensive experience in implementing similar projects
Public Disclosure Copy




                           under the Municipal Services Project. IB’s technical staff have attended several safeguard training
                           programs provided by the WB and they are capable of implementing environmental and social
                           safeguards according to ESMF and LARPF. However, the WB will continue to provide prior and
                           post reviews according to the details provided in the ESMF and LARPF.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include the Treasury, IB, the participating metropolitan municipalities, their
                           utility companies, and municipal residents. Public consultation and disclosure requirements of
                           individual sub-projects are described in the ESMF and detailed in LARPF. Disclosure of the
                           ESMF document was completed on March 28, 2016, and of the LARPF was completed on March
                           28, 2016; both documents were published in WB's Infoshop on March 29, 2016 and March 28,
                           2016, respectively.

                           OP 4.12 requires full public disclosure of LARPF and LARAPs. For this project, Municipalities
                           are responsible for arranging consultation meetings prior to land acquisition procedures with the
                           affected persons to discuss the LARPF, the draft LARAPs, and resettlement planning and
                           implementation, if any.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        28-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     29-Mar-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        17-Sep-2014
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
Public Disclosure Copy




                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        28-Mar-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     28-Mar-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?

                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Soraya Goga
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Zeynep Durnev Darendeliler (SA)                Date: 28-Apr-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: David N. Sislen (PMGR)                        Date: 29-Apr-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
