INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSAI 189
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Aug-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 01-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Gambia, The                Project ID:  P152659
Project Name: Gambia Electricity Sector Support Project (P152659)
Task Team       Daniel Camos Daurella,Manuel Jose Millan Sanchez
Leader(s):
Estimated       26-Aug-2015                Estimated    24-Feb-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEE07                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General energy sector (34%), Thermal Power Generation (33%), Transmission
and Distribution of Electricity (33%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      18.50            Total Bank Financing:   18.50
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                18.50
Total                                                                      18.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to increase the availability and reliability of electricity supply.
3. Project Description
The proposed project will provide immediate investment needs and institutional support to NAWEC
as part of its strategy to redress its financial and operational performance in the short to medium
Page 1 of 7


﻿term. The GESP seeks a phased approach with an immediate focus on rehabilitation and efficiency
enhancement as a means to engage in The Gambia's electricity sector and build confidence for
longer term engagement for sector reform. The GESP will complement other short term and medium
term interventions. In line with this objective, the GESP will support investments that aim at
O
Q)       improving (i) generation capacity; (ii) transmission and distribution networks as well as commercial
performance; and (iii) utility management capabilities for optimizing process and reducing
inefficiencies within the sector. The GESP will facilitate the development of technical, commercial
and financial capacity of NAWEC. This operation will focus on the GBA, where the vast majority of
Gambia's electricity is consumed. The GESP consists of the following three components.
Component 1: Rehabilitation of Critical Generation in Kotu and Brikama (US$7 million). This
component will finance improvements of NAWEC's generation capacity and efficiency in the
existing Kotu and Brikama thermal power plants. This will be in the form of rehabilitation of
required equipment, provision of critical spare parts, and financing urgent maintenance activities.
This support is critical in view of the worsening generation scenario in The Gambia. The Project
component will be divided in the following two subcomponents:
*      Sub-Component 1(a): Rehabilitation of the Kotu thermal power plant (US$5 million). The
GESP will finance the rehabilitation and maintenance of one 6.4 MW engine (group 8 - G8), and
provide the necessary material for a major overhaul (24,000 hours overhaul) of another 6.4 MW
engine (group 9 - G9). In addition, it will finance electrical equipment, and rehabilitate and replace a
number of damaged equipment that are critical for restoring the functionality, providing operation
reliability and improving the power plant efficiency.
*      Sub-Component 1(b): Rehabilitation of the Brikama thermal power plant (US$2 million).
The GESP will finance the rehabilitation of group 1 (Gl) in Brikama power plant. This investment
will restore current suppressed generation due to breakdown in the group. GI in Brikama is a 6.4
MW engine which has been down since 2011.
Component 2: Reduction of technical and commercial losses in the GBA (US$4.5 million). This
component will finance improvements in the transmission and distribution network in the GBA. The
project will contribute to reduce forced outages as well as to diminish voltage drop, thus improving
customer satisfaction. It will also generate higher supply continuity and quality, and increase
prepayment metering, which will revert in higher returns. The improvements of the network will
o        impact positively in the operations of NAWEC, reducing losses through the following two
subcomponents:
Sub-Component 2(a): Reduction of technical losses by upgrading and rehabilitating the
existing T&D network (US$3.3 million). The GESP will finance the installation of new transformers
in order to off-load the existing installations, and the replacement of undersized conductors,
distribution feeder pillars, and other auxiliaries. The project will cover the upgrading and
rehabilitation of existing distribution systems in specific areas of the GBA, the upgrading of two
power transformers in Mile 5 and Medina substations, the substitution of switchgear in Wellingara
substation, and the installation of capacitor banks in Wellingara and Mile 5 for reactive power
compensation.
*      Sub-Component 2(b): Reduction of commercial losses by improving metering (US$1.2
million). Currently, about 85 percent of GBA consumers are provided with prepayment meters. The
remaining 15 percent are provided with conventional credit meters.The component will finance the
installation of 15,000 new prepayment meters for customers to cope an additional 10 percent of
consumers. Moreover, the project will finance calibration equipment for meters, and secondary
Page 2 of 7


﻿substation metering.
Component 3: Institutional Strengthening and Project Implementation Support (US$7 million). This
component is comprised of the following three sub components:
U
Sub-Component 3(a): Service contract for NAWEC management support (US$5.5 million).
GESP will finance a service contract for NAWEC for a period of approximately four years to
strengthen NAWEC's technical, financial and managerial capacity, as well as to provide procurement
assistance to the Project Management Team (PMT) located in NAWEC in charge of project
implementation. The recruited consultant will assess NAWEC on implementing the necessary
reforms and on defining a robust integrated IT system to integrate accounting, billing, payroll, stock,
etc. This system shall ease the process of separation of electricity, water and sewerage accounts. The
contractor will also provide specific staff to support procurement and financial management of GESP
during implementation.
*      Sub-Component 3(b): Owner's Engineer (US$1.3 million). The project will finance an
Owner's Engineer to perform the supervision of component 1 and 2 execution.
*      Sub-Component 3 (c): Tariff model update for PURA (US$0.2 million). The GESP will
finance a consultancy contract in order to update the existing tariff model developed in 2009.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
To be determined
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Fatou Fall (GSURR)
Melissa C. Landesz (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         The activities to be financed under Component 1 (existing
U         Assessment OP/BP 4.01               power plants) will consist of equipment rehabilitation and
maintenance while component 2 will focus on upgrading
of existing substations, transmission and distribution
within existing networks and the installation of new
transformers.
The implementation of the project activities will have
both positive and negative environmental and social
impacts. The negative impacts which need specific
attention will occur during the operation of the power
plants are related to pollution from waste
mismanagement, noises, occupational risks and safety at
work, socio-economic damages in the occurrence of
accidental fire in the facilities.
The borrower prepared an ESMP to address potential
negative impacts and propose mitigation measures. The
ESMP was reviewed and validated by the Bank and
disclosed in-country and at the Infoshop on August 6,
2015.
Page 3 of 7


﻿Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           Two Project sites, Mile 2 and Mile 5 substations, are
4.04                                 within a wetland reserve and Ramsar site, the Tanbi
Wetland Complex. Both facilities already exist and there
is neither expansion into the wetland nor use of the
surroundings of the substations for any Project activity.
The only activity at Mile 2 and Mile 5 substations will be
the replacement of capacitor banks. Workers will access
the substations using existing access routes.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project will not support activities related to forest
exploitation or management.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not finance pesticides and none of the
supported activities will indirectly induce use of
pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No           In The Gambia, sand and gravel are supplied by
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 companies registered for that purpose, and sourced from
Government evaluated, and approved quarries (through
the Geological Department, GD). These quarries are
routinely monitoring by the GD and NEA. The current
operational quarries around NAWEC's Project sites for
sand is Kachumeh, and for gravel, Kubuneh and Pirang.
There are no known sites of cultural significance around
these quarries. Nonetheless, as a precautionary measure,
the ESMP requires that all suppliers be approved by the
NEA & GD, and only use Government approved quarries.
Regarding clearance for right of way of transmission
lines, it has been confirmed that there are no sacred sites
within or along those routes.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no indigenous people in the project intervention
BP 4.10                              areas.
Involuntary Resettlement No          OP 4.12 is not triggered. The project will not finance any
OP/BP 4.12                           activities requiring involuntary land acquisition resulting
in
A.     Involuntary resettlement of people and/or loss of
(or access to) assets, means of livelihoods or resources
and
B.     The involuntary restriction of access to legally
designated parks and protected areas resulting in adverse
impacts on the livelihoods of the displaced persons.
The activities to be financed under Component 1 (existing
power plants) will consist of equipment rehabilitation and
maintenance while component 2 (upgrading of existing
substations, transmission and distribution within existing
networks and the installation of new transformers) will
take place only on public domain and/or the right of ways.
An ESMP has been elaborated by the client and will be
published both in country and at the info shop prior to
Page 4 of 7


﻿appraisal.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           N/A
4.37
o
Projects on International  No        N/A
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The activities to be financed under Component 1 (existing power plants) will consist of equipment
rehabilitation and maintenance while component 2 will focus on upgrading of existing substations,
transmission and distribution within existing networks and the installation of new transformers.
The potential negative environmental and social impacts of these activities are expected to be
small to moderate, site-specific and can be significantly reduced or eliminated through adequate
mitigation measures. Potential negative impacts include oil spills affecting land, water, agriculture,
tourism, and habitants of the polluted land; accidents (Public and Occupational) such as road
traffic, falls, electrocution, and bums; air pollution during operation of the generators. Proposed
mitigation measures include among others implementing a sludge management plan including spill
prevention; environmental monitoring of air quality; use of alternative fuel producing less or no
sludge; provision and use of personal protective gear; training and provision of safety information;
adequate management and disposal of waste.
The Borrower has prepared an ESMP to address potential negative impacts and propose mitigation
measures. The ESMP was reviewed and validated by the Bank and disclosed in-country and at the
Infoshop on August 6, 2015.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There are no foreseen potential indirect and/or long term impacts linked to project activities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Borrower has prepared an ESMP to address potential negative impacts and propose mitigation
measures. The ESMP was reviewed and validated by the Bank and disclosed in-country and at the
Infoshop on August 6, 2015.
The Project Management Team (PMT) will includean environmental and social specialist who will
monitor compliance with World Bank safeguards procedures. An existing staff will be designated
within NAWEC and will benefit from training from Bank specialists.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultations with stakeholders (relevant institutional personnel and community heads) were held
Page 5 of 7


﻿to (1) provide information about the project and to tap stakeholder information on key
environmental and social baseline information in the project area; (2) to provide opportunities to
stakeholders to discuss their opinions and concerns; and (3) to inform the process of developing
appropriate management measures as well as institutional arrangements for effective
O
implementation of the project.
Benefits of the proposed project identified by the respondents include efficient electricity supply
that shall subsequently improve value of the area, quality of life, businesses, health and education
amongst others. The new T and D structures shall ensure public and worker safety.
Questions were raised on the equitable distribution and benefit of supply through routing of lines
in particular access of electricity to poor households.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              30-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           06-Aug-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Gambia, The                                              05-Aug-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 6 of 7


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
a          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Daniel Camos Daurella,Manuel Jose Millan Sanchez
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 30-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)            Date: 01-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


