                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC12073

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 29-May-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 11-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Panama                           Project ID:      P154275
                            Project Name:      Burunga Wastewater Management Project (P154275)
                            Task Team          Miguel Vargas-Ramirez,Hector Alexander Serrano
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          16-Mar-2017                      Estimated        15-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWA03                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    150.20                     Total Bank Financing:         65.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                       9.30
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                         65.00
                              Development Bank of Latin America (CAF)                                       25.90
                              EC European Investment Bank                                                   50.00
                              Total                                                                        150.20
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To (i) improve access to sanitation services, (ii) reduce environmental pollution from wastewater
                           generated in targeted areas of Panama Oeste, and (iii) to strengthen wastewater pollution
                           management capacity in Panama
                           C. Project Description
                           1.      The Project would support the PBCSP’s first intervention in the Panama Oeste Province. The
                           Project would focus primarily on Arraijan’s sub-division (Corregimiento) of Burunga given its rapid
                         urban growth, high urban poverty level and its current lack of a sewerage system (only 9 percent of
                         households are connected to a sewerage network). Burunga is within the Country’s urban population
                         bottom 40 percent according to an analysis of Unsatisfied Basic Needs . The Project would also help
Public Disclosure Copy




                         lay the groundwork for comprehensive wastewater management throughout Arraijan and La
                         Chorrera to improve sanitation facilities and contribute to the environmental recovery of urban rivers
                         and the Panama Bay.

                         2.       The Project preliminary cost is US$ 220 million with the World Bank loan of US$ 100
                         million. The Project would be carried out in coordination with the Development Bank of Latin
                         America (CAF) and the OPEC Fund for International Development (OFID), and would utilize
                         parallel or complementary financing. A counterpart funding of USD 20 million is estimated. A
                         description of the components is presented below and a preliminary financing plan is included in
                         Annex 3.

                         3.       Component One. Construction of a new sewerage system in Burunga. This component would
                         finance the implementation of a sewerage system throughout Arraijan’s sub-division of Burunga that
                         would include the design and construction of a separate secondary network, collectors, pumping
                         stations, and a tertiary network to permit household connections. In addition, the sewerage works
                         contract would include minor drainage and road access improvements.

                         4.      The World Bank would finance one of Burunga’s three sectors, and the OFID and CAF
                         would finance the remaining two. The sector the Bank would finance would service a design
                         population of 31,000 people (41% of the Burunga population) and would function independently of
                         the other two sectors given that it would be connected to the wastewater treatment plant (Component
                         2). Refer to Figure 2 to see a map of the three sectors.

                         5.        Component Two. Wastewater treatment in Burunga. This component would finance the
                         construction of a Wastewater Treatment Plant (WWTP) with a preliminary design capacity of 300 l/s
                         to treat the wastewater collected in the newly constructed system, as well as part of the operation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         maintenance of the plant. The World Bank would finance this component through a design, build and
                         operate (DBO) contract. Under this model, the DBO contractor would design, build and operate the
                         plant for seven years. In addition, the DBO contract would include the operation and maintenance of
                         the new sewerage system (Component 1). The Bank would finance the first years of operation as part
                         of the guarantee period. Under this model, the DBO contractor would provide specific training to
                         IDAAN and PCBSP staff on the operation of the WWTP and of the networks to ensure its long-term
                         operational sustainability.

                         6.        Component Three. Sustainable Wastewater Management throughout Panama Oeste. This
                         Component would address two institutional strengthening priorities: water pollution control and
                         wastewater facilities operation. Under the first subcomponent, the project will finance the
                         development of an integrated water pollution management plan for Panama Oeste to strengthen
                         ANAM and PCBSP monitoring and planning capacity. The Plan would determine a water quality
                         baseline and monitoring strategy, source of pollutions (hotspots), define water quality objectives, and
                         recommend infrastructure investments, as well as additional analytical studies and policies to
                         improve environmental sustainability. The second subcomponent will support PCBSM and IDAAN
                         on structuring long-term operational models for sewerage infrastructure management. This will also
                         include a variety of knowledge exchange events such as conferences, workshops, training, and study
                         visits to assist PCBSP and IDAAN’s staff with the gradual transition of the operation, maintenance,
                         and management of wastewater facilities. During preparation, the team would carry out an evaluation
                         of current initiatives/activities and would coordinate with other agencies and donors to better define
                         activities under this component and avoid possible duplication. The World Bank would finance this
                         component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         7.       Component 4. Feasibility Studies for Panama Oeste and Project Administration. This
                         component would finance: (i) initial feasibility studies and basic designs to extend the PCBSP
                         throughout La Chorrera and Arraijan; (ii) a project management consulting firm (Project Manager) to
                         provide quality control, monitoring and inspection, and procurement support for Components 1 and
                         2; and (iii) the PCU’s project administration activities, which include compliance with fiduciary
                         management, reporting requirements and monitoring activities, and implementation of the
                         Environmental and Social Management Plan, which contains Civil Engagement Strategy, gender
                         analysis, and Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM). A social assessment will be conducted
                         during project preparation to define the scope of these activities, as well as to ensure poor household
                         are prioritized. This World Bank, the OFID, and the CAF would finance this component.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         8.     The Project activities will directly benefit the subsection of Burunga, within the District of
                         Arraijan, and will lay the groundwork for comprehensive wastewater management throughout
                         Arraijan and La Chorrera. The District of Arraiján is located on a plain (about 100 m.a.s.l on
                         average) with depressions and elevations such as the Cabra and Galera hills. It is characterized by its
                         high water resources concentration with 54 rivers and streams, where the most important ones
                         include the Caimito, Aguacate, Potrero, Paja and Velasquez rivers. In general, these rivers are short,
                         narrow and of small basin areas. Burunga, enjoys rich natural and water resources of which stand out
                         the Bosque Protector de Arraijan (Arraijan Protective Forest) and El Chorro, a historically touristic
                         waterfall once popular among Panamanians. All of these rivers and streams discharge their waters to
                         the Panama Bay in the Pacific Ocean. The natural richness and sustainability of the area has been
                         affected by the lack of adequate sanitation in the surrounding urban communities. Only 35 percent of
                         the population in Arraijan (9 percent in Burunga) and 20 percent in La Chorrera is connected to a
Public Disclosure Copy




                         sewerage system, and the households that are connected do not receive the full benefits of household
                         sewerage connections because of the system’s poor condition. The sewerage system is not connected
                         to a WWTP, has not undergone major repairs for forty years, and cannot support additional
                         connections, which is highly problematic given the area’s dramatic population growth. The
                         remainder of the population with sanitation solutions utilizes septic tanks or pit latrines or simple
                         ground holes many of which are in a dilapidated state due to lack of maintenance, and septage
                         management services are provided by unregulated private entities. Leakages from septic tanks and
                         direct disposal of untreated wastewater into streets and urban streams have negatively affected the
                         quality of main rivers such as the Rio Caimito and El Chorro, whose water is no longer considered
                         apt for human consumption or bathing. In fact, contamination of the Rio Caimito, the main source of
                         water for the Province of Panama Oeste, has reached a level that has caused the National Water and
                         Sewer Institute (IDAAN) to consider re-locating the water filtration plant. The contamination is not
                         only altering the ecological balance and degrading the environmental health of the rivers and the
                         connecting bodies of water but is also posing a major risk to human health.

                         9.           As a direct response to the issues identified above, Components 1 and 2 would support
                         the implementation of a sewerage system throughout the sub-section of Burunga, including the
                         design and construction of secondary networks, collectors, pumping stations, force mains, and sewer
                         laterals as well as a WWTP with a design capacity of 300 l/s to treat the collected wastewater.
                         Through Components 1 and 2, the Project expects to benefit approximately 45,000 people by the
                           Project’s closing date, and 68,000 people by the end of the WWTP’s design period in 2050.

                           10.     A land parcel initially identified for the WWTP site is privately owned (owners have not
Public Disclosure Copy




                           been identified yet) and is located at the south of the Panama-Chorrera highway. Salient
                           environmental characteristics observed at the site include: (i) a stream with good water quality that
                           runs through the land parcel and collects the water from the micro-watershed , (ii) presence of
                           vegetation, particularly along the stream, which includes a small gallery forest with an ecological
                           value that would be important to preserve, and (iii) an irregular terrain with a moderate to high slope.
                           The presence of communities was observed near the borders of the identified site. This should not
                           pose a problem as the large size of the piece of land allows for the establishment of environmental
                           buffering and isolation areas. The site is easily accessible through major and secondary roads. All of
                           these characteristics particular to the site will have to be considered in the design, construction and
                           operation of the WWTP, as well as in its corresponding Environmental Impact Assessment.
                           Alternative locations will be evaluated at a later stage.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           11.     The Ministry of Health (MINSA) through the Project Coordinating Unit (PCU) for the
                           PBCSP will be responsible for the management of all safeguards aspects of the Project. The PCU has
                           already gained experience in this respect as it has been managing the environmental and social
                           aspects of the first phase of the PBCSP, and has a track record of successfully implementing sanitary
                           improvement projects with international financing .The PCU is familiar with environmental and
                           social safeguards procedures of international financing institutions, particularly from the Japan
                           International Cooperation Agency (JICA), the Latin America Development Bank (CAF) and the
                           Inter-American Development Bank (IADB).

                           12.    At present, there is a group of four professionals supporting the PCU in the management of
                           the environmental and social aspects of the PBCP. For this particular project, the PCU will contract
                           an independent Project Manager firm to supervise and provide technical assistance during its design
                           and implementation. The contracted firm will also have a professional team working on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           environmental and social aspects of the Project. The PCU is in the preparation process to adopt an
                           ISO 14001 environmental management system.

                           13.     The World Bank Safeguards Policies would apply to the entire Project (Sewerage System,
                           Pumping Stations and Wastewater Treatment System). There would be harmonization among three
                           donors with regards to the safeguards policies applicable to the Project, as well as the necessary
                           reporting and monitoring. The Bank team is conducting a review of the environmental and
                           resettlement national policies and the PBCP’s instruments, and when needed they would be
                           strengthen to ensure harmonization with Bank’s safeguards policies.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Carlos Vargas Bejarano (GEN04)
                           Ximena B. Traa-Valarezo (GSU04)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            The proposed wastewater management system will
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       have positive impacts for the public health and
                         environmental sustainability of the area, mainly
                         through the elimination of latrines and septic tanks
                         which pollute both surface and ground waters.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The team proposes the Project to be preliminarily
                         classified as an Environmental Category B, mainly
                         because (i) during the construction phase, negative
                         environmental impacts of the Project will correspond
                         to civil works that can be adequately managed by
                         environmental management plans, and (ii) during the
                         operation phase of the system, negative
                         environmental impacts that may arise from the
                         WWTP effluent and its impacts on the quality of the
                         receiving water body can be controlled by choosing
                         an appropriate wastewater treatment technology.

                         During the design phase, the PCU will perform an
                         evaluation of alternatives for the location of the
                         WWTP and will consider environmental aspects in
                         its decision. The evaluation will also consider the
                         vulnerability of the facility towards climate change
                         impacts. Two Environmental Impact Assessment
                         (EIAs) will be prepared, one for the sewerage
                         collection system and other for the WWTP and will
                         also include a Social Assessment. Once the location
                         of the WWTP is decided, an) EIAs will be carried
                         out in parallel to the technical design of the WWTP.
                         The results of the EIAs will allow the team to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         confirm the environmental category of the Project.
                         The Borrower should submit complete draft EIAs by
                         December 2015, before Project Appraisal. A
                         preliminary draft is expected to be completed by
                         mid-September 2015.

                         The PCU is in the process of contracting a Project
                         Manager private firm whose scope of work includes,
                         among others, the carrying out of environmental
                         impact assessments (EIAs), provide support to the
                         PCU in processing environmental licenses and
                         permits, and supervision during Project
                         implementation.

                         According to Panama’s environmental regulatory
                         framework (Executive Decree 123, August 14,
                         2009), a Category III Environmental Impact
                         Assessment will need to be performed for this
                         Project.
                         The EIA’s TORs and the Environmental
                         management Plans include aspects related to
                         Industrial Security and Occupational Health; when
Public Disclosure Copy




                         applicable the World Bank’s Guidelines on
                         Environment, Security and Occupational health will
                         be taken into account. The Environmental
                         Management Plan will also include specific
                         programs on industrial security and occupational
                         health, which will be applied to the project
                         construction and operation phases.

                         The Bank team will review the scope for the EIAs
                         and will ensure that the methodology used in the
                         identification and analysis of environmental impacts
                         follow best international practices.

                         Taking into account the experience of the PCU in the
                         environmental management of large sanitation
                         systems, the Bank has preliminarily agreed with the
                         PCU to use their environmental management system
                         following Panama’s environmental regulatory
                         framework and abiding to the resolutions by the
                         Ministry of Environment regarding EIAs (one for the
                         WWTP and the other for sewerage system).

                         The team has reviewed the Environmental
                         Management System used by the PCU, and it
                         verified that the system supports Panamanian
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Regulations, in particular the
                         Executive Decree 123 from 2009 (on Environmental
                         Impact Assessments). The team also reviewed the
                         Project environmental licensing, consultation process
                         and citizen’s participation as well as the Terms of
                         Reference for the Environmental Impact Assessment,
                         Category III. From that analysis, the team concluded
                         that they fulfill significantly the requirements
                         established on OP 4.01 and O.P. 4.04. The Bank
                         team requested the PCU to include into the EIA the
                         project’s particular environmental aspects such as the
                         management and final disposal of bio-solids, the
                         analysis on alternatives on the location of the WWTP
                         and the analysis on the effluent receiving body’s
                         assimilation capacity

                         Regarding other social aspects, the PCU will be
                         responsible for the implementation of the Civil
                         Engagement strategy which is part of the social
                         management scheme of the Project. The Civil
                         Engagement strategy will be designed during project
                         preparation, based on the results of the Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Assessment and consultations. The Civil
                         Engagement will take place throughout the project
                         cycle, that is: (a) during the initial diagnostic of
                         socioeconomic conditions of affected population; (b)
                         through informed consultations on the Project
                         design, (c) through the participation strategy of those
                         affected, to register their opinions and views, and to
                         ensure broad community support to the Project at
                         large; and (d) in their participation during subproject
                         implementation, and after civil works have
                         concluded, to ensure sustainability of the W&S
                         systems built or rehabilitated.

                         Gender aspects are a key part of the civil engagement
                         strategy. The social assessment and consultations
                         will identify the specific roles of men and women in
                         the project area. Women are typically the main
                         protagonists of the sector, responsible for fetching
                         water, preparing food, and cleaning the water. They
                         are also suffer the problems resulting from lack of
                         water, or by consuming contaminated water. Women
                         are typically responsible for the health and hygiene
                         education of the family. The Civil Engagement
                         participation strategy will take into account gender
                         roles to include opportunities for meaningful
Public Disclosure Copy




                         participation.

                         Given that Borrower is planning on using open-
                         market purchases and voluntary land donations to
                         acquire land, the EIA will include a procedure to
                         clearly document the voluntary nature of the
                         transaction ensuring power of choice and no
                         coercion. In addition, the EIA will include guidelines
                         for voluntary land donation that would amongst
                         others ensure that infrastructure is not site-specific;
                         that the impacts are minor and no physical relocation
                         is needed; that the land is free of squatters,
                         encroachers or other encumbrances; and that there is
                         sufficient verification through appropriate means,
                         particularly in case of voluntary people (i.e. illiterate
                         or elderly).

                         A Grievance and Redress Mechanism (GRM) will
                         also be designed for the project, to allow
                                                             stakeholders and beneficiaries to express their
                                                             concerns and complaints and to get responses within
                                                             an agreed time-frame.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The Project works to be performed will be mostly
                                                             located in urban or peri-urban areas. There are no
                                                             protected natural habitats located within or in the
                                                             proximity of the Project intervention area. However,
                                                             this safeguard policy is triggered to ensure the
                                                             environmental protection and conservation of
                                                             ecological values identified at the proposed locations
                                                             for the WWTP.

                                                             Following the results of the evaluation of alternatives
                                                             for the WWTP location, site- specific EIAs will be
                                                             carried out for the chosen sites. These EIAs will
                                                             establish all the relevant measures for environmental
                                                             protection, conservation and management of
                                                             ecological values of the sites.

                                                             If the proposed land visited by the Bank team during
                                                             the exploratory mission is selected for the WWTP
                                                             site, the following environmental protection
                                                             measures will need to be followed: (i) the small
                                                             gallery forest that protects the stream that runs along
                                                             the site will need to be preserved, (ii) enough land
                                                             will need to be acquired to establish an
                                                             environmental buffer zone between the facility and
                                                             the nearby communities, (iii) after identification of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             predominant wind regimes, live barriers and odor
                                                             control technology at the Plant to prevent foul odors
                                                             will need to be established, and (iv) appropriate
                                                             wastewater technology taking in consideration the
                                                             natural conditions of the receiving water body.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No    The Project will only finance activities in urban or
                                                             peri-urban areas, with no intervention of forests or
                                                             mangroves within nor in the immediate proximity of
                                                             the Project’s areas of intervention.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The Project will not finance activities involving the
                                                             acquisition or use of pesticides in large quantities.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   TBD   Based on a preliminary assessment it is unlikely that
                         OP/BP 4.11                          physical cultural resources would be found in the
                                                             Project area. The team will assess whether there is a
                                                             need to include chance find procedures in the
                                                             Environmental Management Plans as project
                                                             preparation progresses.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      TBD   Thus far, no indigenous communities have been
                                 4.10                                                                                   identified in Burunga. However, the Social
                                                                                                                        Assessment will determine the presence of
                                                                                                                        indigenous communities in the Project area. In the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        event that there are indigenous communities in the
                                                                                                                        Project area, an Indigenous Peoples Policy
                                                                                                                        Framework will be elaborated by the borrower, with
                                                                                                                        the World Bank’s support.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        Studies undertaken at the moment indicate that
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                involuntary resettlement is not likely to happen.
                                                                                                                        However, land for the WWTP and pump stations will
                                                                                                                        need to be acquired for construction of civil works
                                                                                                                        and easement rights will need to be negotiated with
                                                                                                                        property owners for the construction of the networks
                                                                                                                        and collectors. Therefore, the Policy is triggered and
                                                                                                                        a Resettlement Policy Framework will be elaborated
                                                                                                                        by the borrower, with technical assistance of the
                                                                                                                        Bank team. During preparation the team will also
                                                                                                                        follow closely negotiations and procedures for land
                                                                                                                        acquisition of the WWTP.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The Project will neither support the construction or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of dams nor will it support other
                                                                                                                        investments which rely on services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The Project will not finance activities involving the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   use or potential pollution of international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The Project will not finance activities in disputed
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                areas as defined in the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 02-Dec-2015
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Activity
                                      1) ToR for the Environmental Impact Assessments finalized including Social Assessment (this
                                      will also include consultations with stakeholders and the community)
                                      Expected date
                                      July 30

                                      2) Results of the Social Assessment (The social assessment will advise the need or not for an
                                      Indigenous Peoples Framework)
                                      Expected date
                                      September 15

                                      3) I Resettlement Policy Framework consulted with a sample of stakeholders and beneficiaries and
                                      approved by the Bank and GoP
                                      Expected date
                                      September 30



                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                             4) First draft of the EIAs
                             Expected date
Public Disclosure Copy




                             September 30

                             5) Review of complete draft of the EIAs by the Ministry of Environment and public consultation
                             finalized. Review of complete draft of Social Management Plan
                             Expected date
                             December 12

                             6) EIAs approved by the Ministry of Environment
                             Expected date
                             January 15
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Miguel Vargas-Ramirez,Hector Alexander Serrano
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)                  Date: 08-Jun-2015
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Wambui G. Gichuri (PMGR)                Date: 11-Nov-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
