                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                    Report No.: ISDSA20049

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Nov-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 22-Nov-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Indonesia                           Project ID:   P154779
                                                          Parent        P092218
                                                          Project ID:
   Project Name:      Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility - Additional Financing (P154779)
   Parent Project     Indonesia Infrastructure Finance Facility (P092218)
   Name:
   Task Team          Christopher Juan Costain,Kalpana Seethepalli
   Leader(s):
   Estimated          07-Nov-2016              Estimated     21-Feb-2017
   Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GFM02                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                               Instrument:
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:       200.00           Total Bank Financing:    200.00
   Financing Gap:              0.00
     Financing Source                                                                           Amount
     Borrower                                                                                      0.00
     International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       200.00
     Total                                                                                       200.00
   Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a          Yes
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)
     A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
     The objective of the Project is to strengthen and further develop the institutional framework of the
     financial sector to facilitate financing of commercially viable infrastructure projects and thereby


                                               Page 1 of 15
   increase provision of private infrastructure in Indonesia. Key performance indicators to judge PT.
   IIF's success include the following outcomes: (i) increase in the number of commercially viable
   infrastructure projects achieving financial closure through long-term debt financing, other
   financial products, and advisory services from the IIFF over the life of the project; (ii) Increase in
   the amount of private capital (including long-term debt and equity) available for infrastructure
   projects over the life of the project; (iii) Increased support to government#s policy making in
   private provision of infrastructure through advisory services from IIFF; and (iv) Increase in
   privately financed infrastructure in Indonesia.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   To strengthen the financial capacity of IIF to increase the access of private sector financing for
   infrastructrure.
3. Project Description
Background

The World Bank has supported the Government of Indonesia (GOI) together with IFC and other
international development partners, in setting up IIF as a private non-bank financial institution to
channel debt and equity financing into Indonesia➢❨ s infrastructure development. The establishment
of IIF in January 2010 was initiated by the GOI and multilateral agencies in order to encourage
private sector engagement in the country➢❨ s infrastructure development. Since IIF➢❨ s
establishment, it has become a small, yet credible player in Indonesia➢❨ s infrastructure finance
market, and is seen as an important vehicle to deliver privately financed infrastructure projects to
help address the huge infrastructure gap. IIF is now fully operational, with well-developed
institutional capacity and with an infrastructure investment portfolio of sixteen projects, with total
commitments of US$332 million.

GOI has now expressed interest for continuing financial and technical support from WB to IIF to
help IIF mature into an infrastructure financing platform that mobilizes funds and channels debt and
equity into infrastructure projects. IIF aspires to receive additional financing mainly to scale-up its
infrastructure financing operations, thereby further strengthening its institutional capacity overall.

The parent IIFF IBRD Loan (Ln7331-ID/P092218) for US$100 million was approved by the Bank
on June 24, 2009 and became effective on April 25, 2011. The original project closing date was
December 31, 2013. The project closing date was first extended to November 30, 2015 to complete
the project➢❨ s activities and achieve its PDO. The second extension to November 30, 2016 was
done and the third extension to March 31, 2017 is currently being requested, in order to provide time
to prepare for the additional finance operation.


Project Components and Financial Products

As is the case of the parent IIFF operation, the World Bank provides an investment loan to the
Republic of Indonesia as the Borrower. The Borrower provides the World Bank➢❨ s funds to IIF as
the sole participating financial intermediary, through SMI. IIF in turn, uses these funds to provide
predominantly long-term loans, equity investment and other financial products, as well as advisory
services for infrastructure development. The IIFF-AF will be in the form of an investment loan by
the World Bank to be made available to IIF as junior subordinated and/or perpetual debt. The
Bank➢❨ s lending instrument is a Financial Intermediary Loan (FIL).


                                              Page 2 of 15
The proposed IIFF-AF will continue to finance projects through the range of IIF➢❨ s financial
products that are already included in the Regulation of the Minister of Finance No. 100/PMK
02/2009, which are elaborated in the IIF➢❨ s Operations Manual (Annex W). The IIFF-AF, which
will be a US$200 million lending operation to the Borrower for a period of 5 years, will continue to
finance the same types of the current IIF➢❨ s infrastructure sectors through the same aforementioned
products and services.

The IIFF-AF will continue to facilitate the provision of IIF➢❨ s current products and services for the
private sectors, which are categorized as follows:
➯❪§ Fund based products, provide lending in the forms of:
➢❨¢ Senior debt, subordinated debt, mezzanine financing, equity investment, bridge financing,
take-out financing, refinancing and securitization) which involves actual disbursement of Bank
(through IIFF) funds;
➢❨¢ Financing other activities related to infrastructure projects as permitted by law; and
➢❨¢ Providing equity investment.
➯❪§ Non-fund based products,
➢❨¢ Provide guarantees in the form of, among others, fulfillment of financial liabilities, credit
enhancement, and/or performance bonds; and
➢❨¢ Provide standby facilities.
➯❪§ Fee-based products,
➢❨¢ Provide transaction advisory services to the government in preparing, tendering and raising
project finance for infrastructure projects using PPP scheme, or appointment to State-owned
enterprise (SOE) scheme, or other potential development scheme;
➢❨¢ Advice government on broader policy, legal and regulatory issues related to infrastructure
development bringing the perspectives of private investors and financiers;
➢❨¢ Provide fee income to IIF (for e.g.: for its public sector advisory services and private client
advisory services) and do not involve any disbursement of IIF funds;
➢❨¢ Provide transaction advisory services to project sponsors in bid preparation and participation
in PPP projects.

As specified in the Minister of Finance Regulation No. 100/PMK02/2009, IIF can finance the
following sectors:
a. Transportation infrastructure, covering sea, river or lake harbor, airports, railways and railway
station;
b. Road infrastructure, covering toll road and toll bridge;
c. Water infrastructure, comprises un-distilled water canal;
d. Drinking water infrastructure, comprises of un-distilled water facility, transmission system,
distribution system, drinking water treatment facility;
e. Waste water infrastructure, covering waste water treatment facility, processing plant, collection
networks and main networks and garbage facilities covering transportation and land disposal;
f. Telecommunication infrastructure, covering telecommunication networks and e-government
infrastructure;
g. Electricity infrastructure, covering power generation, renewable energy power development,
transmission and distribution;
h. Oil and gas infrastructure, covering oil and gas processing, storage, transportation, transmission or
distribution; and/or
i. Other infrastructure projects which are not included in the items above with approval from the


                                             Page 3 of 15
Minister of Finance.

Types of sub-projects according to the Level of Preparedness

The IIFF-AF will continue to facilitate the offering of IIF➢❨ s current various products and services
and financing subprojects with different levels of preparedness or readiness for implementation.
There will be four types of sub-projects in this regard, which will require different types of review
procedures:
➯❪§ Type 1 ➢❨ Subprojects in the early stages of preparation (with sites that have not been selected
and design options that are still open);
➯❪§ Type 2 ➢❨ Subprojects that have been fully prepared (where construction bids have been
invited);
➯❪§ Type 3 ➢❨ Subprojects under construction or with facilities that have already been constructed;
➯❪§ Type 4 ➢❨ Fee-based advisory services.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
It is not possible at this stage, prior to the IIFF-AF project implementation, to determine the various
activities for which loan funds will be requested. The nature of the IIFF-AF operations will be
similar to that of the parent IIFF operation, whereby it will finance similar sub-projects nature and
types with similar potential environmental and social risks. As has been the case with the parent IIFF
operation, IIFF-AF➢❨ s subprojects will be located in geographically dispersed areas throughout the
country. As of September 2016, IIF has 21 sub-projects in its portfolio located among others in, the
provinces of Jakarta (clean and renewable energy project, telecommunication tower, improvement of
port and airport facility, and Garuda Maintenance Facility), West Sumatera (mini hydro), Gorontalo
(2MW solar power plant), South Sulawesi (seaport expansion), Riau Islands and South Sumatera
(piping, gas fired power plant), East Java (LPG processing plant), North Sumatera (electricity from
90MW run off river power plant), Lampung and Papua (micro hydro) and West Java (Cipali toll
road). Nine of these projects are category A. Nine of these relate to greenfield activities, whereas the
remaining relate to operating assets. Environmental risks are derived mainly from construction
activities that could cause adverse impact to air, water, natural habitats, forest area and potential
impact to people (such as health and safety, labor and working conditions, community health and
safety, etc.). Only two sub-projects involved involuntary land acquisition, one is large scale for a toll
road (in West Java province) and the other one is small scale for a gas power plant (in Batam, Riau
Islands province). No sub-projects involved or affected Indigenous People➢❨ s communities.

IIF➢❨ s initial pipeline in 2016 will potentially include similar as well as new types of investment,
such as water supply, LNG processing plant, fiber optic telecommunication, telecommunication
tower, run-off hydro power plant, seaport, gas fired-power plant, gas pipeline, telecommunication
tower, and aircraft maintenance facility. Preliminary social and environmental screenings are being
carried out by IIF in reference to its 2014 Social and Environmental Management System (SEMS) to
identify the level of potential risks of each sub-project. It is expected that five of the 11 initial project
pipeline are likely Category A and six are greenfield projects. The risk level will be reconfirmed as
part of the Social and Environmental Due Diligence (SEDD) on the complete set of sub-project
proposal package, including the proposed safeguards instruments. IIF may drop from its financing
support those sub-projects that cannot meet its SEMS or investment requirements.
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Indira Dharmapatni (GSUID)


                                               Page 4 of 15
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes        IIF is a private non-bank financial institution that
Assessment OP/BP 4.01              channels debt and equity financing into Indonesia➢❨ s
                                   infrastructure development. The IIFF-AF will help IIF to
                                   become a more mature infrastructure financing platform
                                   in Indonesia. It will continue as a Category FI project with
                                   potential sub-projects of Category A and B. This project
                                   shall continue to promote environmentally responsible
                                   investment decisions.

                                   Potential environmental impacts from the indicative sub-
                                   projects pipeline of this AF are still similar in nature and
                                   scale with the previous IIF subprojects. They are mainly
                                   derived from the construction activities of the linear
                                   infrastructure such as road, gas pipeline, transmission
                                   line, the construction of airport, seaport, gas fired power
                                   plant and micro hydro power plant. Potential adverse
                                   environmental impacts, such as dust, noise, material
                                   transportation, health and safety, traffic management and
                                   induced impact, such as a new access to forest area or
                                   natural habitats, are likely. There is a possibility of
                                   cumulative impacts and other impacts related to dam
                                   safety and linked activities funded by the Government or
                                   other donors, and potential impacts of ancillary facilities,
                                   such as quarry management. Thus, the potential
                                   environmental and social impacts of sub-projects will
                                   range from medium to high, significant, diverse and
                                   irreversible.

                                   All sub-projects applying for IIFF-AF financing will be
                                   screened using the IIF➢❨ s 2014 SEMS to determine the
                                   safeguards policies triggered, EA category, safeguards
                                   instruments and associated analyses to incorporate risk
                                   and impact minimization, mitigation measures and
                                   monitoring program.

                                   The 2014 SEMS specifies the following requirements
                                   based on the four sub-project development stage:
                                   ➢❨¢ Type 1 ➢❨ Sub-projects in the early stages of
                                   preparation (with sites that have not been selected and
                                   design options that are still open or Greenfield) will be
                                   subject to safeguards screening;
                                   ➢❨¢ Type 2 ➢❨ Sub-projects that have been fully
                                   prepared (where construction bids have been invited) will
                                   be subject to due safeguards due diligence;
                                   ➢❨¢ Type 3 ➢❨ Sub-projects under construction or
                                   with facilities that have already been constructed will be



                                    Page 5 of 15
                               subject to safeguards due diligence or audit; and
                               ➢❨¢ Type 4 ➢❨ Fee-based advisory services are to be
                               consistent with IIF safeguards principles.


                               IIF➢❨ s 2014 SEMS also requires clients to prepare CAP
                               (Corrective Action Plan) should their sub-projects do not
                               meet IIF standards. The World Bank has visited those
                               ➢❨ high risk➢❨ projects together with IIF➢❨ s S&E staff
                               to ensure that they have built their capacity and have
                               adequate comprehension of the World Bank➢❨ s
                               safeguards policies and requirements.

                               An assessment of the applicability of the current IIF 2014
                               SEMS and the capacity of IIF➢❨ s S&E unit in managing
                               safeguards aspects of future projects is elaborated in
                               section II below.

                               IIF➢❨ s advisory service will continue to be delivered in
                               accordance with the 2014 SEMS to ensure that safeguards
                               aspects are incorporated and consistently applied.

                               Social and Environmental Due Diligence (SEDD) on the
                               complete set of sub-project proposal package, including
                               safeguards instruments, will be conducted during project
                               implementation. IIF may drop those sub-projects that
                               cannot meet its SEMS or investment requirements from
                               its financing support.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   Potential sub-projects in road construction, energy
4.04                           generation and transmission line, telecommunication
                               (fiber optic cable), seaport constructions may potentially
                               affect natural habitats. The sub-projects will be screened
                               in accordance with the current SEMS, so as to ensure that
                               the project shall not finance any development with
                               potential significant conversion or degradation to critical
                               natural habitats or natural habitats.

                               For a sub-project that is located adjacent to a protected
                               area or that may change the purpose and/or designation of
                               a protected area or natural habitats, the client shall be
                               required to prepare a full environmental assessment (an
                               ESIA) or to conduct AMDAL study or specific
                               biodiversity study acceptable to the SEMS. The SEMS
                               also fully adopts PS 6 of IFC, in addition to the OP 4.04
                               requirements. Natural habitat includes: forest protection
                               areas; river edges; marine/freshwater conservation areas;
                               nature tourism park; peat areas; areas, surrounding lakes
                               and reservoirs, coastal mangrove areas, water catchment


                                Page 6 of 15
                               areas; national parks; coastal edges, forest parks; cultural
                               reserves; areas surrounding springs; scientific research
                               areas; nature conservation areas; and areas susceptible to
                               natural hazards.

                               Other typical sub-projects such as aircraft maintenance
                               facility, mini hydro, telecom towers might have less
                               potential impacts to natural habitats and some of them are
                               located in urban areas. Nonetheless, the SEMS still
                               requires that thorough assessment of potential impacts be
                               conducted as previously implemented.
Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   Potential sub-projects will not involve commercial forest
                               plantation, as per IIF➢❨ s mandate determined by the
                               GOI, although other investments proposal may take place
                               in close proximity to or within forest areas. IIF, in
                               accordance with its SEMS, shall screen outany sub-
                               projects having potential significant conversion or
                               degradation to critical natural forest or natural forest
                               (protection forest, conservation forest). For a sub-project
                               that is located in production forest area, the client shall
                               prepare an environmental assessment and shall fulfill
                               forestry regulation for land use permit, as per Bank➢❨ s
                               related previous investment project in Indonesia (e.g.
                               Upper Cisokan Pumped Storage, etc.).
Pest Management OP 4.09 No     Similar to the parent IIFF operation, the IIFF-AF does not
                               trigger OP 4.09, as there will be no irrigation sub-projects
                               financed by IIF (In Indonesia, the irrigation sector is not
                               financed by the private sector, but rather through the
                               Government➢❨ s DAK, Local Governments or Ministry
                               of Public Works➢❨ budget).
Physical Cultural        Yes   As some sub-projects involve construction activities such
Resources OP/BP 4.11           as excavation of the linear infrastructure, which may
                               affect cultural property, the IIFF-AF triggers OP 4.11.
                               The environmental screening procedure laid out in the
                               SEMS ensures that such will not adversely affect sites
                               having archeological, paleontological, historical, religious
                               or unique natural values. Any contracts under the project
                               will include a provision covering procedures to be
                               followed in the event of chance finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   As the nature of financing products and potential sub-
BP 4.10                        projects eligible for IIFF-AF are similar to those of the
                               parent IIFF, and sub-projects may be located anywhere in
                               the country where IPs communities might potentially be
                               present and affected, subprojects may affect (positively or
                               adversely) IPs communities. Thus the project continues to
                               trigger OP 4.10. The SEMS, which is part of the OM,
                               includes Principles of Indigenous Peoples (similar to the


                                Page 7 of 15
                                              Bank➢❨ s IPPF) and Guidance to Implement the
                                              Principles of Indigenous Peoples Development Plan (the
                                              term used in the OP 4.10 is Indigenous Peoples Plan).
   Involuntary Resettlement Yes               As the nature of financing products and potential sub-
   OP/BP 4.12                                 projects eligible for IIFF-AF are similar to those of the
                                              parent IIFF, some sub-projects may involve involuntary
                                              resettlement including land acquisition. Thus the project
                                              continues to trigger OP 4.12. As sub-project footprint and
                                              area of influence are unknown at this stage, the IIFF-AF
                                              will adopt the 2014 SEMS that has been used by IIF. The
                                              SEMS, which is part of the OM, includes Principles of
                                              Land Acquisition and Involuntary Resettlement (similar
                                              to the Bank➢❨ s RPF) and Guidance of the Application of
                                              the Principles for Land Acquisition and Involuntary
                                              Resettlement.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes            The project might finance the construction of a dam as
   4.37                                       part of energy generation project or water supply system
                                              and water resource management infrastructure.

                                              For small dams (<15 m in height), the policy requirement
                                              is for the dam to be designed by a qualified engineer. For
                                              large dams (15 m and higher), the SEMS requires reviews
                                              by an independent panel of experts, preparation and
                                              implementation of detail plans (construction,
                                              instrumentation, operation and maintenance, and
                                              emergency preparedness), prequalification of bidders and
                                              periodic safety inspections of the dam after completion.
   Projects on International   No             The project will not be located in the watersheds of any
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50                       international waterways.
   Projects in Disputed        No             The project is not located in any known disputed areas as
   Areas OP/BP 7.60                           defined under the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     This IIFF-AF project shall continue to promote environmentally responsible investment decisions.
     Potential large scale, significant/irreversible impacts from the indicative sub-projects are still
     similar in nature and scale to the parent IIFF project. These are mainly derived from the
     construction activities of water supply facility, LNG processing plant, fiber optic
     telecommunication, telecommunication tower, run-off hydro power plant, seaport, gas fired-power
     plant, gas pipeline, telecommunication tower, and aircraft maintenance facility. The impacts to
     natural habitats, forest, people (from land acquisition) and to Indigenous Peoples are likely. There
     are also possibilities of induced impact such as a new access to forest area or natural habitats or
     access restriction. In addition, there are likely cumulative impacts and other impacts related to dam
     safety, and linked activities funded by Government or other donors, and potential impacts of
     ancillary facilities such as quarry management . Please refer to Section I.4 for a summary of


                                               Page 8 of 15
 safeguards issues surrounding the ongoing parent IIFF operation and 2016 indicative pipeline.

 Given that potential downstream impacts from IIF➢❨ s advisory services are also possible, the
 current 2014 SEMS also ensures that IIF➢❨ s advisory services are also consistent with the
 safeguards requirements.

  The list of potential sub-projects pipeline is dynamic, and preliminary social and environmental
  screening are carried out by IIF in accordance with its 2014 SEMS to identify the level of potential
  risks of each sub-project. The risk level will be reconfirmed during the Social and Environmental
  Due Diligence (SEDD) on the complete set of subproject proposal package.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Potential indirect/long term impacts of future activities in the sub-project area are changes in
  morphology of the area and impacts to natural habitats, mostly from the construction activities.
  Illegal logging from new access road to forest area as an induced impact is also likely. Potential
  long term social impacts would be in terms of change in livelihoods from land acquisition and
  access restrictions that could also affect Indigenous Peoples.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  No alternatives were assessed during project preparation as potential sub-projects will not be
  confirmed until project implementation. However, the SEMS has regulated that the ToR for ESIA
  will include options analysis. The IIF S&E team will ensure that environmental and social
  considerations are properly taken into account for preferred-option analysis by the borrower.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  Measures to address safeguards policy issues. Since its establishment, IIF has adopted a Social
  and Environmental Management System (SEMS) in reference to the approved Environmental and
  Social Safeguards Framework (ESSF) in 2011, to manage E&S safeguards for sub-projects in its
  portfolio and pipeline. The SEMS was updated in end of 2014 to include the IFC➢❨ s 2012
  Performance Standards, and approved for IIF by all of the its stakeholders (IIF, SMI, ADB, and
  DEG). The SEMS, which is part of IIF➢❨ s Operations Manuals follows:
  ➢❨¢ Prevailing Indonesian Laws and Regulations;
  ➢❨¢ All of IFC 2012 Performance Standards, i.e., PS on Environmental and Social
  Sustainability; PS1 on Assessment and Management of Environmental and Social Risks and
  Impacts; PS2 on Labor and Working Conditions; PS3 on Resource Efficiency and Pollution
  Prevention; PS4 on Community Health, Safety and Security; PS5 on Land Acquisition and
  Involuntary Resettlement; PS6 on Biodiversity Conservation and Conservation and Sustainable
  Management of Living Natural Resources; PS7 on Indigenous Peoples; and PS 8 on Cultural
  Heritage;
  ➢❨¢ Seven triggered World Bank Safeguards Policies, i.e., OP/BP 4.01 on Environmental
  Assessment; OP/BP 4.04 on Natural Habitats; OP/BP 4.11 on Cultural Property; OP/BP 4.10 on
  Indigenous Peoples; OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement; OP/BP 4.36 on Forest; and OP/BP
  4.37 on Safety of Dams; and
  ➢❨¢ Environment and Social Policy and Procedural Guidelines for Projects Financed Jointly by
  Bank, IFC and/or MIGA (2009).

 The SEMS specifies the S&E requirements, principles, operating procedures (review/screening,


                                            Page 9 of 15
appraisal, post loan, and project completion), S&E organizational arrangements and
responsibilities, capacity building plan and approach to S&E risk management. The SEMS
basically contains procedures and requirements to ensure that the environmental and social
impacts of those sub-projects financed by IIF are assessed, managed and monitored in accordance
with the abovementioned laws, regulations, IFC➢❨ s PSs and World Bank Policies. Grievance
Redress Mechanisms and Disclosures are part of each S&E Principle. Based on the Social and
Environmental Due Diligence (SEDD), should there be any gap, IIF requires the potential clients
to prepare a plan to fully meet the S&E requirements as specified in the SEMS. A specific form of
legal agreement is made between IIF and the clients which is part of the eligibility to receive
financing. Monitoring of the implementation of the agreed S&E instruments and corrective action
plan is carried out regularly by IIF➢❨ s S&E Management Unit in accordance with requirements
specified in the SEMS, and the performance of the S&E safeguards management is consolidated in
the IIF Annual Report and the Annual S&E Performance Report.

IIF has developed and adopted a Standard Operating Procedure (SOP) on Social and
Environmental (S&E) safeguards as a practical tool for the staff of the S&E Management Unit and
other relevant units to implement the SEMS within the overall IIF business processes. The SOP
covers: (i) the procedures, screening and review criteria, reporting and working arrangements of
the S&E Management Unit in defining subproject eligibility/ineligibility for IIF financing; and (ii)
the flows of decision making and working arrangements between the S&E Management Unit and
other departments/units in IIF. The SOP shows the flows of working arrangements of the S&E
Management Unit, which include: (i) pre-approval procedures of subprojects, for Type 1
Greenfield and Types 2 & 3 Brownfield sub-projects; (ii) approval process; (iii) post approval
process (client/developer duties and S&E staff➢❨ duties); and (iv) completion phase SOP (the
production of ICR and other documentation).

Borrower capacity. For the past two years, IIF has demonstrated a stronger and better capacity in
managing S&E safeguards, as governed by its SEMS. IIF has an S&E Management Unit
established under the Credit Risk and Operations Department, which is mainly responsible for
ensuring that the SEMS in the Operations Manual is consistently followed by all sub-projects
financed by IIF through the integration of the S&E requirements into the IIF➢❨ s business
operations overall. IIF➢❨ s capacity in managing. Since the past two years in particular, IIF has
built a stronger capacity in managing S&E safeguards. This is mainly due to the adequate number
and qualification of staff for the current portfolio and pipeline, consistent application of SEMS and
SOP, and continued undertaking of practices for mainstreaming S&E in the overall IIF➢❨ s
business cycle. It is important to note that the IIF➢❨ s top management has demonstrated a very
strong commitment to implement and ensure strict adherence to the SEMS through regular
monitoring and proper support to the unit. The Managing Director and Head of the CRO Departme
nt has been in charge as the S&E Manager as well, and under him the unit has four full-time S&E
specialists, all of whom hold Master Degrees and had experiences in S&E management in public
institutions, as well in international multi-lateral supported projects, prior to joining PT IIF. A
Manager for Social and Environmental Unit will be hired in early December 2016.

The S&E Management Unit has also hired international as well as national S&E consulting firms
as partners to help carry out Social and Environmental Due Diligence (SEDD) and reviews of
potential projects seeking for IIF support. Partnership with the teams from PT ERM Indonesia, PT
Enviro Solutions and Consulting, PT Delta Prima Mitra Manajemen, PT AECOM Indonesia, PT
BERI, PT Hatfield Indonesia, PT Lorax Indonesia and PT Hatch Indonesia, has provided the IIF


                                          Page 10 of 15
 S&E staff significant learning opportunities and knowledge improvements. Since 2015, IIF has
 carried out the SEDD in-house for projects having moderate risks, including telecommunication,
 solar power, and renewable energy projects. The Bank has reviewed a sample of IIF➢❨ s in-house
 SEDD for the Gas-fired power plant in Batam and Gorontalo Solar Power Energy, and noted that
 these have been satisfactorily done in accordance with the revised SEMS, with minor potential
 area for future improvement. In addition, as part of its capacity strengthening program, the S&E
 Management Unit staff have participated in various workshops and seminars, and received in-
 house and external trainings relevant to their specific needs each year since 2013 (the list is
 available in a separate document). For example, in 2014 IIF S&E staff participated in an IFC
 training session on ➢❨ PS6 Quest for Zero Biodiversity Loss and What It Means for Project
 Developers➢❨ ; the Indonesia Green Infrastructure Summit jointly organized by the World Bank,
 JICA, ICLEI and GOI; and training on S&E and HSE, OHSAS and Risk Assessment. In 2015, the
 S&E Management Unit received external training on IFC PS7; GHG Management; IFC PS4; IFC
 PSs of 2012; Stakeholders Engagement Training; and Environmental Analysis. Further, the S&E
 Management Unit delivered the S&E principles as specified in the SEMS for all IIF employees
 during the Internal Knowledge Sharing Session. Furthermore, in 2015 IIF participated in seminars
 related to Sustainable Financing such as: (i) Green Planning and Budgeting Strategy for Indonesia
 Sustainable Development; and (ii) OJK Green/Sustainable Financing.

 Going forward, with the steadily growing pipeline and business volume, IIF plans to continue to
 strengthen its S&E Management Unit➢❨ s capacity. The short-term plan is to recruit another S&E
 specialist in 2016 (now already hired). Also, S & E safeguards staff is expected to take four
 training sessions in 2016, namely training on Land Acquisition and Resettlement, Renewable
 Energy or Mini Hydro Project, GHG Inventory and on Risk Assessment. In addition, IIF also
 continues to socialize the 2014 SEMS to its clients and lenders counterparts as the company➢❨ s
 branding for adopting the international standard for social and environmental management. IIF
 also plans to increase public awareness of its S&E requirements and good practices in S&E
 safeguards management, particularly by stakeholders within the infrastructure financing industry
 and other financial institutions and commercial Banks in implementing S&E safeguards
 requirements in the infrastructure development. The first of this initiative was implemented in
 November 2015, whereby IIF itself conducted training for its clients and potential clients
 regarding IIF➢❨ s S&E Principles, and was well attended and appreciated by clients and potential
 clients. Similar activities will be continued in 2016 onwards every year. In addition, in April 2016
 IIF was invited by one of the largest commercial banks in the country, i.e., BCA, to present the
 ➢❨ Implementation of IIF➢❨ s Social and Environmental Principles➢❨ and by the Indonesia
 Association of Regional Banks (ASBANDA) in a Workshop of Knowledge Sharing, wherein it
 presented ➢❨ Social and Environmental Risks in Infrastructure Development Projects➢❨ . The
 long-term capacity strengthening will be continuously planned and implemented in accordance
 with the volume and nature of the sub-projects in the IIF➢❨ s portfolio and pipeline.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  Key stakeholders. At the national level, key stakeholders involved in the IIFF-AF project includes
  the Directorate General for State Assets, Ministry of Finance; the shareholders (SMI, IFC, DEG,
  ADB and the Sumitomo Mitsui Bank Corporation); and the World Bank. These are parties who
  should approve the SEMS and the Operations Manual, and at the highest level the shareholders
  receive the Annual S&E Performance Report of the Implementation of SEMS and ensure that it is
  implemented consistently across all of IIF business operations. At the sub-project level,
  stakeholders include IIF clients who receive financing and advisory services. Ultimate

                                           Page 11 of 15
  beneficiaries of sub-projects financed by the IIF (e.g. toll road, electricity, ports, etc.) are the
  public.

  Consultation and disclosure. Initially, the Environmental and Social Safeguards Framework
  (ESSF), which outlines the framework of WBG policies that apply to IIF sub-projects, was
  consulted with relevant stakeholders, including potential clients (private sector/companies),
  representatives of NGOs and universities as well as the media on March 29-30, 2011, and
  subsequently disclosed in the Ministry of Finance➢❨ s and IIF➢❨ s websites. The IIF disclosed
  the same ESSF in its own website, www.iif.co.id in August 2013. IIF has developed a Social and
  Environmental Management System in 2012 as part of its Operation Manuals for its internal
  operating guidance, which includes the approved ESSF and adopting the 2006 IFC➢❨ s
  Performance Standards, ADB and World Bank safeguards policies as well as GOI➢❨ s laws and
  regulations. This 2012 SEMS was approved by its shareholders and the Bank. In 2014, IIF
  augmented its 2012 SEMS to adjust with the 2012 IFC➢❨ s Performance Standards and
  subsequently was approved by its shareholders. IIF disclosed the 2014 volume 1 of the SEMS
  through its website on November 2nd 2016. This SEMS contains the approved ESSF and a more
  detailed and operational S&E policies and procedures. Feedback from various stakeholders on the
  SEMS is being solicited. Further, key safeguards instruments that had been prepared by IIF➢❨ s
  clients were also disclosed in the IIF➢❨ s website. The S&E Safeguards Management Unit also
  shares and holds internal awareness training on the SEMS and its implementation in the overall
  IIF➢❨ s business cycle on a regular basis for other IIF➢❨ s departments and units. IIF➢❨ s clients
  also have carried out consultations with the Project Affected Persons in the sub-project footprints
  and surrounding areas during the planning and construction stage, for example in the Cipali toll
  road, the gas-fired power plant in Batam and the Solar Power Plant in Gorontalo. This practice
  will be continuously implemented and ensured by IIF➢❨ s S&E team. Refer to section II.A.4 on
  the socialization and consultation activities of IIF on the SEMS to its clients and other financial
  institutions.The Volume 2 of the SEMS without sensitive corporate information will be disclosed
  in January 2017 .
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    02-Nov-2016
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 17-Nov-2016
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                      02-Nov-2016
  Comments: This is covered in the ESSF previously disclosed on March 29, 2011 and the more
                recent SEMS, as uploaded on IIF➢❨ s website on November 2, 2016.
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                              02-Nov-2016
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                           16-Nov-2016




                                              Page 12 of 15
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                     02-Nov-2016
  Comments: This is covered in the ESSF previously disclosed on March 29, 2011 and the more
               recent SEMS, as uploaded on IIF➢❨ s website on November 2, 2016.
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                    02-Nov-2016
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                 16-Nov-2016
"In country" Disclosure
  Indonesia                                                      02-Nov-2016
  Comments: This is covered in the ESSF previously disclosed on March 29, 2011 and the more
                recent SEMS, as uploaded on IIF➢❨ s website on November 2, 2016.
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?



                                            Page 13 of 15
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

 200 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
 assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
 livelihoods)

 200 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 and constraints been carried out?
 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 overcome these constraints?
 Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 does it include provisions for certification system?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
 Bank?
 Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 place in a form and language that are understandable and
 accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the project cost?



                                            Page 14 of 15
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Christopher Juan Costain,Kalpana Seethepalli
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                     Date: 22-Nov-2016
   Practice Manager/    Name: Jennifer Isern (PMGR)                 Date: 22-Nov-2016
   Manager:




                                            Page 15 of 15
