                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC16612

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Apr-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:        Malawi                              Project ID:       P158864
                            Project Name:
                            Team Leader(s): Talip Kilic
                            Estimated Date 06-May-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:                                      Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 1.942082                       Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Free-standing Single Purpose Trust Fund                                                   1.942082
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           This project will support the Malawi Integrated Household Survey (IHS) Program over the period
                           2015-2020 for increasing the availability, quality, timeliness and relevance of household survey data.
                           The support will cover the partial costs of implementing the Fourth Integrated Household Survey
                           (IHS4) in 2016/17 and the Fifth Integrated Household Survey (IHS5) in 2019/20.
                           C. Project Description
                           The core objective of this work is to survey households in 2016/17 for the Fourth Integrated
                           Household Survey (IHS4) and in 2019/20 for the Fifth Integrated Household Survey (IHS5). Both
                           the IHS4 and the IHS5 samples will be comprised of a cross-sectional sample and a panel sample.
                           The cross-sectional sample will be composed of 12,480 households in each round and will be the
                           source of official poverty and all other statistics for which the IHS is designated by the NSO as the
                           primary source. The cross-sectional interviews will be spread over a 12-month period, in line with
                           the historical practice, in order to take into account seasonality in food and non-food consumption.
                           The panel households will come from the sample that were initially interviewed in 2010 as part of
                           IHS3 and were re-surveyed in 2013 during the Integrated Household Panel Survey (IHPS). The IHPS
                           attempted to track all tracking-eligible individuals associated with 3,246 households that were
                           previously surveyed by the IHS3. At the end, by tracking split-off individuals and bringing into the
                           sample the new households that they had formed between the IHS3 and the IHPS, the IHPS sample
                         grew to 4,000 households.

                         The panel components for the IHS4 and the IHS5 will survey a sub-sample of the original 3,246
Public Disclosure Copy




                         IHS3 households selected for the IHPS as well as the descendants of this sub-sample that were
                         interviewed by the IHPS in 2013. More specifically, the original households and their descendants
                         tied to 102 out of 204 IHPS enumeration areas (EAs) will be targeted starting with the IHS4,
                         translating into an initial panel sample of approximately 2,000 households. This sample can still
                         expand in IHS5 by tracking split-off individuals and bringing into the sample the households that
                         they will have formed between the IHS4 and IHS5. The IHS4 and IHS5 panel components will build
                         on the impressive tracking success achieved during the IHPS, and will work towards building a long-
                         term panel of households and individuals.

                         The panel data will (i) ultimately span a period of 9 years between the IHS3 and the IHS5, (ii)
                         include data from 4 points in time and (iii) be instrumental in understanding poverty and nutrition
                         dynamics, livelihood transitions, structural changes in the rural economy, internal migration patterns,
                         household formation and dissolution dynamics, idiosyncratic and covariate shocks, and inter-linkages
                         among these changes. The panel components of the IHS4 and the IHS5 will be smaller in size than
                         the past panel rounds and the reduced sample size is in line with the approach to building long-term
                         panels in other countries supported by the LSMS-ISA (including Tanzania and Uganda) and provides
                         the minimum sample size for analysis at the national level, and urban/rural levels. Given the nature
                         of panel surveys, it is expected that the attrition rate will increase (due to increased opportunities for
                         household dissolution, household formation and individual migration) as the panel ages. With the
                         reduced sample size greater attention can be also given towards improving quality control over the
                         individual tracking process and limiting attrition. The continued panel data platform will also help
                         address impact evaluation and targeting assessment needs of large-scale development programs in
                         the country, such as the Farm Input Subsidy Program.

                         The IHS4 and the IHS5 will be implemented using a computer-assisted personal interviewing (CAPI
                         platform designed using the World Bank Survey Solutions CAPI software. Methodological survey
Public Disclosure Copy




                         experiments may be built into the IHS4 and the IHS5 to validate key survey methods and measures
                         to improve the quality of survey data. The methodological experimentation that may be conducted
                         under the IHS4 and IHS5 umbrella will be in line with the priorities set forth by the Research
                         Component of the Global Strategy to Improve Agricultural and Rural Statistics, and will be vetted
                         through the IHS4/5 Technical Working Group.

                         Lastly, the project emphasizes capacity building both during and between survey rounds and
                         developing sustainable systems for the production of accurate and timely information on rural
                         households in Malawi. All data generated will be made publicly available within twelve months of
                         completion of each wave of data collection to preserve the value of the data. This requirement will be
                         an integral part of the Grant Agreement that will be signed between the World Bank and the
                         Government of Malawi. The public availability of the data is already consistent with data access
                         policies of the NSO, including ensuring confidentiality of the unit-record data and requiring requests
                         for the data from all other institutions and individual researchers to provide a brief description of the
                         proposed analysis. These procedures also meet the public data requirements of completeness and
                         timeliness set by the United States Government’s Open Data Policy – Managing Information as an
                         Asset policy. Furthermore, the unit-record, anonymized data will be made available in multiple
                         formats, namely CSV, STATA and SPSS, and will be described fully in the accompanying basic
                         information document. Following the data release, a point of contact will be designated on the LSMS
                           team to receive all queries from data users and pass the questions along to the appropriate LSMS and
                           NSO management members.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                  Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/        No              The project is considered an environmental risk
                           BP 4.01                                             Category C because there are no civil works or
                                                                               other investments which would have any
                                                                               environmental or social impacts. Likewise, no
                                                                               safeguard policies are triggered since there are
                                                                               no aspects of the project which will have
                                                                               implications for these policies.
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04         No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                  No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09             No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/     No
                           BP 4.11
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10       No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP      No
                           4.12
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37           No
                           Projects on International           No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP    No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):           Name: Talip Kilic
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:       Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                       Date: 21-Apr-2016
                           Practice Manager/         Name: Michael M. Lokshin (PMGR)                      Date: 22-Apr-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
