                                  The World Bank
                                  Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 19-Sep-2018 | Report No: ISDSC25439




                         Sep 20, 2018                                                                                                  Page 1 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                 Environmental Category     Country
                                                             Development of Businesses
                                                             and Entrepreneurship for
                                                                                          B - Partial Assessment
                                                             Syrians under Temporary                                 Turkey
                                                                                          (B)
                                                             Protection and Turkish
                                                             Citizens
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit              Financing Instrument
                           Ahmet Levent Yener, Sirma                                                                 Investment Project
                                                                                          GSP03
                           Demir Seker                                                                               Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                    2.15
                           Total Financing                                                                                                       2.15
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                         0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                        2.15
                                 Free-standing TFs for ECA ECCTR Country Unit                                                                    2.15


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of the project is to support the growth of SMEs and increase employment and
                           entrepreneurship opportunities for SuTP and Turkish Citizens in a pilot province characterized by high incidence of
                           SuTPs.

                           C. Project Description
                           The recipient of this Grant is the Ministry of Industry and Technology of the Republic of Turkey (MoIT). MoIT
                           will sign a subsidiary agreement with the Small and Medium Enterprises Development Organization
                           (KOSGEB) to implement the Project.




                         Sep 20, 2018                                                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens




                           The Project has two components. Component 1 will support KOSGEB to implement a pilot small-grant
                           scheme in a pilot province (Gaziantep) to support existing businesses of SuTP and Turkish citizens, and new
                           SuTP entrepreneurs.

                           Component 2 will strengthen institutional capacity of KOSGEB. Under Component 1:

                           1. KOSGEB will support 30 SuTP and host community SME. Participating SME will be selected from those
                           operating in manufacturing sector or using medium/high technologies. The SME owned by Turkish citizens
                           will be eligible if they commit employing new SuTP employees. There will be no employment obligation for
                           SuTP SME.

                           2. 30 new entrepreneurs will be supported by KOSGEB and selected entrepreneurs will receive start-up
                           advances, machinery, equipment and software funding as well as performance support.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 2 will finance activities that support the KOSGEB to deliver, monitor, and evaluate services and
                           programs to be provided to SMEs of SuTP and Turkish citizens in Gaziantep. Under Component 2:

                           1. KOSGEB's capacity for designing, delivering and monitoring of services implemented under Component 1
                           will be strengthened. This will include translation of KOSGEB's existing training modules into Arabic and
                           English, field visits to countries having similar experiences with refugees (i.e. Germany, Lebanon), and
                           training for relevant KOSGEB staff in business mentorship, migration policies, and project management.

                           2. KOSGEB will establish a project implementation unit (PIU) in headquarters that will be responsible for
                           overall project coordination, and a liaison office in the field for day-to-day implementation. The costs of
                           human resources to be contracted out for the PIU and liaison office, and the relevant operating costs and
                           cost of equipment will be financed under this sub-component.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          Project will be implemented in Gaziantep, Turkey.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01 is triggered. Bank team is working closely with KOSGEB teams for
                          familiarizing them to Bank's environmental and social safeguard policies. Since the grants will only be used
                          for low Category B and C projects, the staff in KOSGEB will be adequate to review the grant application


                         Sep 20, 2018                                                                                                  Page 3 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens




                          documents by benefiting from the ESF.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Arzu Uraz Yavas, Social Safeguards Specialist
                          Esra Arikan, Environmental Safeguards Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project              Triggered?                Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                Yes                   KOSGEB will distribute small grants to
                                                                                                   Syrian and Turkish entrepreneurs. The sub-
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   projects that will benefit from the grants
                                                                                                   are expected to be Category B and C
                                                                                                   projects. The environmental and social
                                                                                                   management framework (ESMF) is being
                                                                                                   prepared for describing the national
                                                                                                   environmental assessment procedures and
                                                                                                   WB safeguard requirements and will be
                                                                                                   disclosed on both the Borrower and Bank's
                                                                                                   website. The ESMF will include screening
                                                                                                   criteria for assessing project risk and
                                                                                                   categories and will be guiding KOSGEB for
                                                                                                   screening Category A projects out.

                                                                                                   It is anticipated that there will be no large
                                                                                                   scale significant and/or irreversible impacts
                                                                                                   from the project. Most of the sub-projects
                                                                                                   to benefit from the grant are expected to
                                                                                                   be training, consultancy,
                                                                                                   rehabilitation/renovation activities of
                                                                                                   existing facilities or establishment of small
                                                                                                   scale new production facilities within
                                                                                                   existing buildings. The locations and the
                                                                                                   scope of sub-projects will be identified
                                                                                                   during the project implementation and
                                                                                                   relevant environmental forms will be filled
                                                                                                   in line with the ESMF document. It should
                                                                                                   be noted that KOSGEB will be approached
                                                                                                   for financing of sub-projects after the sub-
                                                                                                   project sponsors have obtained all
                                                                                                   necessary environmental permits and
                                                                                                   environmental clearance from Turkish


                         Sep 20, 2018                                                                                                    Page 4 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens



                                                                                                   Government. After ascertaining that all
                                                                                                   Turkish requirements have been met and
                                                                                                   clearances obtained, the sub-projects will
                                                                                                   be screened according to World Bank
                                                                                                   categorization and the corresponding
                                                                                                   assessment and review procedures will be
                                                                                                   followed as described in details in the
                                                                                                   environmental review procedures of the
                                                                                                   ESMF. Regarding the Bank’s review, the
                                                                                                   first 3 sub-project grant applications will be
                                                                                                   submitted to the Bank by the KOSGEB for
                                                                                                   “prior review”. Following this “pilot”
                                                                                                   period, if World Bank and KOSGEB agrees,
                                                                                                   the World Bank will change to spot
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   checking the screening and environmental
                                                                                                   review process on a “post review” basis.

                                                                                                   Regarding social impacts, the project does
                                                                                                   not expect to have any adverse impact.
                                                                                                   Since the grant program will not allow any
                                                                                                   purchasing of land or civil works there will
                                                                                                   not be any land acquisition impacts, as per
                                                                                                   OP 4.12. Other non-safeguards impacts are
                                                                                                   expected to be positive as it will help create
                                                                                                   new business and employment
                                                                                                   opportunities for both Syrian and host
                                                                                                   communities in Gaziantep, which is
                                                                                                   impacted by the Syrian refugee influx.

                                                                                                   The Turkey portfolio has ongoing
                                                                                                   engagement and various projects for SuTPs
                                                                                                   (Syrians under Temporary Protection) since
                                                                                                   2015. The social dynamics of the SuTP is
                                                                                                   constantly analyzed through analytical
                                                                                                   work and through routine engagement
                                                                                                   with the relevant government entities, and
                                                                                                   also through site visits from time to time.
                                                                                                   The team has been to the region during the
                                                                                                   project inception stage. The likelihood of a
                                                                                                   potential social conflict in this project is
                                                                                                   very low as the beneficiaries of this small
                                                                                                   grant project will be SuTP and Turkish
                                                                                                   entrepreneurs who confirm the eligibility
                                                                                                   criteria of KOSGEB’s microgrant. Since the
                                                                                                   target is very limited and the project is


                         Sep 20, 2018                                                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens



                                                                                                   implemented in a pilot city Gaziantep,
                                                                                                   which has more than 400.000 SUTP and is
                                                                                                   very well-known for its thriving economy
                                                                                                   fostered by both Syrian and Turkish
                                                                                                   entrepreneurs, there are already various
                                                                                                   ongoing entrepreneurship grant supports
                                                                                                   and programs for the Turkish citizens.
                                                                                                   Formal Syrian entrepreneurs are eligible for
                                                                                                   government-led support programs.
                                                                                                   However, their knowledge on these
                                                                                                   programs and access are limited. This will
                                                                                                   be the first pilot to assess how the grants
                                                                                                   mechanism works for the SuTP community.
                                                                                                   In its communication efforts, KOSGEB will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   pay attention on the fact that this grant
                                                                                                   program is financed through EU’s FRIT
                                                                                                   money and will not only benefit the SuTP
                                                                                                   entrepreneurs but also the entrepreneurs
                                                                                                   from the host community. As the project’s
                                                                                                   aim is to foster the economy and create
                                                                                                   new employment, the indirect beneficiaries
                                                                                                   of this project will be employees, both
                                                                                                   Turkish and SuTPs. KOSGEB will insert
                                                                                                   language in their sub-grant agreement with
                                                                                                   the entrepreneurs, that they would follow
                                                                                                   the national labor law and hire employees
                                                                                                   accordingly (which usually is not the case
                                                                                                   for SuTps, they are usually hired
                                                                                                   informally). Even though the government
                                                                                                   has introduced work permits in 2016 for
                                                                                                   Syrians under temporary protection, there
                                                                                                   is a rule that a company should employ ten
                                                                                                   Turks for every foreigner.

                                                                                                   In terms of gender, the same Bank task
                                                                                                   team is engaged in another gender-specific
                                                                                                   project funded under the EU-FRIT, EUR 55
                                                                                                   million was allocated to the World Bank to
                                                                                                   finance three projects. The project will not
                                                                                                   have gender specific activities, but will have
                                                                                                   positive discrimination against women
                                                                                                   entrepreneurs and those with disabilities
                                                                                                   who fit into the selection criteria.

                                                                                                   In its grant sub-agreement with the


                         Sep 20, 2018                                                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens



                                                                                                   entrepreneur, KOSGEB requires a
                                                                                                   commitment from the grant receiver to
                                                                                                   oblige by the national law. For this project,
                                                                                                   even though the scale of the sub-projects
                                                                                                   will be small grant projects and hence
                                                                                                   environmental and social risks are low, the
                                                                                                   commitment plan will be modified and
                                                                                                   explicitly have some language on the
                                                                                                   environmental and social compliance with
                                                                                                   World Bank requirements.

                                                                                                   Due to the limited resources of the grants,
                                                                                                   in order not to inflate any demand and
                                                                                                   potential tension among the host and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                   Syrian communities, KOSGEB will have a
                                                                                                   targeted communication strategy about the
                                                                                                   eligibility criteria and grant selection
                                                                                                   process. Hence, KOSGEB will not promote
                                                                                                   the program to public at large. Given that
                                                                                                   the target group of the small grants is
                                                                                                   limited to one city and KOSGEB is
                                                                                                   experienced in managing entrepreneurial
                                                                                                   programs, KOSGEB's call-center and its
                                                                                                   local office in Gaziantep will be addressing
                                                                                                   any type of inquiry or concerns, as a GRM.
                                                                                                   There will be a designated personnel to
                                                                                                   deal with the communications amongst the
                                                                                                   grant applicants in KOSGEB's Gaziantep
                                                                                                   local branch.
                                                                                                   Project activities in natural habitats will not
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                       No
                                                                                                   be eligible for application.
                                                                                                   No forest or nature related activities are
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                No
                                                                                                   planned.
                                                                                                   No agricultural activities or any other type
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                           No                     that includes pest agents or control are to
                                                                                                   be funded.
                                                                                                   The grant will not support activities that
                                                                                                   will have any impacts on cultural properties
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11            No                     and chance finds will not be an issue since
                                                                                                   project is not expected to provide any
                                                                                                   grants to construction activities.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                     No                     N/A
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12               No                     Under this small grant program, KOSGEB
                                                                                                   does not support any purchasing of
                                                                                                   immovable assets, civil works or

                         Sep 20, 2018                                                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                                   The World Bank
                                   Development of Businesses and Entrepreneurship for Syrians under Temporary Protection and Turkish Citizens



                                                                                                                      retrofitting. Therefore, the project will not
                                                                                                                      trigger the Bank’s safeguard policy on
                                                                                                                      Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).
                                                                                                                      N/A .Envisaged activities do not include any
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                     No                            type of intervention on dams.

                                                                                                                      No activities impacting international
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                No
                                                                                                                      waterways will take place.
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                         No                            N/A


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
Public Disclosure Copy




                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           17-Sep-2018
                              b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              ESMF is drafted and has been reviewed by the Bank. The final ESMF will be disclosed after the appraisal
                              completion due to OP 10.00 Emergency Procedures.


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Ahmet Levent Yener

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nina Chee                                         19-Sep-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Cem Mete                                          19-Sep-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Sep 20, 2018                                                                                                                              Page 8 of 8
