                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                     CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC17816

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Mongolia                          Project ID:       P152343
                            Project Name:       Mongolia: Second Energy Sector Project (P152343)
                            Task Team           Peter Johansen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           03-Oct-2016                       Estimated         23-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:      GEE02                             Lending           Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):          Energy efficiency in Heat and Power (50%), Transmission and Distribution of
                                                Electricity (50%)
                            Theme(s):           Regulation and competition policy (20%), City-wide Infrastructure and Service
                                                Delivery (30%), Rural services and infrastructure (50% )
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     35.00                       Total Bank Financing:          30.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                               Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                               5.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                     30.00
                              Total                                                                           35.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The development objective of the proposed project is to improve reliability of and access to
                           electricity services and revenue collection in two regional distribution utilities in Mongolia.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project would invest in high priority distribution infrastructure, information
                         communication technology (ICT) and technical assistance (TA). The project is expected to create
                         new assets or rehabilitate existing parts of the power system in two regional distribution companies
                         identified by GoM as the highest priority for investment. Infrastructure investment would cover
Public Disclosure Copy




                         distribution lines and substations, and to a lesser extent, transmission lines. The ICT investment
                         would support better corporate and operations management at two distribution companies, while the
                         TA would enable the distribution and transmission companies to implement the project.

                         The project is envisioned to consist of three components as described below:

                         -        Component A: Upgrade and Expansion of Regional Distribution Companies (estimated cost
                         of $29.2 million, of which $24.2 million is IDA credit): Baganuur -Southeastern Region Electricity
                         Distribution Network (BSEDN) and Erdenet-Bulgan Electricity Distribution Network (EBEDN). The
                         purpose of this component is to reduce system losses and improve reliability of and access to
                         electricity services in selected parts of the distribution network through strengthening of power
                         infrastructure. The support for the component would include: (i) rehabilitation, upgrade and
                         expansion of selected existing substations and associated lines; (ii) construction of new substations
                         and distribution lines; (iii) installation of e-meters and advanced metering infrastructure; and (iv)
                         training in network design, proper installation of equipment, and power system loss reduction and
                         basic financial management. The project would also provide additional substation capacity where
                         needed so at to be able to supply the expected new loads and improve system reliability.

                         -        Component B: Improved efficiency of National Power Transmission Grid (NPTG)
                         (estimated cost of $1.8 million, all IDA credit). There are three subcomponents: (i) installation of
                         switchgears with vacuum circuit breakers; (ii) provision of software for planning and management
                         purposes; and (iii) staff capacity building. This component will invest in switchgears and introduce
                         efficient ICT solutions in NPTG to help reduce transmission losses and improve the efficiency of the
                         transmission network and capacity of NPTG in planning and operations.

                         -        Component C: Project Management, Technical Assistance, and Capacity Building (estimated
Public Disclosure Copy




                         cost of $4.0 million, all IDA credit). The purpose of this component is to strengthen the capacity of
                         the project management office (PMO) under the Ministry of Energy and the implementing units
                         (PIUs) of the regional distribution companies through provision of technical assistance, training and
                         study tours. The component includes: (i) technical assistance for project implementation and special
                         studies; (ii) training programs to improve the project management capabilities; and (iii) project
                         management cost.

                         In parallel with this project the Bank will provide support to GoM through the Scaling up Renewable
                         Energy Program (SREP), for which an Investment Plan was approved in November 2015. SREP will
                         provide grant financing of around $30 million (about half through World Bank and the other half
                         through ADB) to support development of renewable energy generation as well as to support and
                         build capacity in the Energy Regulatory Commission (ERC). The objective of the ERC support will
                         be to improve tariff methodologies, ensure efficient financial pass-through provisions to enable
                         greater private participation, particularly in renewable energy generation - thereby moving the
                         Mongolian power sector toward a more sustainable and market-based development model.

                         The SREP funded support to ERC will need to be linked to the ESP2 project since regulatory
                         improvements will be critical to ensure improved financial performance and thereby sustainable
                         operation of the regional distribution companies. In order to strengthen this link, the Bank is
                         designing a TA activity supported from the Asia Sustainable and Alternative Energy Program
                           (ASTAE ) which is intended to (i) provide a review of proposed investment plans of two of the
                           regional distribution networks with a view on establishing a social baseline and understanding the
                           affordability issues of electricity tariffs; and (ii) to provide a diagnostic of the power sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                           regulatory environment and market structure to identify key gaps and capacity constraints and outline
                           a roadmap to address these issues.

                           Lessons and experience learned and reflected in the project design
                           The project has been designed to take into consideration the lessons learned from other relevant Bank
                           projects in Mongolia and other similar countries, particularly through the experiences of ESP which
                           include the following (Report No: ICR2955):
                           -       Early, intensive and continuous training and capacity building have proven to be critical to
                           the success of projects, particularly when the PIU has no previous experience with Bank processes
                           and the domestic regulatory framework is weak;
                           -       The practice of having the technical consultant sit with the aimag utilities to provide
                           intensive hand-holding trainings and TAs is a key factor contributing to a project?s success; and
                           -       The TA support to the regulator needs to be designed in a focused and pragmatic matter,
                           while taking government?s will to act into consideration. On-going policy dialogue with high level
                           government officials should be maintained during the whole course of the project.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           BSEDN distributes and supplies electricity to a total of 46,568 customers in the Baganuur District
                           close to Ulaanbaatar and in 56 soums (villages) of 7 aimags (districts). The vast majority of the
                           customers are residential households with a small portion of SMEs and mines. EBDEN serves 65,400
                           customers spread over 108 soums in 11 aimags. A majority of residential customers live in ger areas,
                           where most residents are poor. Further characterization of the project areas will be made during the
                           preparation mission when specific investments are established.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Project Management Office sitting under the Ministry of Energy is familiar with Bank-funded
                           projects and has developed internal capacity through its most recent implementation of the Energy
                           Sector Project. Also the PMO envisaged the hiring of environmental and social (E&S) safeguards
                           consultants to assist with conducting E&S assessment, consultation, and preparing safeguards
                           instrument. During project preparation, safeguard specialists will assess the Borrowers capacities for
                           implementing World Bank safeguard policies. If appropriate, recommendations for capacity
                           development/strengthening will be made at that time.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Bernard Baratz (GEEDR)
                           Reisha Anne Jones (GSU02)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies               Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment         Yes            The project will involve rehabilitation and/or
                           OP/BP 4.01                                      replacement of several substation transformers, or
                                                                           other electrical equipment some of which may
                                                                           contain or be contaminated with polychlorinated
                                                                           biphenyls (PCBs). PCBs are considered hazardous
                                                             materials and required specialized analytical
                                                             equipment to establish their presence as well as
                                                             special techniques for their management and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             disposal. The degree to which PCBs are present in
                                                             various elements of the proposed project will have to
                                                             be determined and a detailed management plan for
                                                             the removal, handling, transport and ultimate
                                                             disposal will be required as part of the overall project
                                                             Environmental Management Plan (EMP). The EMP
                                                             will also include requirements prohibiting all new
                                                             electrical equipment (transformers, switches,
                                                             capacitors etc.) from containing PCBs.

                                                             The project will also involve removal and
                                                             replacement of numerous wooden poles supporting
                                                             existing power distribution lines. In general wooden
                                                             poles are treated with wood preservatives
                                                             (pentachlorophenol, creosote, copper salts, etc.). By
                                                             their very nature, these materials may be considered
                                                             hazardous which would make the wooden poles
                                                             unsuitable for subsequent use as fuel. During project
                                                             preparation, the wood preservatives used for these
                                                             poles will be determined. The EMP will include
                                                             specific guidance on the management (handling,
                                                             transport, and disposal/recycle/reuse) of these poles.

                                                             The project may also involve replacement of
                                                             numerous electrical meters. Although these meters
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             are not expected to contain hazardous materials, their
                                                             disposal still represents a potentially significant
                                                             waste management issue that will be addressed in the
                                                             EMP.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This project will not support or lead to the
                                                             conversion of natural habitats. Most anticipated
                                                             investments will be rehabilitation or replacement of
                                                             existing equipment (substations, OHL support
                                                             structures-wooden poles etc.).

                                                             There may be investment in expanding existing
                                                             substations or constructing new substations.
                                                             However, screening criteria will be developed to
                                                             ensure that: (a) no investments which involve the
                                                             significant conversion of critical natural habitats;
                                                             and/or (b) have acceptable mitigation measures in
                                                             place for those investments likely to affect non-
                                                             critical natural habitats
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   This project will not lead to the destruction of forests
                                                             or forest ecosystems. As mentioned above, most
                                                             anticipated investments will be rehabilitation or
                                                             replacement of existing equipment (substations, OHL
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             support structures-wooden poles etc.).

                                                             There may be some investment in expanding existing
                                                             substations or constructing new substations. During
                                                             preparation the Task Team will verify that no direct
                                                             or linked investments in areas supporting destruction
                                                             or conversion of forests and forest ecosystems which
                                                             affect the management of forests or the rights and
                                                             welfare of forest dependent communities, will be
                                                             supported.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No    The project will not finance any activities that would
                                                             result in procurement or use of pesticides. There will
                                                             be no pesticide use in construction or maintenance of
                                                             works. Any land clearing in preparation for civil
                                                             works and/or maintaining rights-of-way will be
                                                             undertaken manually or mechanically.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   While known physical cultural resources can be
                         OP/BP 4.11                          avoided by sub-project design, there is a chance that
                                                             these resources could be uncovered during the course
                                                             of civil works hence this policy is triggered. A
                                                             chance finds procedure will be included in the ESMF
                                                             to cover these eventualities.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No    Mongolia has an estimated 24 ethnic groups, which
                         4.10                                are either descendants of Mongolian nomadic tribes,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             or are groups of Turkic origin who have become
                                                             Mongolised over time. The majority are the Khalkh
                                                             who comprise over 90% of the population. Except
                                                             for the Kazakh minority group residing in western
                                                             Mongolia, all ethnic groups speak Mongolian
                                                             dialects which are comprehensible to speakers of
                                                             Khalkha and to each other. Only the Kazakhs rely
                                                             upon a distinct spoken language.

                                                             The majority of Mongolia➢❨ s ethnic minority
                                                             groups share similar customs, traditions and systems
                                                             of production as the Khalkh. With the exception of
                                                             the predominantly Muslim and linguistically
                                                             differentiated Kazakhs in western Mongolia, and
                                                             traditionally nomadic reindeerherding Tsaatan
                                                             peoples in the north, Mongolia➢❨ s ethnic groups are
                                                             not considered to be economically, socially or legally
                                                             marginalized or otherwise disadvantaged in a manner
                                                             which would restrict their ability to participate in the
                                                             project. The project will not cover those areas
                                                                                                                        populated by either the Kazakh or Tsaatan and is
                                                                                                                        therefore not expected to trigger this policy.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        Improvements to the distribution system will require
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 BP 4.12                                                                                installation of some physical infrastructure.
                                                                                                                        Improvements will be within the existing
                                                                                                                        infrastructure footprint, within the established right
                                                                                                                        of way, or on government land. This OP is triggered
                                                                                                                        in the event that improvements are installed on land
                                                                                                                        that is not already within the established right of
                                                                                                                        way, existing footprint or government land. As sites
                                                                                                                        and any impacts on populations are yet to be
                                                                                                                        finalized, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
                                                                                                                        will be prepared. The RPF will lay out the steps to be
                                                                                                                        taken when any land is involuntarily acquired,
                                                                                                                        purchased under negotiated settlement or voluntarily
                                                                                                                        donated for project activities.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance or retrofit any dams.

                                 Projects on International                                   No                         Potential investments under the project are not
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   expected to have any adverse effects on the water
                                                                                                                        quantity or quality of international waterways.
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      Project activities be will not be undertaken in
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                disputed areas

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 24-Oct-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      Environmental and Social Impact Assessment and Environment Management Plan: June-August
                                      2016
                                      Resettlement/ Land Acquisition Policy Frameworks: June-August 2016
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Johansen
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                                                                                      Date: 10-Jun-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Julia M. Fraser (PMGR)                                                                                                 Date: 10-Jun-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
