                                            INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                               IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                 Report No.: ISDSC16870

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Indonesia                         Project ID:     P159047
                            Project Name:        Project Development Facility
                            Team Leader(s):      Tuo Shi
                            Estimated Date       31-Aug-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GSURR                             Lending         IPF
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3                                 Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Indonesia Sustainable Urbanization                                                               3
                            Environment         F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           12.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access and support LGs in project
                           identification, planning and preparation through the structuring and operationalization of a Project
                           Development Facility (PDF).

                           13.     Structured under PT.SMI with the Regional Infrastructure Development Fund (RIDF), the
                           PDF would primarily support the development of a project pipeline as well as to channel technical
                           assistance to LGs in areas of project identification, design and construction supervision, and related
                           advisory services.
                           C. Project Description
                           16.      A Project Development Facility (PDF), whose initial establishment is supported by an RETF,
                           will be established as part of the RIDF project (component 1 of RIDF, which is now being prepared),
                           with the objective of building a subproject pipeline for RIDF by supporting subnational governments
                           in subproject identification, planning and preparation. PDF support will help ensure that subprojects
                           are consistent with the technical, financial, economic, social and environmental appraisal standards
                           of RIDF.

                           17.     The activities eligible for PDF support are:
                         (i)      project identification and preliminary structuring;
                         (ii)     project preparation studies, including feasibility studies, safeguards studies and detailed
                         engineering designs;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (iii)    design and supervision assistance;
                         (iv)     advisory services related to financial management, environmental and social assessments,
                         etc.; and
                         (v)      preparation of procurement and contract documents.

                         These activities are consistent with good practice cases of similar facilities in India, the Philippines
                         and South Africa. These facilities are typically revolving funds financed by the respective
                         government and international agencies. They provide assistance in the areas of undertaking pre-
                         feasibility studies, environmental and social impact assessments, project documentation and
                         preparation of detailed project reports.

                         18.       To avoid potential conflicts of interest, the PDF will be housed under a separate business unit
                         within PT. SMI, specifically under the Project Development Division. This division of PT. SMI
                         already undertakes activities similar to those proposed for the PDF, which would become an
                         additional activity under the same directorial oversight. The PDF would naturally adopt the same
                         eligibility and compliance standards of RIDF. Options for ensuring the financial sustainability of the
                         PDF include adopting a fee-for-service structure, and including a small spread on all RIDF loans
                         with proceeds earmarked for the recapitalization of the PDF.

                         19.      Before receiving assistance from PDF, LGs initially submit loan application to RIDF that
                         must fulfill following pre-conditions: i) Infrastructure to be financed is public infrastructure that is
                         most needed (priority) and is contained in the RPJMD; ii) Approval of the relevant legislature
                         (DPRD) at the subnational level; iii) subnational government is not in arrears, whether with SLA or
                         other loan sources; iv) DSCR of at least 2.5 times (as stipulated in PP NO.30/2011); v) Loan amount
                         should not exceed 75% of the accumulated general revenue amount in the APBD of the previous
                         fiscal year; vi) current fiscal year APBD deficit, if any, is within the limits prescribed by applicable
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regulations; vii) Audit results from BPK (supreme audit institution) from each of the last three years
                         should be at least WDP (qualified opinion) or better; viii) Recommendation from the Ministry of
                         Home Affairs. In addition, RIDF unit will also identify readiness level of each proposed subprojects.
                         There are three types of subprojects that could apply for RIDF funding:
                         i.       Type 1 ➢❨ subprojects in the early stages of preparation (with sites that have not been
                         selected and design options that are still open);
                         ii.      Type 2 ➢❨ subprojects that have not been fully prepared. Some of the subproject documents
                         might have been prepared, but in need of an update or revalidation;
                         iii.     Type 3 ➢❨ subprojects that have been fully prep              ared.

                         RIDF will inform LGs that PDF can assist with subproject preparation if their subprojects fall under
                         type 1 and 2. PDF will, then, provide interested LGs with detailed information on requirements for
                         PDF grant application.

                         20.     The PDF is a facility which facilitates robust project development, by supporting the LGs in
                         taking projects through feasibility study, detailed engineering design, safeguards studies such as
                         AMDAL, EMP, LARAP, IPP, etc. and other project preparation documents. The objectives of PDF
                         are to meet the capacity gap of LGs in planning and designing subprojects as well as to generate
                         project pipeline for RIDF lending facility for LGs and ensure quality delivery of projects. The PDF is
                         a business development operation, independent from the RIDF lending facility but both are
                         supporting to each other, both under the overall World Bank-supported operations to support
                         infrastructure development in LGs housed at PT SMI. The PDF, once it is mature would receive
Public Disclosure Copy




                         other source of financing, from international donors, financing institutions and APBN. The PDF is
                         designed to be a development facility to support LGs in developing subprojects which are primarily
                         realistic, feasible and within the ambit of RIDF lending facility. The PDF would also result in
                         creating a pipeline of bank-able infrastructure subprojects sponsored by LGs, for the RIDF to
                         evaluate lending to.

                         21.     Eligible LGs. All LGs applying for RIDF funding are eligible towards receiving the PDF
                         support. Eligibility towards PDF support will be assessed for the LGs based on the sectors and
                         subprojects that are eligible for RIDF financing. All LGs are eligible towards receiving the PDF
                         support except those, who have defaulted under any of the earlier grant agreements under PDF
                         support. The type and extent of support shall be determined upon the evaluation of the LGs➢❨
                         application by RIDF. Further assistance shall be provided to the LG within the designated limits of
                         maximum financial assistance.

                         22.      Eligible activities under PDF funding. The RETF supported PDF would be used to
                         establish the PDF and to assist LGs in the below listed aspects of project development. All other
                         activities beyond the list would have to be undertaken by LG through its own internal resources /
                         other sources of funding. The PDF would ensure that the subprojects prepared with its support are
                         consistent with technical, financial, economic, social and environmental appraisal standards
                         established for RIDF lending operation under the umbrella of RIDF operations. Therefore, principles,
                         procedures, and requirements for environmental safeguards applied for activities supported by PDF
                         will be the same with those of RIDF. Specifically, eligible activities under PDF funding include:

                         ➯❪¡      Project identification and preliminary structuring ➢❨ LGs often appreciate the solution
                         involving larger infrastructure intervention, however, they are to some extent unable to identify the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         infrastructure interventions in a project format. The PDF will assist the LG towards subproject
                         identification, prioritization and preliminary structuring.
                         ➯❪¡      Project preparation studies ➢❨ feasibility studies, environmental and social safeguards
                         studies and detailed engineering designs - The PDF would support LGs by appointment of
                         consultants / advisors to assist them in undertaking technical including detailed engineering designs
                         (DEDs), financial including FS, environmental and social assessment. The appointment of such
                         advisors / consultants shall follow a transparent procurement procedure, recommended by PDF team
                         and be driven by the LG.
                         ➯❪¡      Design-supervision assistance - Certain technically critical subpro jects, might require all
                         round support and would require accountability from the consultants in terms of design (for instance,
                         a regional landfill or a treatment plant). In that case, the PDF can engage a consultant to both design
                         and to supervise / vet the ou tputs for the subprojects.
                         ➯❪¡      Preparation of Procurement and Contract Documents - The PDF would support LGs in
                         preparation of contract / procurement documents, for subprojects being supported by the PDF. Over
                         time, PDF could help develop model / standard pr ocurement and contract documents that can be
                         used across various subproject types / sectors. This value addition of the PDF to the current system,
                         can subsequently lead to standard procurement policies / acts, to be followed by LGs.
                         ➯❪¡      Capacity building for local governments ➢❨ The PDF would support LGs in the form of
                         workshop, training, or advisory support in the area of technical, fi nancial, project management, and
                         environmental and social aspects required to strengthen their capacity for subproject preparation and
                         implementation.

                         23.     Eligible sectors / subprojects: All sectors and subprojects eligible for lending under the RIDF
Public Disclosure Copy




                         lending facility shall be eligible for support under the PDF. The nature of subproject, eligible under
                         RIDF lending facility shall also be eligible for support under PDF: (1) water supply and sanitation
                         (including water supply and sewerage); (2) environmental infrastructure (including solid waste
                         management and drainage, and energy efficiency projects etc.); (3) low-income-housing and slum
                         upgrading (including public or low-income housing projects, public housing units in slum areas,
                         integrated urban upgrading including water, sewerage, drainage, roads, street lighting, etc.); (4)
                         transportation and logistics infrastructure (road, public transportation, terminals, parking facilities,
                         bridges, etc.); and (5) social infrastructure (schools, hospitals, public markets, etc.). Refer to Table 1
                         for a complete list.

                         Table 1: Eligible Sectors and Subprojects
                         Eligible Sectors Eligible Subprojects
                         1       Water Supply and Sanitation     Water Supply
                         ➢❨¢ Source augmentation
                         ➢❨¢ Water treatment plan, storage reservoirs, pumping machinery and system automation.
                         ➢❨¢ Trunk and distribution network (new and rehabilitation)
                         Sewerage
                         ➢❨¢ Collection network and waste-water treatment facility
                         ➢❨¢ Pumping stations and machinery
                         ➢❨¢ Regional facilities and system automation
                         2       Environmental Infrastructure Solid Waste Management
                         ➢❨¢ Construction of a municipal waste-processing facility (sanitary, land-fill, processing plant,
                         incineration unit, etc.).
                         ➢❨¢ Construction of construction and demolition waste processing facility.
                         ➢❨¢ Waste recycling project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ➢❨¢ Purchase of vehicles and bins for solid waste collection.
                         Ã¢➂❨ Â¢          Development of vehicle-tracking and waste disposal monitoring system.

                         Drainage
                         ➢❨¢ Development of storm water drainage network
                         ➢❨¢ Rehabilitation of existing drainage networks
                         ➢❨¢ De-silting and/or strengthening of natural drains

                         Energy Efficiency
                         ➢❨¢ Improvement of electricity installation and equipment in building and public facilities
                         ➢❨¢ Retrofitting building and infrastructure with efficient energy consumption instruments
                         ➢❨¢ Improving system that can control energy consumption
                         3        Low-Income Housing and Slum Upgrading         ➢❨¢ Public or low income housing
                         projects.
                         ➢❨¢ Integrated urban upgrading including water, sewerage, drainage, roads and street lighting,
                         etc.
                         4        Transportation and Logistic Infrastructure    ➢❨¢ New carriageway development (at
                         grade, flyovers, bridges)
                         ➢❨¢ Road rehabilitation, upgrading and/or widening
                         ➢❨¢ Junction-improvements projects
                         ➢❨¢ Development of mass transit (non - rail based) infrastructure.
                         ➢❨¢ Development of pedestrian infrastructure (foot-over bridges, footpath, street furniture, street-
                         lighting, etc.).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         ➢❨¢ Development of pedestrian infrastructure (foot-over bridges, footpath, street furniture, street-
                         lighting, etc.).
                         ➢❨¢ Purchase of public buses
                         ➢❨¢ Development of street-furniture for bus-stops
                         ➢❨¢ Development of bus depot and shelters
                         ➢❨¢ Development of dedicated BRT lane and related infrastructure, tracking and monitoring
                         system for operating BRT etc.
                         ➢❨¢ Development of multi-level car parking structure
                         ➢❨¢ Development of traffic monitoring and management system
                         ➢❨¢ Development of building and/or facilities to house traffic management unit.
                         ➢❨¢ Irrigation development
                         5        Social Infrastructure ➢❨¢ School construction and rehabilitation
                         ➢❨¢ Hospital and health clinic construction and rehabilitation
                         ➢❨¢ Public market facilities
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         31.      Given the nature of the RIDF and PDF➢❨ s activities and its early stage of establishment
                         process, the subprojects➢❨ type and scope as well as geographical distribution of the LGs that will
                         apply for and be supported by the PDF are unknown at this stage. LGs and types of subprojects that
                         will receive support from the PDF will only be known once the RIDF and PDF are in operation. As is
                         the case with RIDF, the project anticipates that LGs meeting the eligibility criteria for receiving
                         support from PDF could be located anywhere in the country. Type and scope of eligible subprojects
                         as well as documents to be prepared through the assistance of the PDF will be determined once the
                         RIDF➢❨ s evaluation of the application package has been completed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         32.      As explained earlier, there will be three types of subprojects in terms of readiness when
                         RIDF receives the application of a subproject proposal from LG. Potential environmental and social
                         impacts that might entail from the downstream investment identified by the outputs of the PDF
                         support will be assessed during FS or right after the FS is completed. The type of environmental and
                         social safeguards instruments to manage such impacts will be determined at and will be supported by
                         PDF. Draft of relevant instruments will be prepared in accordance with the requirements specified in
                         the ESMF. Update on the draft safeguards instruments might be carried out during or after the
                         preparation of the Detailed Engineering Designs (DEDs).

                         33.     Given the eligible sectors and subprojects that would be eligible for RIDF financing, hence
                         also would eligible for receiving PDF supports, potential environmental and social impacts of the
                         downstream investment of which preparation is supported by the PDF would range from medium to
                         high impacts, could be diverse and irreversible. From environmental assessment point of view, the
                         PDF is an FI category that would support preparation of a subproject with category A or B.
                         34.     To better illustrate safeguards management approach to the eligible activities under PDF
                         funding, the below matrix is developed in conjunction with the Interim Guidelines on the Application
                         of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust
                         Funds Administered by the Bank.
                         Table 2: Indicative Safeguards Instruments Required Related to PDF activities
                         Eligible Activities Under PDF Funding Potential Environmental and Social Implications Indicative
                         EA Category of possible projects           Indicative list of instruments to be prepared in each activity
Public Disclosure Copy




                         supported by PDF
                         Project identification and preliminary structuringThese activities usually do not have potential
                         adverse environmental and social implications or risks C             ESMF will be used to help screen
                         the subprojects.
                         Project preparation studies such as feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs      These
                         types of activities may have significant down-stream impacts. Each of the proposed infrastructure
                         investments must be screened (like in any Bank financed investment lending operations) for its
                         potential social and environmental impacts to identify/define: (a) safeguards policies triggered; (b)
                         EA category; (c) safeguards instruments to be prepared during preparation of engineering designs;
                         and (d) consultation and disclosure requirements.            A or B Specific environmental and social
                         safeguards instruments (such as ESIA, EMP, LARAP, IPP) will be prepared in consistent with the
                         requirements specified in the ESMF. The ToR for project preparation studies and safeguards
                         instruments will be reviewed by the safeguards team of PDF and by the Bank.
                         Design-supervision assistance These activities usually do not have potential adverse environmental
                         and social implications or risks B or C TOR for the consultant should incorporate the scope of the
                         design/supervision for the implementation of environmental and social safeguards instruments
                         Preparation of Procurement and Contract Documents            These activities usually do not have
                         potential adverse environmental and social implications or risks B or C Bidding document and
                         contract include activities required by the environmental and social safeguards instruments to be
                         implemented during construction
                         Capacity building for local governments These activities usually do not have potential adverse
                         environmental and social implications or risks. Depending on the mandate of the institutional
                         recipient of capacity building, there may be reputational risks if the Bank is perceived as assisting
                         indirectly in the implementation the PDF that is not attuned with Bank safeguard principles.           C
                         ESMF provides capacity building program which will be implemented during the course of PDF
                         operation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                         36.      35.      The Directorate General of State Assets (DJKN) of the Ministry of Finance (MOF)
                         would be the Executing Agency (EA) of the RIDF including PDF, on behalf of the Borrower (MOF).
                         The PDF will be housed in the PT. SMI as a new operation arm (unit or division), and will be
                         developed exclusively to serve the LGs and will operate under a separate management and
                         independent from the ongoing PT SMI➢❨ s operations for PPPs and SOEs. SMI is an infrastructure
                         financing company which was established on 26 February 2009 as a state owned enterprise (SOE)
                         with 100 percent shares owned by the Government of Indonesia through the MoF. PT. SMI plays an
                         active role in facilitating infrastructure financing as well as preparing projects and serving advisory
                         for infrastructure projects in Indonesia. Based on its original mandate, PT. SMI aims to finance
                         commercially-viable projects including investments in toll road & bridges, transportation, oil and
                         gas, telecommunication, waste management, electricity, irrigation and waterway, and water supply
                         sectors. By mandate, PT. SMI provides financing for public-private partnership (PPPs) and private
                         sector projects, however as of to date this mandate has not been fully implemented due to rigidities in
                         the pipeline for such projects. Since 2015, PT SMI has been given an expanded mandate to provide
                         financing and technical assistance to local governments (LGs) to accelerate the country➢❨ s
                         infrastructure development. PT. SMI is one of the key shareholders (with shares of 30 percent) in the
                         PT Indonesia Infrastructure Financing (IIF), an independent business entity, which has been in full
                         operations since 2011 and since then continued to have a growing portfolio for private sector
                         infrastructure projects. PT. IIF has an Operations Manual that includes an ESSF and ESMS which
                         were developed in reference to IFC, World Bank and ADB Environmental and Social Safeguards
                         Standards and Policies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         36.      Currently, PT. SMI has an Environmental and Social Management System (ESMS) which
                         was developed based on the Indonesia country system, i.e. Indonesian regulations. However, the
                         ESMS also refers to the World Bank and IFC Standards for health and safety. The Bank preliminary
                         review noted that the ESMS is heavily focused on environmental aspects. The social aspects
                         including Indigenous Peoples and Involuntary Resettlement needs to be strengthened. The ESMS,
                         enacted as a Director Regulation issued in January 2015, has been adopted to screen proposed PPP
                         projects for financing, determine environmental and social risk level, and carry out due diligence
                         assessment, all of which, will determine the gaps of meeting the requirements specified in the ESMS.
                         Should there is a gap identified based on this due diligence assessment, the project proponent seeking
                         for financing is required to prepare a corrective action plan (CAP) to meet the requirements specified
                         in the ESMS.

                         37.       The RIDF and PDF will be in complement and supportive to each other. Previously, within
                         the PT. SMI organizational structure, environmental and social management is mainly managed by
                         the Environmental and Social Unit under the Risk Management Division. After 24 March 2016, the
                         unit is now elevated to a Division level called ESSBCM (Environmental and Social Safeguards
                         Business Continuity Management) under Risk Management Directorate. The division has hired a
                         social expert since June 2015 and a senior environmental expert since April 2016. There is also a
                         pool of on-call consultants including environmental and social experts under the Project Advisory
                         Division. PT SMI is planning to hire a new senior social safeguards specialist this year. This new
                         institutional arrangements and staffing for environmental and social safeguards management is part
                         of the recommendations provided by a Consultant Team, hired by the Bank to assist the MoF, in a
                         Business Plan for RIDF and PDF, of which institutional assessment and strengthening are part. Some
                         other key recommendations relevant to safeguards are as follows:
                         ➢❨¢ PT SMI needs to improve its current ESMS into ESMF that will be adopted for both RIDF
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and PDF based on its current ESMS, World Bank triggered safeguards policies, and recent applicable
                         Indonesian Laws and Regulations, as well as lessons learned from the PT IIF;
                         ➢❨¢ PT SMI needs to develop an Operations Manual (OM) as an operational tool for the PT. SMI
                         staff to implement the ESMF in its business operations;
                         ➢❨¢ PT. SMI has to strengthen its management capacity for environmental and social safeguards,
                         including staffing and capacity building;
                         ➢❨¢ PT SMI will have to assist the capacity of LGs in environmental and social management,
                         through outreach, training and technical assistance.

                         38.     Recently, PT SMI has developed ten principles of Environmental and Social Safeguards
                         (ESS) similar to IFC Performance Standards for projects to be financed by multilateral financial
                         resources. PT SMI is developing a single ESMF that will be used for both RIDF and PDF. The
                         ESMF is developed in reference to this PT SMI➢❨ s ESS along with relevant Indonesian laws and
                         regulations and the triggered World Bank safeguards policies. The ESMF also takes into account the
                         Bank➢❨ s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Bank Safeguards Policies for TA and TFs, as
                         well as Guidelines on Advisory Services, as relevant. The ESMF will be elaborated in the Operations
                         Manual as a practical tool for PT SMI and its LG clients.

                         The following main aspects are to be covered by the ESMF (a single ESMF for RIDF and PDF):
                         a.       Objectives, project components to be financed by the RIDF and PDF, organizational
                         structure of SMI that shows the position of RIDF and PDF and operational linkage of the two, types
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of eligible sectors, type of subprojects in terms of level of preparedness, list of ineligible activities;
                         b.       Safeguards policies triggered; WBG Environmental Health and Safety Guidelines;
                         c.       GOI Laws and regulations and gap assessment between the GOI➢❨ s laws and regulations
                         and the triggered OPs; actions to address such gaps that are mainstreamed in the ESMF
                         d.       The Bank➢❨ s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Bank Safeguards Policies for TA
                         and TFs, as well as Guidelines on Advisory Services, as relevant
                         e.       Generic potential environmental and social impacts for eligible sectors
                         f.       Process, procedures and requirements:
                         a.       Screening of potential environment and social impacts;
                         b.       Subproject category
                         c.       Determination of specific safeguard plans/instruments to be prepared for subproject (ESIA/
                         AMDAL, EMP/UKL-UPL, ECOPs, SOP),
                         d.       Screening and assessment and how to address ancillary facilities and potentially linked
                         activities;
                         e.       Screening and assessment of cumulative impacts following established methodology such as
                         the IFC Good Practice Hand Book on Cumulative Impact Assessment;
                         f.       Preparation of safeguards instruments
                         g.       Identifying whether the proposed subproject already has the required safeguards
                         instruments; identify the necessary safeguards instruments needed versus those that have been
                         available; review the gaps between the available instruments with the requirements specified in the
                         ESMF; defining the scope and activities in the Corrective Action Plan; In the case a proposed
                         subproject does not have any safeguards instruments, require the LGs to prepare the instruments in
                         accordance with requirements specified in the ESMF;
                         h.       Environmental Management Frameworks including guidance to prepare ESIA/AMDAL and
                         UKL-UPL, Generic ECOPs, Pest Management, PCR Management Plan and Pest Management
Public Disclosure Copy




                         i.       RPF (including PF) and IPPF;
                         j.       Stakeholders Analysis, Consultations;
                         k.       Institutional arrangements for environmental and social safeguards management for
                         screening, review/assess, approval, preparation and implementation of safeguards instruments,
                         monitoring and reporting
                         l.       Institutional arrangements for environmental and social safeguards management for
                         screening, identify and manage any potential gaps or inconsistency between TA policy products (this
                         PDF) and triggered Bank safeguard policies, identify safeguards instruments appropriate for the
                         downstream investment, and guidance to prepare such safeguards instruments;
                         m.       Grievance Redress Mechanisms;
                         n.       Disclosures;
                         o.       Capacity Building Assessment Plan, developed based on a safeguards institutional
                         assessment for PT SMI and capacity of LGs. The institutional assessment of PT SMI and LGs will
                         lead to the identification on the scope of capacity building program, resources and budget estimates
                         for the RIDF and PDF operations;
                         p.       Supervision and Monitoring of the implementation of safeguards instruments implemented
                         by the local governments

                         39.     PT. SMI will use the ESMF for all of its clients both for the RIDF and PDF operations
                         regardless of financing/capital source (RIDF, government budget, and/or other donors, etc.) for a
                           particular subproject receiving support from RIDF and/or PDF. Currently the RIDF is preparing an
                           ESMF that will be used not only for LG seeking infrastructure financing from RIDF, but also will be
                           applied to LGs seeking technical assistance from PDF for project identification, structuring and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           preparation. The ESSBCM (Environmental and Social Safeguards Business Continuity Management)
                           under Risk Management Directorate will adopt a single ESMF for both PDF and RIDF operations.

                           40.     The Draft ESMF has been consulted with relevant stakeholders during June 21-22, 2016, and
                           disclosed in the PT SMI➢❨ s website on June 15, 2016 and in World Bank InfoShop on July 18,
                           2016. The outputs of the support of the PDF to LGs, e.g. Feasibility Study and safeguards
                           instruments for project investments seeking financing from RIDF, will be assessed by RIDF during
                           subproject appraisal in reference to the ESMF and reviewed by the Bank until the EESBCM of PT
                           SMI has sufficient capacity.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Indira Dharmapatni (GSUID)
                           Krisnan Pitradjaja Isomartana (GEN2A)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       Yes             The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to
                           BP 4.01                                            increase access and support LGs in project
                                                                              identification, planning and preparation through
                                                                              the structuring and operationalization of a
                                                                              Project Development Facility (PDF) of which
                                                                              downstream activities of the outputs from the
                                                                              PDF would be financed by the RIDF lending.

                                                                              No physical infrastructure construction will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                              conducted in this RETF supported PDF. As
                                                                              explained earlier in the paragraph on eligible
                                                                              activities under PDF funding, the PDF will
                                                                              provide LGs technical assistance in project
                                                                              identification and preliminary structuring,
                                                                              preparing feasibility studies, environmental and
                                                                              social safeguards studies/instruments and
                                                                              DEDs; design-supervision assistance; preparing
                                                                              procurement and contract documents; and
                                                                              providing capacity building for LGs. RIDF
                                                                              lending facility would finance eligible
                                                                              subprojects proposed by LGs, which are likely
                                                                              medium and large-scale infrastructure.
                                                                              Therefore the downstream impact of the
                                                                              preparation and feasibility studies financed
                                                                              under the PDF pose potential risks.

                                                                              At this concept stage, the PDF is proposed to be
                                                                              Category FI because it involves investment of
                                                             Bank funds through a financial intermediary, in
                                                             the future projects that may result in adverse
                                                             environmental and social impacts. As a
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             Category FI project, future projects to be
                                                             financed could fall as Category A or B; it is
                                                             because of the potential environmental and
                                                             social downstream impacts from preparation
                                                             activities of the eligible sectors (water,
                                                             transport, urban, social infrastructure) might be
                                                             significant, diverse and irreversible. The future
                                                             subprojects may also have social downstream
                                                             impacts other than land acquisition and
                                                             resettlement and possibility of cumulative
                                                             impacts and other impacts related to linked
                                                             activities funded by government or other donors
                                                             and potential impacts of ancillary facilities.

                                                             However, the exact nature, scale and location of
                                                             impacts can only be identified at the time that
                                                             RIDF evaluate the application of proposed
                                                             subproject documents. Thus an ESMF will be
                                                             prepared as safeguards instruments for the
                                                             preparation and feasibilities studies as well as
                                                             for other preparation studied to be supported by
                                                             PDF.


                                                             The ToR for feasibility studies will be reviewed
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             by PT SMI Safeguards team supported by the
                                                             Bank➢❨ s safeguards specialist to ensure that
                                                             the studies will cover environmental and social
                                                             aspects above. Necessary safeguards
                                                             instruments preparation funded by PDF during
                                                             the feasibilities studies or right after the FS
                                                             completed will also be reviewed by the Bank
                                                             together with PT SMI until they have a
                                                             sufficient capacity.

                                                             The ESMF shall also refer to the Bank's Interim
                                                             Guidelines on the Application of Bank
                                                             Safeguard Policies for TA and TFs for activities
                                                             to be supported by the PDF. The Draft ESMF is
                                                             being prepared and discussed with the Bank.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   Some of the feasibility studies of infrastructure
                                                             projects may interact with natural habitats
                                                             especially for municipalities or districts located
                                                             in eastern part of Indonesia (e.g. Papua,
                                                         Kalimantan, Sulawesi, and NTB). Potential
                                                         impacts on Natural Habitat will become part of
                                                         the feasibility studies that will be screened and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         addressed through the ESMF, which will spell
                                                         out that the project shall not finance any
                                                         development on protected areas nor the projects
                                                         with potential significant conversion or
                                                         degradation to critical natural habitats or natural
                                                         habitats.

                                                         For subprojects that is located adjacent to a
                                                         protected areas or that may change the purpose
                                                         and/or designation of a protected area or natural
                                                         habitats, the feasibility studies shall be required
                                                         to prepare a full environmental assessment (an
                                                         ESIA or to conduct AMDAL study acceptable
                                                         to the Bank) . This includes: forest protection
                                                         area; river edges; marine/freshwater
                                                         conservation areas; nature tourism park; peat
                                                         areas; areas, surrounding lakes and reservoirs,
                                                         coastal mangrove areas, water catchment areas;
                                                         national parks; coastal edges, forest parks;
                                                         cultural reserves; areas surrounding springs;
                                                         scientific research areas; nature conservation
                                                         areas; and areas susceptible to natural hazards
                                                         (ESMF Annex 2).

                                                         All these mechanisms shall be ensured to be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                         fulfilled by LGs during PDF activities by using
                                                         the ESMF.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36        Yes   Subproject activities may take place in close
                                                         proximity to or within forest areas. However,
                                                         during preparation activities, the ESMF shall
                                                         screen out any subprojects with potential
                                                         significant conversion or degradation to critical
                                                         natural forest or natural forest (protection forest,
                                                         conservation forest). For a subproject that is
                                                         located in production forest area, the PDF will
                                                         support LGs in preparing an environmental
                                                         assessment and shall fulfill forestry regulation
                                                         for land use permit as per Bank➢❨ s related
                                                         previous investment project (e.g. Upper Cisokan
                                                         Pumped Storage etc.).
                         Pest Management OP 4.09   Yes   The policy is triggered as there are potential
                                                         irrigation subprojects proposed by LGs. From
                                                         38 applicants (bottom up approach) there is one
                                                         proposal related to irrigation improvement from
                                                                 West Sumatra. The project shall not finance the
                                                                 purchase of pesticides but the construction of
                                                                 new irrigation systems for a large coverage area
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 (such as more than 3000 Ha) would potentially
                                                                 increase pesticide use significantly. During FS,
                                                                 a specific mitigation measure shall be required
                                                                 such as the preparation of ESIA or EMP for this
                                                                 kind of subproject. For irrigation projects with
                                                                 medium scale such as the above mentioned, the
                                                                 implementation of IPM (Integrated Pest
                                                                 Management) will become part of the
                                                                 Environmental Management Plan.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   Yes   Some of the subprojects included under PDF
                         BP 4.11                                 may affect cultural property and trigger OP
                                                                 4.11. The environmental screening procedures
                                                                 specified in the ESMF during PDF operation to
                                                                 support LGs will ensure that this consideration
                                                                 to become part of the FS studies and a project
                                                                 will not adversely affect sites having
                                                                 archeological, paleontological, historical,
                                                                 religious or unique natural values.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     Yes   The project anticipates that preparation of any
                                                                 LGs and subprojects could be eligible for
                                                                 getting support from the PDF. It is expected that
                                                                 LGs and subprojects seeking financing from the
                                                                 PDF come from any areas in the country where
                                                                 IPs communities which include Masyarakat
                                                                 Hukum Adat (MHA) communities might
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                 presence and be affected by the downstream
                                                                 investment of the studies financed by the PDF.
                                                                 The presence and impacts on IPs or MHA
                                                                 communities can only be defined during the
                                                                 Feasibility Studies and/or DEDs is carried out.
                                                                 The ESMF will include an IPPF developed in
                                                                 accordance with OP/BP 4.10 and government
                                                                 regulations that are relevant with IPs, which will
                                                                 be part of the ESMF. The IPPF is a stand-alone
                                                                 document as well.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    Yes   The project anticipates that the clients of PT.
                         4.12                                    SMI could be any LGs and subprojects eligible
                                                                 for financing with a set of criteria for getting
                                                                 support from RIDF, hence also from PDF. It is
                                                                 confirmed that eligible sectors that PT. SMI will
                                                                 be financing with the RIDF, hence also support
                                                                 from PDF funds, include: (i) water supply and
                                                                 sanitation; (ii) environmental infrastructure; (iii)
                                                                 low-income housing and slum upgrading; (iv)
                                                                             transportation and logistics infrastructure; and
                                                                             (v) social infrastructure. Locations,
                                                                             characteristics and scale of subprojects and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             potential impacts due to involuntary
                                                                             resettlement as per OP/BP 4.12 policy are yet to
                                                                             be defined during PDF implementation when
                                                                             the Feasibility Studies and/or DEDs are being
                                                                             prepared. Looking at the nature of eligible
                                                                             sectors and subprojects it is very likely that the
                                                                             proposed subprojects of which preparation is
                                                                             supported by the PDF, will involve land
                                                                             acquisition and/or involuntary resettlement. The
                                                                             ESMF will include an RPF developed in
                                                                             accordance with OP4.12 and meeting the
                                                                             requirements of the Indonesian Law 2/2012 and
                                                                             the implementing Regulations on Land
                                                                             Acquisition for Public Purposes. The RPF will
                                                                             be a stand-alone document as well.
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37         Yes             The PDF activities may involve the preparation/
                                                                             feasibility studies of the construction of a dam
                                                                             as part of water supply system and water
                                                                             resource management infrastructure in the
                                                                             region. The ESMF will be used during this PDF
                                                                             support activities.

                                                                             For small dams (<15 m in height), policy
                                                                             requirement is for the dam to be designed by a
                                                                             qualified engineer. For large dams (15 m and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                             higher), the ESMF shall requires reviews by an
                                                                             independent panel of experts, preparation and
                                                                             implementation of detail plans (construction,
                                                                             instrumentation, OM and emergency
                                                                             preparedness), prequalification of bidders and
                                                                             periodic safety inspections of the dam after
                                                                             completion.
                           Projects on International        No               The projects will not be located on international
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                              waterways
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No               None of the projects will be located in disputed
                           7.60                                              area.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                           A. Appraisal stage ISDS required?: Yes
                               i. Explanation
                                  Because the PDF could develop/produce Category A or B projects.
                               ii. Tentative target date for preparing the Appraisal Stage ISDS
                                  07-Sep-2016
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing should be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.
                              A single ESMF is being prepared for the PDF and RIDF. This ESMF will be sumbitted to RSS for
Public Disclosure Copy




                              review and clearance by the RIDF task team. RIDF is currently at the stage of pre-appraisal
                              mission, with the tentative date for appraisal decision meeting on August 25, 2016.

                               The draft ESMF has been disclosed in country on June 15, 2016, and in World Bank Infoshop on
                               July 18, 2016. Public consultations on the ESMF were held on June 21 and 22.

                               The tentative date for circulating the appraisal package is September 15, 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Tuo Shi
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                                            Date: 10-Aug-2016
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)                                       Date: 10-Aug-2016
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
