                              INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                          RESTRUCTURING STAGE
            Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon       approval of the project restructuring
.




                                                                                          Report No.:ISDSR22050
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated: 07-Jul-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Bhutan                          Project ID:               P123820
    Project Name:                      Remote Rural Communities Development Project (P123820)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Winston Dawes
    Estimated Appraisal                17-Aug-2012                     Estimated Board           02-Oct-2012
    Date:                                                              Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GFA06                           Financing                 Specific Investment
                                                                       Instrument:               Loan
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                      Recovery) or OP               No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                                Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           9.00                               Total Bank Financing: 9.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                           Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                                 0.00
    International Development Association (IDA)                                                                        9.00
    Total                                                                                                              9.00
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

2. Current Project Development Objectives
The project development objective is to increase agriculture productivity and access to community assets in
remote rural areas by improving access to markets, irrigation, agricultural technologies and community
infrastructure.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The project development objective is to increase agriculture productivity and access to community assets in
remote rural areas by improving access to markets, irrigation, agricultural technologies and community
infrastructure.
3. Project Description
The project will consist of three components.


                                                     Page 1 of 10
Component A. Rural Infrastructure (USD6.2 million). The focus of this component is to connect the
communities to larger roads and regional markets and to improve production potential through improved
availability ofirrigation. This component would consist of two main sub-components:

A.1. Rural accessibility (USD3.4 million). This sub-component will finance farm road development,
consisting of new farm road construction, landslide protection, and river crossing structures. Specifically, it
would fund the following activities:
(a) New farm road construction. This subcomponent will include 34 km of farm roads chosen from the list of
farm road proposals totaling 87.5 km which remained unfinanced under the Tenth FYP. The roads are
located in Haa, Dagana, Samtse, Trongsa, and Wangdue dzongkhags. This sub-component will also fund
low cost causeways (concrete or stone paved), timber/concrete bridges, or Bailey bridges.
(b) Landslide protection structures. This subcomponent will finance protective works addressing landslide
risks and would respond to damage from future events. It will include a provisional budget to cover civil
works against potential landslides in locations to be identified during the project life. Such locations would
become apparent after one or two monsoon exposures.
12. A.2. Irrigation (USD2.7 million). This sub-component will finance:

(a) Irrigation infrastructure rehabilitation and modernization. The project will rehabilitate about 67 schemes
serving an area of about 1,000 hectares.

(b) High efficiency irrigation development. The project will fund modernization of a existing systems
covering about 60 ha. The high efficiency irrigation development will include pilots to test new technologies
such as gravity-fed low pressure sprinkler, micro-jets, and drip systems.

(c) Water Storage Structures. The project will support the installation of two storage structures
in each district, where feasible.

(d) Engineering Support. During the first years of project implementation, the project will provide
intermittent support by an experienced regional hydraulic or irrigation engineer.

(e) Water User Associations (WUA) Training and Support. The project will provide targeted training and
support required for the WUAs to undertake these duties.

Component B. Community, Marketing and Productive Infrastructure (USD3.1 million). This component
would cover investments in marketing and post-harvest infrastructure, critical community-level
infrastructure, and investments identified by producers to increase agricultural productivity. It would consist
of two sub-components:

B.1. Establishing community and marketing infrastructure (USD1.1 million). Although specific investment
needs cannot be determined prior to implementation, it is expected that this component will support
development of basic rural infrastructure and related technical assistance for drinking water supply systems,
rural sanitation infrastructure, electrification, foot bridges, school building construction and repair, small-
scale agriculture production and marketing infrastructure, and improved housing. The sub-component will be
implemented in the poorest and most disadvantaged geogs within the project area with a poverty rate of over
50%. These include Biru, Bangra, Denchukha, Dorokha, Dungtoe, Namgaychoeling, Tading geogs in Samtse
dzongkhag and Getana, Lokchina geogs in Chukkha dzongkhag. It is expected that between 60 and 100 sub-
projects will be completed over a three-year period.

B.2. Improving Productive Assets of Existing Producer Groups (USD2.0 million). The interventions
supported by this sub-component would address major productivity constraints and enhance farm income of


                                                  Page 2 of 10
participating producers in a differentiated way, depending on the specificity of each project location.
Specifically, the project will finance the rehabilitation of declining citrus orchards and assist producers with
replanting of cardamom plantations that have been devastated by fungal and viral diseases in recent years.
Such investments will address the needs of about 2,100 households. Project resources will be also provided
to poultry groups organized around about 240 farming households, to enable an increased production of eggs
that are in high demand by the communities. Investment packages will be provided to organized groups on a
cost-sharing basis, along the lines of existing schemes that are promoted by the MOAF through the geog
RNR staff in many parts of the country.

Similarly, and also on a cost-sharing basis, over 25 Community Forest Groups and about 1,500 households
will receive project assistance and support for their wood and non-wood-forest products (NWFP) production
and value addition activities. Finally, the project will support investments of tested wildlife damage
mitigation and sustainable land management technologies (developed by the Sustainable Land Management
Project) in all project dzongkhags. While this intervention is estimated to benefit directly over 1,500
households, the population in the surrounding communities will also be aware of such technologies.

Component C: Project Management and Institutional Strengthening (USD0.5 million). This component
supports project management, including the monitoring and evaluation functions of the project. It covers: (a)
technical and financial management, (b) procurement, and (c) supervision of compliance with environmental
and social safeguards. This component also would strengthen the capacity of the MoAF to effectively
coordinate implementation and provide procurement support to local communities as needed. This
component also would support mid-term and end-of-project project monitoring surveys that would provide
project performance information at the activity, output, and outcome levels to meet the requirements of the
existing RGoB monitoring system and the PLAMS (Planning and Monitoring System).
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will benefit about 6,440 households living in rural areas in Bhutan. As part of the RGoB?s
general drive to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of public expenditure, poverty mapping will be used
as a means to target project resources to the most remote and poorest rural areas in the country. Thus, project
activities will be concentrated in 26 geogs in six dzongkhags (Samtse, Haa, Chhukha, Trongsa, Dagana and
Wangdue) in Western and Southern Bhutan, all of which have significant concentrations of poverty. Within
these dzongkhags, project activities will focus on geogs with a large number of poor and will ensure
participation of women. Based on the Rural Poverty Assessment in Bhutan, the 2010 poverty estimate in the
project area (26 selected geogs) is 46.2%, about double the national level (23.0 %) Women represent about
41% of all people employed in agriculture in the project area. About 29percent of all households residing in
the project area are headed by women (Population and Housing Census, 2005).
 5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                    Team
 Nadia Sharmin( GEN06 )

 Rekha Shreesh( GSU06 )

6. Safeguard Policies                          Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             This is applicable given the emphasis on rural
                                                               infrastructure development and to assess the
                                                               risk it poses on land, water, vegetation and
                                                               cultural property. An Environmental
                                                               Management Framework (EMF) has been


                                                  Page 3 of 10
                                                     developed to ensure all environmental impacts
                                                     are considered in planning, implementation and
                                                     monitoring of project activities. For the
                                                     infrastructure including farm road and
                                                     irrigation schemes, the EMF includes provision
                                                     for undertaking environmental screening and
                                                     limited EA if necessary (Full EA or EIA
                                                     required activity is not eligible).
                                                     Environmental codes of practices as outlined in
                                                     the Environmental Friendly Road Construction
                                                     guidelines that have been developed by the
                                                     Royal Government of Bhutan will be used. In
                                                     terms of the community components, this
                                                     Policy / EMF is also relevant for the
                                                     management of community level natural
                                                     resources within the project areas.. Screening
                                                     Checklist for identifying and addressing
                                                     potential environment impacts have been
                                                     developed and staff will be trained to use these
                                                     during the community planning process.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No          This is likely not applicable. Although there is
                                                     a national park and known bird habitat/high
                                                     biodiversity area, activities located in those
                                                     areas or dependent on resources from them are
                                                     not-eligible. The infrastructure activities will be
                                                     small-scale. These activities are highly
                                                     unlikely to cause significant conversion or
                                                     degradation of natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       Yes         Some of the infrastructure to be supported
                                                     under the project may be located in the forest
                                                     area. The project envisages community and
                                                     private forests and some limited afforestation
                                                     of degraded areas to curb land degradation.
                                                     However, the project will not engage in
                                                     commercial forestry activities. Environmental
                                                     screening/ assessment will address any issue
                                                     related to forest.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  Yes         The project might involve the procurement and
                                                     use of pesticides on a limited scale to enhance
                                                     crop production in farmer agricultural lands.
                                                     However, the procurement and distribution of
                                                     pesticides in Bhutan is well controlled through
                                                     a centralized system and there will be no
                                                     procurement of pesticides classified as Class Ia,
                                                     Ib and II by WHO. Efforts would be made to
                                                     use IPM methods to the extent possible and
                                                     practical.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No          EMF conclusion is that there are number of
                                                     cultural and religious sites of local significance

                                           Page 4 of 10
                                                      in all the project Geog. Chances of adverse
                                                      impacts, which may be limited in scale and
                                                      nature, on them may not be ruled out due to
                                                      construction activities. Activities within 50 of
                                                      nationally or internationally renowned PCR site
                                                      is in the negative list, but activities may be
                                                      permitted near the local cultural sites.
                                                      Environmental screening/ assessment will
                                                      address risks to the cultural/religious sites, if
                                                      any.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No           There are no separate disadvantaged ethnic
                                                      groups different from the dominant population
                                                      who will be adversely affected by the project.
                                                      However, there are vulnerable households
                                                      across ethnic groups. A Vulnerable
                                                      Community Development Framework has been
                                                      developed that includes special measures to
                                                      protect socially and economically vulnerable
                                                      households such as women headed households
                                                      and people living in extreme poverty.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes          The Project proposes to finance small,
                                                      community-level infrastructure investments,
                                                      including irrigation and water harvesting/
                                                      management structures, rural access roads, and
                                                      community facilities (sale centers, packaging
                                                      houses, storage facilities etc.). These
                                                      investments may require lands for their
                                                      construction. The impacts are expected to be
                                                      marginal. In the event that minor land
                                                      acquisition (most likely to be only for the farm
                                                      roads) is unavoidable, a Resettlement Policy
                                                      Framework (RFP) has been prepared that lays
                                                      out principles, entitlement policies and
                                                      planning steps to address such impacts.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                No           Negative list of subproject/ activity include any
                                                      water retaining structure or barrier across
                                                      stream 10 m or more in height or that pose
                                                      significant disaster risks if it breaks.
Projects on International Waterways OP/BP Yes         The project area covers existing irrigation
7.50                                                  network which draws water from rivers going
                                                      through Bhutan's territory and then flow to
                                                      India. Thus the project triggers World Bank
                                                      OP/BP 7.50 (Projects on International
                                                      Waterways). The proposed investments under
                                                      the project are mainly for renovation of
                                                      irrigation canals, and improvements of drainage
                                                      infrastructure, which are not expected to
                                                      change the volume of extraction/discharge
                                                      water or quality of water of these rivers, but

                                            Page 5 of 10
                                                             rather will lead to more effective irrigation and
                                                             drainage of the water. Thus the project
                                                             implementation would improve the
                                                             transboundary water resources use and their
                                                             quality. Based on mentioned, the project team
                                                             is processing an exception to the notification
                                                             requirement under paragraph 7(a) of the Policy.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60         No

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project. Identify and
describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is expected to have positive environmental and social impacts by enabling rural communities to
use land and other resources in a more sustainable manner and help them achieve higher incomes through
enhanced agricultural productivity and improved marketing. However, limited environmental impacts such
as landslides/ erosion, loss/degradation of forests/vegetation, workers? and community health safety and
sanitation, and construction period disturbances are possible from the community infrastructures. These
impacts are likely to be limited to site and its immediate surrounding and can be managed through readily
available measures. The project will follow a participatory and inclusive process of direct and systematic
participation of beneficiary communities in the selection, implementation and monitoring of project
investments. Consultations with local communities indicate a strong support for the project, in particular for
proposals to improve agricultural productivity and marketing, and improve access to markets. The identified
main positive social impacts of the project are improved investments in agriculture and land resources,
increased market access and credit facilities and improved water delivery and management at the farmland.

Given that investments would be small, localized nature, the project will not result in significant adverse
social impacts, such as physical relocation of people or the large scale acquisition of private lands. The
proposed investments will have their footings on the ground and will need lands. However, the land needs
are expected to be small in quantity and the impacts of such marginal. To the extent possible, alternative
designs and alignment (in particular for roads and irrigation facilities) will be considered to avoid land
acquisition and minimize adverse social impacts.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
No highly significant long term indirect impact is expected from the project. One potential long term or
indirect impact of the road construction, though may not be highly significant, could be increased
demographic pressure on resources hitherto isolated from human settlement. The Environmental Screening
and/or EMP of each subproject or activity or environmental clearance terms & condition will have mitigation
specified to address negative impacts that could arise from enhanced resource use and access. It would also
include special measures to ensure slope stabilization of the farm roads. Given the nature of the types of
investments to be supported by the project, it is anticipated that there will be minimum cumulative social and
environmental adverse impacts, since the screening process will eliminate sites that may result in any serious
impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
One option considered was to build roads with minimum of costs, but the long term environmental impacts of
building such roads would have been enormous. An alternative was to build roads based on the concept of


                                                 Page 6 of 10
?environmentally-friendly construction? (EFRC) methods. While this originally took time to be understood
and adopted, it is now applied to all feeder roads in Bhutan. Evidence suggests that compliance with EFRC
increases up-front costs of investment, but minimizes environmental damage and decreases maintenance
costs significantly. The proposed project will adopt EFRC for farm road construction and higher construction
costs are built into project costing. RGoB recently revised Farm Road Policy which increased the Farm Road
Unit cost from Nu 1.2 million per km to Nu 2.6 million per km, and the revised Irrigation Policy permits use
of contractor, for more skilled works, in the community irrigation schemes. These revisions make it possible
to use environmentally friendly construction techniques/ methods.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment
of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
RGoB has prepared an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) for the project in order to screen/
assess, use appropriate mitigations, and manage any environmental issue resulting from the small-scale
interventions spread far and wide across six districts (26 Geogs). The EMF requires, each investment to be
subjected to screening and, if required, preparation of an Environmental Management Plan (EMP), obtaining
No Objection letter from competent agency, The subproject/ activity will be subjected to periodic compliance
and final monitoring. Memorandum of Understanding will be agreed upon by each of the stakeholders ?
Community representatives (i.e. Water User Committee), and geog and dzongkhag representatives. The
implementation of the EMP and the Memorandum of Understanding will be periodically monitored by the
community and Project Management Team, and/or by NECS/DEC , PPD/MoAF. A subproject's EMP
consists of the set of mitigation, monitoring, and institutional measures to be taken during implementation
and operation to eliminate adverse environmental and social impacts, offset them, or reduce them to
acceptable levels. The plan also includes the actions needed to implement these measures.

Assessment made during EMF preparation indicates there is general awareness about environmental
requirements among the staff of dzongkhag and ministry, but their ability to perform is constrained by the
lack of human and financial resources, and by lack of specific skills. The EMF has included a plan for
addressing this issue in the context of the project, and suggests the following measures: provision of
additional human resources (on need basis), orientations and training tailored to the specific needs, engaging
private sector or NGO, and supporting NECS and/or PPD/MoAF in conducting environmental due diligence
of the project.

The project follows a programmatic fashion. A Social Management Framework (SMF) has been prepared for
this project. The SMF includes a) a Land Acquisition And Rehabilitation Framework that lays out the
principles, entitlement policies and compensation as well as resettlement planning process, b) a Vulnerable
Community Development Framework that lays out the objectives, principles, identification of such
households and development interventions, c) a gender and social inclusion framework that describes its
principles, approach and interventions, d) a Community Consultation and participation framework, e) project
planning procedures, f) institutional arrangements and g) grievance redress as well as monitoring
mechanisms.

In addition, to ensure transparency and equity, a Process Framework (PF) for the participation of local
communities in the implementation of community activities has been developed to detail the principles and
processes for assisting communities to manage any negative potential impacts. Since the exact social impacts
of access will only be identified during project implementation, the Process Framework will ensure that
mitigation of any negative impacts deriving from development activities or potential restriction access by
communities to natural resources will be based on a participatory process involving all affected stakeholders,
and on their consent regarding the type of mitigation measures to compensate any loss of income or the scale
of restriction of resource use that are needed. Any desired changes by the communities in the ways in which
local populations exercise customary tenure rights in the project sites will not be imposed on them, but will


                                                 Page 7 of 10
   emerge for a consultative process satisfactory to the World Bank. Annual project work plans including
   management arrangements for community access to resources in project sites and associated mitigation
   measures will require World Bank agreement.

   Field based consultations also indicated that there were no social groups present in these communities with a
   social and cultural identity distinct from the dominant society that would make them vulnerable to being
   disadvantaged in the development process. Since project activities are based on local demands and identified
   through a highly participative and inclusive process, the project will ensure that vulnerable groups are
   involved in decision making throughout the planning and implementation phase of the project, and that these
   groups will be provided assistance in accordance to their priorities. To effectively monitor project impacts on
   the vulnerable, the socioeconomic baseline established for the project will include specific data on
   representative vulnerable households (e.g. women and women headed households, the most poor, farmers
   with marginal land holdings and the landless).
   5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
   safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
   The key stakeholders include communities/ users, geog, chiog, dzongkhag, and MoAF. Local-level
   consultations were carried out with primary stakeholders, specifically the local communities, Geog Tshogde
   (GT) members and Geog Renewable Natural Resources (RNR) extension agents. The consultations with
   local communities involved group discussions and household interviews. During the field consultation,
   special attention was given to including women and vulnerable people. At the central level, consultative
   meetings were held with the representation from all the major government agencies: Ministry of Finance,
   Ministry of Works and Human Settlement; Ministry of Trade and Industry; National Environment
   Commission Secretariat; Bhutan Development Bank Limited, and the Ministry of Agriculture and its
   Departments of Agriculture, Forestry, and Livestock. A formal stakeholder consultation, participated by
   government agencies and NGOs, was held in Thimphu on May 17, 2012. Annex 7 of EMF summarize the
   consultation feedbacks.

   The project is based on a strong participatory approach in the selection, implementation, monitoring and
   operation and maintenance of project facilities through the direct participation of beneficiary communities.
   The SA (developed on the basis of consultation with affected communities) provides guidance on the overall
   consultation strategy and mechanisms to ensure community awareness and involvement in the project, as
   well as participatory monitoring and evaluation modalities.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
 Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                         03-Aug-2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                      14-Aug-2012
 For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive Summary
of the EA to the Executive Directors
 "In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Bhutan                                                                       14-Aug-2012
    Comments: PHENVCOMM
    Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
    Date of receipt by the Bank                                          03-Aug-2012
    Date of submission to InfoShop                                       14-Aug-2012
    "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




    Bhutan                                                                       14-Aug-2012

                                                    Page 8 of 10
 Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
 Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                    Y
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                       03-Aug-2012
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                    14-Aug-2012
 "In country" Disclosure
PHPESTCTRY




 Bhutan                                                                   14-Aug-2012
 Comments: PHPESTCOMM
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including       Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 EMP) report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP          Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management         Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 issues?
 Is a separate PMP required?                                Yes   []    No [X]        NA          []
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a        Yes   []    No []         NA          [X]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements
 included in project design?If yes, does the project team
 include a Pest Management Specialist?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy            Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for         Yes   [X]   No []         NA          []
 safeguards or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?              Yes   []    No []         TBD         []
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or      Yes   []    No []         TBD         []
 access to assets that leads to loss of income sources or
 other means of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
 Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional   Yes   []    No []         NA          [X]
 issues and constraints been carried out?
 Does the project design include satisfactory measures to   Yes   []    No []         NA          [X]
 overcome these constraints?
 Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, Yes   []    No []         NA          [X]
 does it include provisions for certification system?
PHCompliance




 OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 Have the other riparians been notified of the project?     Yes   []    No [X]        NA          []

                                              Page 9 of 10
          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the      Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the
          Legal Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared
          and sent?
          Has the RVP approved such an exception?
PHCompliance
                                                                       Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to      Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          the World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a       Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          public place in a form and language that are
          understandable and accessible to project-affected groups
          and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional   Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been         Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project     Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been           Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
          agreed with the borrower and the same been adequately
          reflected in the project legal documents?

    III. APPROVALS

    Task Team Leader(s):                Name: Winston Dawes
    Approved By:
    Safeguards Advisor:                 Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)           Date: 10-Jul-2017
    Practice Manager/Manager:           Name:                                    Date:




                                                         Page 10 of 10
