                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                 APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                           Report No.:ISDSA20473
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                  11-Jan-2018
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed                11-Jan-2018
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Vietnam                      Project ID:              P152232
    Project Name:                      Vietnam HCFC Phaseout Project Stage II (P152232)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Qing Wang,Katelijn Van den Berg
    Estimated Appraisal                27-Dec-2017                  Estimated Board          15-Mar-2018
    Date:                                                           Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GEN2B                        Financing                Investment Project
                                                                    Instrument:              Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                    Recovery) or OP             No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                                Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           14.64                          Total Bank Financing: 0.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
    Borrower                                                                                                       0.00
    Montreal Protocol Investment Fund                                                                             14.64
    Financing Gap                                                                                                  0.00
    Total                                                                                                         14.64
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The project development objective is to reduce HCFC consumption in order to assist Vietnam meet its HCFC
    phase-out obligations under the Montreal Protocol, and to reduce greenhouse gas emissions arising from the
    replacement of these HCFCs.
    3. Project Description
    The Stage II project is a continuation of the ongoing Stage I project and the project duration is expected to be
    from 2017 to 2022. The project consists of three proposed components described below.

    Component 1: HCFC Consumption Reduction (US$ 13.56 million)



                                                     Page 1 of 11
AC manufacturing and servicing sector. The project will finance incremental capital costs (ICC) needed for
converting to non-HCFC based AC production including procurement of new production equipment,
performance testing of new AC models, and technician training for installation and servicing, and incremental
operating cost (IOC) based on MLF financing guidelines at four enterprises (consuming a total 175 MT of
HCFC-22 in 2014). After conversion at the four enterprises, no HCFC-22 will be used for AC production in the
entire sector, i.e. 251 MT of HCFC-22 will be completely phased out. The approved funding is US$2.18 million.
The lower GWP alternatives to HCFC-22 in the AC sector are HFC-32 with a GWP 675 or R-290 with a GWP
of 5, however both are flammable which will require special safety precautions and investments.

Due to its classification as an A2L refrigerant, mildly flammable refrigerant, HFC-32 requires that certain
measures be put into place before its wider use in Vietnam, including in manufacturing. TA will be needed
specifically for effective adoption of this technology. Given its recent experience in this area including related
to HFC-32 regulation, Japan has been approved under the MLF to provide TA as the Cooperating Agency while
drawing practical expertise from Japanese AC manufacturers through JRAIA. TA activities are proposed at a
total cost of $233,630: development of A2L policy measures, TA to the AC manufacturers, and TA for good
practice in installation and operation. An additional 66.3 MT in HCFC-22 phase-out is expected from the AC
servicing and Japan TA activities.

Refrigeration manufacturing sector. The project will finance conversion of priority industrial refrigeration
systems where cost-effective and low GWP alternatives (e.g. ammonia, hydrocarbons, HFC-32, etc.) are
available through ICC (for system, component and process redesign, new equipment, performance verification,
and safety training) and IOC at about 34 enterprises which are eligible for MLF funding. Approved funding is
US$3.64 million. A reduction of 303 MT will be achieved by project closing. The implementation of HCFC
phase-out in the refrigeration sector will be phased, whereby 6-10 demonstration subprojects for applications
including ice making units, stand-alone refrigeration units, cold storage rooms, and condensing units will be
started at the beginning of the Stage II project. As soon as a body of experience has been accumulated, the
knowledge will be used by experts to inform remaining companies.

Refrigeration servicing sector. The project will finance the following activities in the refrigeration servicing
sector: training and certification in good servicing and maintenance practices, provision of servicing tools to
selected vocational training centers to enable training in the handling of alternative flammable refrigerants and
to selected servicing shops to inform the sector on alternatives and prepare for Stage III, TA demonstration for
10 selected industrial refrigeration end users on HCFC leakage management. The approved funding is US$1.37
million for an HCFC-22 phase-out impact of 285.3 MT.

Foam sector. The project will finance ICC needed for foam production conversion to hydrocarbon, methyl
formate or HFO (hydrofluoroolefin) alternatives at about 44 enterprises. After completion of conversion at these
enterprises, it will be prohibited to use HCFC-141b contained in pre-blended polyol for foam production in the
whole sector. About 2035 MT of HCFC-141b will be completely phased out. In order to allow SMEs
(consuming less than 20MT of HCFC-141b) to convert to non-HCFC production in a cost-effective way, the
project will also finance upgrading of two to four system houses to be competitively selected among existing
foam producers or chemical suppliers that have established the basic system house infrastructure. These system
houses would supply non-HCFC pre-blended polyol to SMEs. In addition, the project will finance conversion at
an enterprise which used HCFC-22 of 100 MT in 2014 for XPS foam production. The approved funding for
HCFC-141b phase-out and HCFC-22 phase-out in the foam sector is US$5.52 million and US$613,568
respectively.

Implementation in the foam sector will also be phased due to the limited funding approved in contrast to the
large amount of HCFCs used. The largest consumer of pre-blended HCFC-141b polyol systems in Vietnam is
the insulated roofing panel manufacturing industry. This subsector is made up of primarily SMEs in real terms.


                                                Page 2 of 11
Therefore, four demonstration projects including establishment of system houses for the roofing subsector will
be initiated first at the beginning of the Stage II project.

Component 2: Technical Assistance and Policy Actions (US$ 406,801)

This component aims to support sector-wide technology and knowledge transfer, TA and exchange of best
practices, as well as to create a policy and market environment that will enable and sustain sector
transformation. TA activities focusing on the AC, refrigeration and foam manufacturing sectors will include
training workshops on subproject preparation, approval and implementation procedures and requirements,
international and national technical consultant services for subproject appraisal and technical support for the
PMU and enterprises, development of technical standards of alternatives, training for government officials,
training on the safe use of alternatives, study tours on HCFC alternatives, a joint study on integrating HCFC
phase-out and EE improvement in the industrial refrigeration manufacturing and food process sectors, and
others as needed.

On policies, this component will cover the annual HCFC import quota issuance and the development and
issuance of sector-specific policy and regulations by project completion, including a ban on local production and
import of HCFC-22 based ACs, and a ban on import and use of pre-blended HCFC-141b polyol in foam
production.

Component 3: Project Management (Estimated US$ 678,001)

The PMU currently implementing the Stage I HCFC Phase-out Project will most likely continue with financial,
procurement, and safeguard management as well as monitoring and reporting responsibility. This component
will finance the PMU staff including one project coordinator, two project officers, one procurement officer, one
accountant and one administrative officer, project launch and completion workshops, financial audits, annual
HCFC consumption verification, public awareness activities, and incremental operating cost (of the PMU).
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis (if
known)
The project will involve HCFC conversion at about 80 enterprises in air-conditioning, refrigeration, and foam
manufacturing sectors around the country. A long list of potential participating beneficiary enterprises in these
sectors has been identified during project preparation. The final beneficiary enterprises will only be confirmed
during project implementation when subproject proposals are prepared by enterprises and appraised by the
PMU. Ammonia, HFC-32 and hydrocarbons, which are flammable materials, are the main alternatives to be
adopted by the project. This could lead to safety issues for which proper safety equipment, measures and
training should be put into place.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
 Ha Thi Van Nguyen, Social Safeguards Specialist
 Quang Nhat Nguyen, Social Safeguards Specialist
 Son Van Nguyen, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
 Van Trung Nguyen, Social Safeguards Specialist
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes            The project will have a positive impact on the
                                                              global environment by reducing the use of HCFCs,


                                                Page 3 of 11
                                                    which are ozone-depleting substances and
                                                    greenhouse gases with a GWP ranging from several
                                                    hundred to several thousand times that of CO2. The
                                                    project will contribute to about 2.9 million CO2
                                                    tons equivalent emission reduction per year after
                                                    completion. It will support Vietnam to meet the
                                                    2020 HCFC phase-out obligation (35% reduction of
                                                    the baseline), eliminating the consumption of
                                                    HCFCs of 1,006 MT.

                                                    The project will include a series of investment
                                                    activities and replace the HCFC use with the other
                                                    alternative gases or refrigerants (hydrocarbons, HC-
                                                    290, HFC-32, ammonia) in the existing AC,
                                                    refrigeration and foam manufacturers. No closure of
                                                    these enterprises is expected due to the project.
                                                    Most of these enterprises are located in industrial
                                                    area, but some SMEs are located in residential area.

                                                    While HCFCs have an impact on global climate
                                                    change, they have no adverse local impact as these
                                                    chemicals are stable and not considered toxic or
                                                    dangerous for the environment. The alternative
                                                    gases or refrigerants have zero ODP and lower
                                                    GWP but high flammability, and therefore, have
                                                    high risk of fire and explosion. Few may result in
                                                    environmental impacts if it is mishandled.
                                                    Ammonia (NH3) is also a toxic gas. The
                                                    manufacturing process also involves potential
                                                    occupational and health safety issues. Therefore,
                                                    OP 4.01 is considered triggered.
                                                    EMPs, one for each of the three sectors (foam, AC
                                                    and refrigeration) have been prepared and will be
                                                    followed by the participating enterprises during
                                                    subproject implementation.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04              No         The project will not affect any protected areas,
                                                    known natural habitats, or established or proposed
                                                    critical natural habitats as all the project activities
                                                    will take place within the existing plant boundaries
                                                    either located in industrial zones or residential
                                                    areas, thus there is no impacts on natural habitat.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                       No         There is no proposed investment involving forest
                                                    harvesting or forest management.
Pest Management OP 4.09                  No         The project does not involve the procurement or use
                                                    of any pesticides or herbicides or result in an
                                                    increase in pesticides usage.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   No         Given the project location and activities it will not
                                                    adversely affect sites with archeological,
                                                    paleontological, historical, religious, or unique

                                         Page 4 of 11
                                                                  natural values.
    Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                  No             All sub-projects will be implemented within
                                                                  existing project enterprises or in industrial area, so
                                                                  there is no IP group to be affected. Therefore, the
                                                                  project will not trigger this policy.
    Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12            Yes            All sub-projects will be likely implemented within
                                                                  existing enterprises, so land related impact are not
                                                                  expected. However, some SMEs will possibly be
                                                                  relocated to industrial areas as per the request of
                                                                  local governments, the policy is therefore triggered.

                                                                  A Resettlement Policy Framework has been
                                                                  prepared to guide relocation and potential land
                                                                  issues if any during preparation of the subproject
                                                                  proposals (during the overall project
                                                                  implementation stage.

                                                                  Due diligence review for five first enterprises
                                                                  confirmed that they had fully complied with
                                                                  government regulation, and there were no legacy
                                                                  issues pending to be solved. During
                                                                  implementation, the borrower will ensure that
                                                                  following the RPF proper screening be carried out
                                                                  and reported for the Bank’s due diligence review.
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No             There is no construction or rehabilitation of dams or
                                                                  dykes.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                  The project does not have any impact on any
    7.50                                                          international waterway.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No             No The project is not located in any disputed areas.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The project is classified as a Category B project. No large-scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts are
    expected.

    The project, under Component 1, will finance phase-out of 1,006 MT HCFC-22 from four AC manufacturer,
    about 34 refrigeration manufacturers, one XPS foam manufacturer, and the refrigeration and AC servicing
    sectors. The project will also finance complete phase-out of HCFC-141b (about 2,035 MT) in pre-blended
    polyol in about 44 foam manufacturers.

    The project activities will likely occur in the existing facilities, even though flammable substances such as
    ammonia, R-32 and hydrocarbons (R-290 or cyclopentane) will be used, which may create safety and
    occupational health issues. These impacts, with more details provided below, are site specific and can be
    mitigated with appropriate mitigation measures.


                                                     Page 5 of 11
Air-conditioning production sector:

In the AC sector, the HCFC-22 (R-22) is converted to the proposed alternative gases: HFC-32 with GWP of 675
(about 1/3 that of HCFC-22) or HC-290 with a GWP of 5, both have zero ozone depletion potential (ODP).
However, they are flammable as ISO 817-2014 classified as A2L (lower toxicity, lower flammability) and A3
(lower toxicity, higher flammability) chemicals, respectively. Therefore, these two alternatives have safety risks
and fire hazards must be properly addressed. Direct contact of HFC-32 can also be harmful to skin, and its
inhalation or eye contact could cause significant effects or critical hazards as well.
Other chemical involved in air-conditioning production is the synthetic Polyol ester (POE) oil. POE oil is
completely wax-free and is the best choice of lubricants due to their better thermal stability, more miscible and
highly biodegradable. When POE oils are exposed to moisture and heat, they may react, forming acid that is
harmful to the system and difficult to be recovered. The recovery technique should be selected to avoid
discharge which could cause water or soil pollution.

The potential refrigerating effect of HFC-32 is 1.5 times better than that of HCFC-22. More specifically,
pressure losses are lower with HFC-32 than HCFC-22 for the same capacity and the liquid density of HFC-32 is
also 10% lower. Thus the piping diameter can be smaller. As a result, the charging volume can be 30% less than
with HCFC-22. The cooling seasonal performance factor (CSPF) of HFC-32 is higher than conventional
refrigerants. Its peak power consumption is also lower, helping to alleviate power shortages in large cities during
periods of high demand.

Refrigerator production sector:

In the refrigeration sector, ammonia, HC-290 and HFC-32, are proposed alternatives to HCFC-22. Ammonia,
which has zero GWP, is widely used for large distributed systems and large chillers. This refrigerant is an
important option for many industrial refrigeration applications. However, ammonia is toxic and flammable
(classified as B2L-lower flammability, higher toxicity) – appropriate safety precautions are required. NH3 may
explode if heated; toxic if inhaled, causes severe skin burns and eye damage, very toxic to aquatic life; corrosive
to the respiratory tract.

There are also potential environmental and occupational health and safety (OHS) risks associated with
inappropriate handling of these chemicals/gases, which could be caused by chemical spills or fire and explosion.
Therefore, good operational procedures and mitigation measures should be effectively taken at all enterprises
supported by the project.

Extruded polystyrene (XPS) foam:

The XPS foam production will use CO2 with Alcohol/DME/ u-HFC technology. The chosen technology is a
low-GWP based system, which is a definitive alternative under the Montreal Protocol (MP) and additionally has
a positive impact on climate and are not adverse to the environment, in compliance with MP Decision XIX/6.

Polyurethane (PU) Foam production sector:

Hydrocarbon (cyclopentane) and CO2 have been selected as blowing agents to replace HCFC-141b.
Hydrocarbon has a GWP of less than 25. Cyclopentane is classified as a Volatile Organic Compound (VOC),
but its use results in very low levels of emissions of about 2-3% of the blowing agent, which results in
minuscule emissions, compared for example, to emissions from two-stroke motorcycle traffic in urban areas.
Therefore, there is no significant environmental impact from the cyclo-pentane itself. However, due to its
flammability, safety requirements associated with hydrocarbons are important and should be in place.



                                                Page 6 of 11
The other chemicals involved in foam production are Methylene Diphenyl Isocyanate (MDI), polyol, amine
catalysts and fire retardants. The probability that a spill of polymeric MDI - a liquid at room temperature – the
risk of contaminating the soil and water is very low, because the floor of the foam production areas consists of
cement coated with an anti-leakage, low permeability/chemical layer such as epoxy. In the case that MDI leaks
into the soil, it will react with moisture, and the reaction would result in CO2 and insoluble polyurea
compounds, which are not biodegradable but chemically inert. MDI may cause health impacts such as eye,
respiratory system and skin irritation. Exposure via skin contact and inhalation can result in respiratory
sensitization.

Fire retardant and amine catalysts (use very little amount) are mixed/pre-formulated in the polyol at the system
houses (pre-blended polyol suppliers), from which the foam enterprises purchase pre-blended polyol and MDI,
so the foam enterprises will not handle these toxic chemicals directly. Fire retardant and amine catalysts will
remain in the final foam products and are not likely to be emitted to the environment during the foam production
or later. Therefore, there are no anticipated legacy environmental contamination issues that are associated with
foam production.

Methylene chloride is the cleaning agent now used in the foam production process. It can affect the body if it is
inhaled or if the liquid comes in contact with eyes or skin or is swallowed. Methylene chloride can be a
hazardous waste but only when present in large quantities and high concentrations, as defined in Vietnamese
regulations. However, only small quantities are used in foam production and the mixing heads for the new
cyclopentane based foaming units to be purchased under the project will facilitate the phase-out of the use of
methylene chloride as a cleaning agent.

In the second phase project, the system houses will be invested to provide the pre-blended polyol for the other
small and medium foam production enterprises to help them get rid of HCFC-141b with less investment as well
as minimize the impacts and chemical risks for those SMEs.
Lastly, since some enterprises might need to move in industrial zones requiring small scale construction
activities. This would cause some construction related impacts which are expected to be small and can be
addressed through application of the Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOPs) which are included in the
EMPs. The impacts of non-hazardous solid waste generated during AC, refrigeration manufacturing and foam
production process are also expected to be small and will be addressed in the subproject EMPs.

OP4.10 Indigenous People: is not triggered, as the project scoping confirmed that there are no ethnic minority
peoples in project areas, as HCFC conversion will be carried out in existing enterprise location or industry zones
(IZ) to which some enterprises may be relocated.

OP4.12. Involuntary Resettlement is considered triggered. Although the project investment will not result in any
new or additional involuntary resettlement, some enterprises have or will have to be relocated to IZs per the
Government’s land planning request when preparing or implementing their subprojects (which might result in
involuntary resettlement). There is no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts anticipated
from the HCFC Phase II project as known at the time of appraisal. The preparation of appropriate safeguard
instrument is detailed in the RPF.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
project area:
There are no indirect, cumulative, or long-term adverse impacts caused by the project.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of

                                                Page 7 of 11
borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environment

Although most sub-projects will only be confirmed from a long list of potential enterprises in different sectors,
through subproject proposals to be prepared by application enterprises and appraised by the PMU during project
implementation, considering alternatives with zero ODP and low GWP have been identified and some of them
have been being used internationally, the generic Environmental Management Plans (EMPs), one for each
sector, have been prepared by the Borrower. The World Bank has reviewed them and found acceptable. The
objectives of the EMPs are to: i) ensure compliance with the applicable national, laws, regulations, standards,
and guidelines; ii) ensure that there is sufficient allocation of resources on the project budget for implementation
of EMP-related activities; iii) ensure that environmental risks associated with a project properly managed. The
EMPs consist of the set of good practice mitigation measures, including the World Bank Group’s EHS
guidelines, to address the sector-specific impacts, common construction related impacts which referred to as
Environmental Codes of Practices (ECOP), and guidance on site-specific impacts and mitigation measures. The
EMPs also include monitoring, and institutional arrangement for implementation, and the budgets for their
implementation including for capacity building in project environmental management. Some specific
mitigations measures are provided below:
- As the alternative chemicals and gases are flammable, it will require changes of charging equipment and some
production procedures during the construction and equipment installation phase: (i) Redesign the process,
manufacture the prototype and test them; (ii) Modify the assembly line such as: change high – pressure pump,
equip handheld leak detector, test pressure and drying; (iii) Inspect quality and testing; (iv) Issue certificates; (v)
Process, operation maintenance and safety training; and (vi) Provide technical assistance from external experts.
- During operation phase, the measures on precautions and chemical emergency response are requested. The
enterprises to produce, use and storage those gases should prepare a document and submit to the Department of
Industry and Trade before commission. For safety operation, the enterprises must also have the license of
firefighting and prevention issued from the Department of Police.

Environmental Safeguard Implementation, Monitoring, and Training. The PMU will be responsible for overall
supervision and monitoring of the subproject including implementation of the subproject EMPs and will provide
safeguard training to the subproject staff. The PMU will assign a safeguard specialist to assist in the
coordination, supervision, and monitoring of safeguard implementation activities. For all subprojects, the
participating enterprises are required to develop their own EMP with specific impacts and mitigation measures
based on the sector generic EMP. The PMU will appraise the subproject proposals by visiting enterprises to
ensure safety measures and equipment are included in the subproject proposals. Appropriate emergency
preparedness and response measures should be in place when subprojects are completed. A due diligence review
on occupational health and safety measures, fire and exposure risk will be conducted during the commission of
subprojects and the early operation phase by the PMU. The Bank team will also selectively visit some
subprojects to carry out safety review as well. Enterprises staff involved in the production, installation and
services will be trained under the project.

Social

Resettlement Framework: A Resettlement Policy Framework has been prepared to guide relocation and potential
land issues if any during preparation of the subproject proposals (during the overall project implementation
stage).

Social Safeguard Due Diligence Review: Due diligence review of the five already confirmed participating
enterprises (4 in the AC sector and the XPS foam enterprise) were carried out during project preparation. It is
confirmed that all the five enterprises complied with government laws and regulations on involuntary
resettlement, there were no legacy issues pending to be solved.

                                                  Page 8 of 11
Except for the five above confirmed participating enterprises, sub-projects will only be confirmed during project
implementation, the Bank will review when and how the land was acquired or being acquired for the Industrial
Zone and the enterprise relocation plan at the preparation stage of sub-projects. For each sub-project which
require involuntary resettlement, if the land has been acquired before the grant agreement is signed, a due
diligence review of the land acquisition process will be undertaken by the Bank team to confirm whether there is
any legacy issues. The procedures for undertaking land due diligence review is presented as bellowed:
a) PMU/MONRE submits to the Bank, a report containing general information on the actual status of the
resettlement and compensation on the proposed project enterprises (within the selected IZ) as part of the
package required for the subproject grant appraisal submission procedures.
b) World Bank undertakes a due diligence (DD) of the resettlement and compensation in the selected area. The
DD serves to confirm that involuntary resettlement and compensation in the proposed IZs is completed or
substantially advanced. It will confirm that was undertaken following government norms and regulations and for
general consistency with Bank policies and objectives. Additionally, it should confirm pending issues as per
Grievances and Redress Mechanisms reports of the pertinent authorities, recommending actions to be followed.

The DD report method used for gathering the information, includes desk review of documents issued by the
Provincial, District and Communes levels, methods for gathering and analyzing the qualitative and quantitative
information gathered in the field, results of the interviews with PAPs, and analysis of other pertinent issues and
documents related to involuntary resettlement and land compensation on a case-by-case basis.

Preparation of Abbreviated RAPs. An abbreviated RAPs (A-RAP) if applicable will be prepared for subprojects
(as part of the sub-project proposals) to handle the relocation and potential land issues. Possible social issues if
any outside resettlement will be reviewed as an annex to the generic EMP, as no significant social issues are
expected.

Monitoring. Based on the findings of the due diligence review or A-RAP, the Bank will monitor the involuntary
resettlement and compensation that may be ongoing. The Bank will review the status of any pending
compensation activities during implementation support missions.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project key stakeholders are the beneficiary enterprises and relevant government agencies: the Ministry of
Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE), the Ministry of Industry and Trade (MOIT), and the Customs.
The stakeholders were consulted on the contents of the EMPs and RPF during their preparation. Another
stakeholder consultation workshop was organized on November 17, 2016. Participants of the workshop were
MONRE, MOIT, and Customs representatives, the selected enterprises, and representatives from some local
governments. The feedbacks from the consultations have been taken into account in the preparation and
incorporated into the final EMPs and RPF.
The generic EMPs and RPF in Vietnamese were disclosed locally at the PMU website on November 21, 2016
and their English versions were disclosed through the Bank Operations Portal on November 21, 2016. The
Appraisal Stage Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet of the project will also be disclosed through the Bank
Operations Portal.
.




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            14-Nov-2016
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         12-Jan-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors

                                                 Page 9 of 11
    "In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Vietnam                                                                11-Jan-2017
 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      30-Jun-2016
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   10-Jan-2018
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Vietnam                                                                    22-Dec-2017
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)       Yes []    No [X]        NA         []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice      Yes []    No []         NA         []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP               Yes []    No []         NA         []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                 Yes [X]   No []         NA         []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards   Yes [X]   No []         NA         []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes []    No []         TBD        [X]
 Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []    No []         TBD        [X]
 to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
 of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




 The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
 Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]   No []         NA         []
 World Bank's Infoshop?
 Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]   No []         NA         []
 public place in a form and language that are understandable
 and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




 All Safeguard Policies
 Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]   No []         NA         []
 responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
 measures related to safeguard policies?
 Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]   No []         NA         []
 included in the project cost?
 Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]   No []         NA         []
 include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
 related to safeguard policies?

                                               Page 10 of 11
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [X]     No []        NA   []
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?


III. Approval
Task Team Leader(s):                Name:Qing Wang,Katelijn Van den Berg
Approved By:
Practice Manager/Manager:           Name: Christophe Crepin (PMGR)      Date: 11-Jan-2018




                                             Page 11 of 11
