INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 12226
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 23-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Mozambique                 Project ID:   P129413
Project Name: MZ - FCPF REDD+ READINESS PREPARATION SUPPORT (P129413)
Task Team        Andre Rodrigues de Aquino
Leader(s):
Estimated
Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR
Sector(s):       Forestry (100%)
Theme(s):        Climate change (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       3.60             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility          3.60
Total                                                             3.60
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
1. The Project Development Objective is to assist the Recipient to carry out the Readiness
Preparation Activities.
2. The project aims to contribute to the adoption of national REDD+ strategy and of the national
legal and institutional framework for REDD+. Strengthening the national readiness management
arrangements within the Ministry of Agriculture and Environment as well as promoting multi-
stakeholder consultations are required activities to allow the country to prepare an effective national


﻿REDD+ strategy and the associated legal and institutional framework.
3. Keys Results
The achievement of the PDO will be measured through the following results indicators:
O
U       a) A national strategy to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD+) is
prepared and validated by national stakeholders;
b) The legal and institutional framework for the implementation of the strategy is prepared and
validated by national stakeholders; and
c) A Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) including an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) are prepared and validated through participatory stakeholders
consultation.
C. Project Description
4. The Government of Mozambique (GoM) has developed a Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP)
under the first FCPF Grant under TF01126 (of US$200,000) which helped with the formulation of
said R-PP. This second Grant under TFO 1126 -- the REDD+ Readiness Preparation grant, will
provide additional funding of $3.6 million, to support the Country in carrying out the activities
outlined in its R-PP. The grant will fund only a portion of the R-PP activities, and will help the
Country towards achieving REDD+ Readiness, even though the Country may not reach this stage
until well after the grant closes. Based on the activities outlined in the R-PP, it is expected that the
Country would ultimately be able to participate in REDD+ carbon transactions, including under the
FCPF Carbon Fund.
5.     Mozambique and the FCPF. Mozambique's Readiness Preparation Proposal (R-PP) was
endorsed by the FCPF Participants Committee in March 2012. The Committee requested the World
Bank to conduct its due diligence with the view of signing a grant of up to US$ 3.6 million to allow
Mozambique to implement the activities presented in the R-PP. The R-PP includes activities related
to: (i) the preparation of national REDD+ strategy and a legal and institutional framework; (ii) the
design and implementation of a national Measurement, Verification and Reporting (MRV) system to
allow the country to monitor and report on emissions arising from deforestation and forest
degradation; and (iii) the preparation of a national reference level of emissions from deforestation
and forest degradation.
6.     REDD+ Readiness in Mozambique. The FCPF will contribute with a US$ 3.6 million grant,
which will finance the formulation of a National REDD+ Strategy and a legal and institutional
framework for implementation, through a participatory consultative process with stakeholders. The
grant will also contribute to increasing the national institutional and technical capacity on REDD+.
The FCPF grant will finance analytical studies, public consultation and participation processes at the
national and provincial levels, and capacity strengthening and technical assistance to the GoM.
Nonetheless, the FCPF grant will not finance the implementation of REDD+ pilot investment
activities on the ground.
7.     Other Development Partners are expected to provide support to REDD+ Readiness in
Mozambique. Since this FCPF grant will not fund all activities expected to make Mozambique
"ready" for REDD+, other development partners have committed to support the GoM. In particular,
activities related to the creation of a national Measuring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) system
and to the preparation of a national reference scenario of emissions (i.e., reference emission level -
REL) from deforestation and forest degradation, the governments of Japan and Norway have been
supporting the GoM. The Government of Japan and JICA have committed US$ 10.5 million to the


﻿implementation of the activities related to MRV and REL. The Government of Norway is providing
US$3.27 million additional resources through the International Institute for Environment and
Development (IIED) for research at the subnational level in particular to establish baseline, identify
drivers of deforestation, devise specific investment activities and draw lessons. These lessons will
O
U       help national level REDD+ agenda.
8.     Activities to be financed by this FCPF grant. The table below summarizes activities to be
financed by the FCPF grant. These activities have been selected based on: (i) discussions with the
Government authorities and national priorities for the REDD+ Readiness process; (ii) World Bank
comparative advantages; (iii) existence of financing by other development partners.
Project Activities and Costs (in $million) are as follows.
1. Strengthening the national readiness management arrangements ($1.8)
1.1 Strengthening of the Technical Unit for REDD+ and the Technical Committee  ($1.0)
1.2 Strengthening the decentralization of REDD+ arrangement ($0.3)
1.3 Project Management Costs ($0.5)
2. Promotion of multi-stakeholder consultations ($0.9)
2.1 Multi-stakeholder awareness raising and consultations on the REDD+ strategy and its legal
framework     ($0.6)
2.2 Preparation of communication material on REDD+ ($0.3)
3. Design of the national REDD+ Strategy  ($0.9)
3. 1 Preparation of the national REDD+ Strategy ($0.4)
3.2 Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA), that provides both for an Environmental
and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF), as well as
a Grievance Redress Mechanism (GRM)($0.3)
3.3 Design of the national legal and institutional framework for REDD+ ($0.2)
Total Costs   ($3.6)
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
9. Activities to be financed by this FCPF-grant in support of the REDD+ Readiness process in
Mozambique do not include the implementation of REDD+ programs on the ground. This FCPF
support is limited to analytical studies, capacity building, and consultation processes at the national
and sub-national levels.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The execution of the national REDD+ Readiness Process in Mozambique will be led by the
Technical Unit for REDD+ (UT-REDD), co-led by MICOA (through its National Directorate of
Environmental Management) and by MINAG (through its Directorate of Land and Forests). A
Technical Review Committee will provide an advisory role to the UT-REDD+ under the overall
strategic direction from CONDES (Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Sustentdvel/ National
Council for Sustainable Development).
11.    The National Directorate of Environmental Impacts Assessment (DNAIA) at MICOA is
responsible for development of policies, review environmental and social impacts studies and
mitigation plans, as well as conducting environmental and social audits. MICOA also has Sustainable
Development Centers for the Coastal Zone based in Xai-Xai (Gaza province) and forest and other
resources in Chimoio (Manica province). The former conducted the first macro-zoning and Strategic
Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) of the Coastal Zone. The Ministry of Agriculture,


﻿through the National Directorate of Agrarian Economy (DNEA), facilitated the development of the
only Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) conducted for a national program -
PROAGRI. The SESA of PROAGRI included analysis of social, economic and environmental
impacts as well as legal instruments and institutions to implement mitigation measures.
0
12.    A multi-stakeholder/multi-disciplinary REDD+ Consultative Committee will be established
in Mozambique to coordinate the development of the SESA/ESMF and a Resettlement Policy
Framework (RPF). This Committee will oversee the preparation of the SESA and ensure that
institutional and capacity gaps for managing environmental and social risks are fully assessed. They
will work very closely with the National REDD+ Technical Review Committee.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Cheikh A. T. Sagna (GSURR)
Stephen Ling (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment
OP/BP 4.01                              (SESA) to be carried out under the project will serve
to identify, avoid mitigate and compensate the
potential negative environmental and social impacts
that may be associated with future activities to be
supported by the final REDD+ Strategy. The
strength of the SESA for REDD+ is that it will
combine analytical work and participatory
stakeholder consultations to inform the preparation
of the REDD+ strategy. The SESA will help ensure
compliance with the Bank's safeguards policies by
integrating key environmental and social
considerations relevant to REDD+. The SESA will
help the Government of Mozambique to formulate
their REDD+ strategy in a way that reflects inputs
from key stakeholder groups, including women, the
poor and most vulnerable groups and addresses the
main environmental and social issues identified. The
SESA will also provide guidance and key elements
for the preparation of an nvironmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) as a framework for
managing and mitigating the environmental and
social risks related to investments and carbon finance
transactions in the context of the future
implementation of REDD+. All future investments
and carbon finance transactions will still require
specific environmental and social screening and
assessments, but these will benefit from the strategic
context created by the SESA and. the ESMF will
include institutional arrangements for screening,


﻿reviewing, implementing and monitoring specific
ESMPs to prevent adverse induced and/or
cumulative impacts.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes           The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all
options proposed in the National REDD+ Strategy
take into account the conservation of biodiversity, as
well as the numerous socio-environmental services
and products that natural habitats provide to human
society. Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to
have significant positive impacts on natural habitats,
as the country will put in place an effective strategy
to reduce the possible loss of natural habitats and
forests. The SESA will address issues related to
natural habitats and potential impacts of the National
REDD+ Strategy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes          Overall, REDD+ activities are expected to have
significant positive impacts on forests in the country,
in that the main goal of the project is to reduce, in the
short-to-long term, deforestation and forest
degradation, while contributing to the well-being of
forest-dependent communities. Potential impacts of
the National REDD+ Strategy on natural forests will
be assessed through the SESA that provides also for
the ESMF. The SESA will reflect the basic
requirements of the Bank's Operational Policy
regarding forests management, in particular as these
relate to the establishment of plantations.
Pest Management OP 4.09      TBD          This policy could be triggered depending on the final
scope of the National REDD+ Strategy. Agricultural
intensification and reforestation activities, for
instance, could trigger this policy, depending on the
methods employed by concrete activities on the
ground to manage pests. If triggered, the SESA, and
ESMF will also address critical issues related to pest
management, as necessary.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD          This policy could be triggered if REDD+ activities
OP/BP 4.11                                promote actions in areas containing sites deemed as
physical cultural resources by communities living
there (e.g. holy sites such as sacred graves, sacred or
holy forests, etc.). Though it is not anticipated thatthe
grant will have negative impacts on any such sites,
the SESA will address issues related to chance finds
which will later be included in the ESMF.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         REDD+ activities will trigger Involuntary


﻿BP 4.12                                   Resettlement in situations involving involuntary
restrictions of access to legally designated parks, or
protected areas (such as forest management/
reforestation areas, etc.). The policy basically aims to
avoid involuntary resettlement to the extent feasible,
or to minimize and mitigate its adverse social and
economic impacts in cases where resettlement or
other involuntary restrictions cannot be avoided.
Through the SESA process issues related to land
acquisition or involuntary resettlement will be
identified and a Resettlement Policy Framework and/
or a Process Framework will be prepared.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No           The policy is not triggered because the project will
not finance activities that will include construction of
dams and/or use of waters from a dam.
Projects on International    No           The policy is not triggered because the project will
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      not finance activities on/using international
waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         The policy is not triggered because the project will
BP 7.60                                   not finance activities in/on disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 29-Dec-2014
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
15. The SESA is expected to be launched four months after Grant Signature, during project
implementation. TORs will be developed by the Borrower, then reviewed by the Bank and
O
disclosed both in-country and at the InfoShop prior to appraisal. Likewise, once developed during
implementation, the SESA will also be reviewed and cleared by the Bank and ultimately disclosed
both in-country and at the InfoShop.
16.    The Project will not finance any concrete investment activities and therefore is expected to
have no direct environmental and social impacts on the ground. In addition to a SESA, an ESMF
and the RPF/PF will be prepared in view of the addressing possible key environmental and social
issued associated with the future implementation of REDD+ strategy/projects.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Andre Rodrigues de Aquino
Approved By:
Regional Safeguards    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (RSA)                Date: 02-Apr-2015
Advisor:
Practice Manager/      Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                       Date: 06-Apr-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


