                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening Statistical Capacity in the Ministry of Public Education




                                                      Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                    Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                 Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Sep-2018 | Report No: ISDSC25025




                         Sep 26, 2018                                                                                              Page 1 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening Statistical Capacity in the Ministry of Public Education



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                        Project Name                  Environmental Category      Country
                                                             Strengthening Statistical
                                                                                           B - Partial Assessment
                                                             Capacity in the Ministry of                               Costa Rica
                                                                                           (B)
                                                             Public Education
                           Team Leader(s)                    Estimated Date of Approval    Managing Unit               Financing Instrument
                           Melissa Ann Adelman,                                                                        Investment Project
                                                                                           GED04
                           Enrique O. Alasino Massetti                                                                 Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                      0.25
                           Total Financing                                                                                                         0.25
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                           0.00

                           DETAILS  -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                         0.25
                                 Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                                                     0.25


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The development objective of this Project is to strengthen the capacity of MEP (i) to collect and manage high-quality,
                           student-level education data, (ii) to produce reliable information on key sector challenges using the data, and (iii) to
                           design and carry out analysis of the data to inform the design of programs and policies.

                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed Project will be financed through a Recipient Executed Grant from the Trust Fund for Statistical
                           Capacity Building (TFSCB) over a period of 18 months. The TFSCB grant will leverage (i) $428,000 in financing
                           from the EU for database development as well as technical assistance to enable the World Bank to provide
                           support on data analysis and planning evidence-based interventions, and to provide supervision of Project
                           activities, and (ii) an investment of approximately $1.07M from the Government. The proposed Project
                           amount financed by the TFSCB grant is US$250,000.



                         Sep 26, 2018                                                                                                         Page 2 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening Statistical Capacity in the Ministry of Public Education




                           The Project will be divided into three components:

                                 1. Strengthening the education management information system through the design and construction
                                    of a student-level records module for MEP’s EMIS system Plataforma Ministerial
                                 2. Strengthening MEP capacity to analyze data for planning and decision-making
                                 3. Provision of support to MEP for the implementation and supervision of Project activities, including
                                    the financing of audits

                           Component 1: Strengthening the education management information system through the design,
                           development, and implementation of a student-level records module. Amount requested: $158,500.

                           Subcomponent 1.1: Design and development of the student-level records module, and international
                           experience sharing. Under this subcomponent, MEP will finance the design and development of the student-
Public Disclosure Copy




                           level records module, based on existing database platforms within MEP. The output of this subcomponent
                           will be a data platform that is based on student-level records generated and primarily populated at the
                           school level that are automatically linked to additional databases within MEP (specifically, the database of
                           scholarships and grants (FONABE), the database of school feeding recipients, and the database of transport
                           subsidy beneficiaries) by each student’s unique national identification number (cédula). The subcomponent
                           will also be used to ensure the technical and practical interconnections between MEP’s data and the key
                           national registry system (SINIRUBE) through workshops with all key technical staff across the government
                           agencies involved.

                           TFSCB funds will finance a conference and experience sharing activities (videoconferences, study visits,
                           technical assistance) to facilitate south-south knowledge exchange between Ministries of Education across
                           the world that have recent, relevant experiences strengthening their EMIS for greater use in informing
                           planning and policymaking. Estimated cost: $44,000.

                           Subcomponent 1.2: Strengthening MEP capacity for sustainable implementation of the student-level records
                           module at the core of the Plataforma Ministerial. This subcomponent will finance the development of
                           protocols for data inputting, data verification, and database management, delivery of on-the-job technical
                           support and training based on the protocols, and purchase of backup servers for MEP to ensure the
                           sustainable implementation of the student-level records module. Specifically, public school directors and
                           local MEP officials will be trained on how to input and verify data. MEP staff in the Department of
                           Information Systems within the Directorate of Management Information Systems will be trained to manage
                           the module, including quality control, updating, and expanding the database as additional needs are
                           identified. Estimated cost: $114,500.

                           Component 2: Strengthening MEP capacity to analyze data for planning and decision-making. Amount
                           requested: $76,500.

                           This component will finance the development and delivery of a training program to key staff, as well as the
                           purchase of software licenses, to enable MEP staff in the Department of Statistical Analysis within the
                           Directorate of Planning to analyze data from the student-level records of the Plataforma Ministerial. The

                         Sep 26, 2018                                                                                             Page 3 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening Statistical Capacity in the Ministry of Public Education




                           training program will be comprised of theoretical and practical modules on processing and analyzing data,
                           including effective use of statistical software. The training program will include specific topics of particular
                           policy interest to MEP, including how to assess the coverage, targeting, and potential impacts of current
                           social programs, and how to carry out sub-group analysis (for questions regarding gender, ethnic, and
                           regional disparities). Software licenses to be purchased could include SPSS, Stata, and/or Big Data tools.

                           This component will strongly complement the planned World Bank technical assistance financed by the EU to
                           design an Early Warning System (EWS) to reduce secondary school dropout. Specifically, the technical
                           assistance will provide (i) technical support to MEP in the design of predictive analysis on school dropout
                           using student-level data, and (ii) the design of a plan for cost-effective, information-based interventions
                           aimed at reducing school dropout based on international experience. Such analysis, when based on detailed,
                           student-level data, can accurately predict who is most likely to drop out - information which can be used to
                           intervene early and with more accuracy (both of which improve efficiency).
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Component 3: Provision of support to MEP for the implementation and supervision of Project activities,
                           including the financing of audits. Amount requested: $15,000.

                           This component will finance the required audit of grant implementation activities.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          Given the grant’s national scope, this grant is highly relevant to help improve data reliability and visibility of
                          education gaps of indigenous peoples and afro populations. Subject to additional funding the activities might
                          also consider the analysis of other vulnerable sub-groups such as students with disabilities.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                          This is a Statistical Capacity Building project implemented by MEP. The activities to be funded by the project
                          are limited to technical assistance, capacity building, data production, and dissemination. It will not fund any
                          civil works that could have environmental impacts or lead to involuntary resettlement.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Gunars H. Platais, Environmental Safeguards Specialist
                          Maria Elena Garcia Mora, Social Safeguards Specialist


                         Sep 26, 2018                                                                                                 Page 4 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening Statistical Capacity in the Ministry of Public Education




                          G. Policies that might apply
                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project                Triggered?                       Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                                           This policy is not triggered as the proposed
                                                                                                           project activities do not involve physical
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01                  No                          interventions with foreseeable impacts on
                                                                                                           the environment or natural, physical or
                                                                                                           cultural resources.
                                                                                                           This policy is not triggered as project
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                          No
                                                                                                           activities will not affect natural habitats
                                                                                                           This policy is not triggered as no forests will
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                   No
                                                                                                           be affected by project activities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                           This policy is not triggered given that the
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                              No                          project activities will not involve the
                                                                                                           purchase or use of pesticides.
                                                                                                           This policy is not triggered as no impacts to
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11               No
                                                                                                           physical cultural resources are expected.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                        Yes                         Whereas the indigenous population makes
                                                                                                           up a relatively small percentage of the
                                                                                                           overall population in Costa Rica (2.4%), in
                                                                                                           line with the objectives of the project of
                                                                                                           producing reliable information on key
                                                                                                           sector challenges and carrying out analysis
                                                                                                           to inform the design of programs and
                                                                                                           policies, the Indigenous Peoples Policy (OP
                                                                                                           4.10) is triggered.

                                                                                                           The Project provides a unique opportunity
                                                                                                           to provide further information and visibility
                                                                                                           to existing gaps in education outcomes.
                                                                                                           Education attainment of rural indigenous
                                                                                                           peoples in Costa Rica reaches only 29.6%
                                                                                                           (2000). The attainment of IPs in secondary
                                                                                                           level (17.6% in urban areas vs. 2.7% in rural
                                                                                                           areas) and tertiary level (5.6% in urban
                                                                                                           areas vs. 0.5% in rural areas) is even lower,
                                                                                                           highlighting the importance of improving
                                                                                                           disaggregated data collection and analysis.
                                                                                                           This grant also provides an opportunity to
                                                                                                           build upon existing initiatives to strengthen
                                                                                                           education outcomes of Indigenous Peoples
                                                                                                           and Afro-Costa Ricans such as the Costa
                                                                                                           Rica Higher Education (P123146).


                         Sep 26, 2018                                                                                                              Page 5 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening Statistical Capacity in the Ministry of Public Education



                                                                                                           The grant will finance the design and
                                                                                                           construction of a student-level database to
                                                                                                           strengthen education management
                                                                                                           information system and capacity-building in
                                                                                                           the use of data for planning and decision-
                                                                                                           making in the education sector. The
                                                                                                           diagnostic of current practices at MEP for
                                                                                                           student and school-level data collection will
                                                                                                           assess how do these practices incorporate
                                                                                                           the ethnic variable to assess gaps in
                                                                                                           education outcomes between indigenous
                                                                                                           peoples and afro-descendants and the
                                                                                                           remainder of the population. The design
                                                                                                           and development of Student-Level Records
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                           Module of the Ministerial Platform will take
                                                                                                           into consideration best practices in
                                                                                                           disaggregated data collection to include
                                                                                                           sub-group analysis to incorporate
                                                                                                           indigenous and Afro-descendant students,
                                                                                                           and possibly other vulnerable population
                                                                                                           such as students with disabilities. The
                                                                                                           diagnostic of current practices at MEP for
                                                                                                           student and school-level data collection will
                                                                                                           assess cultural pertinence of the
                                                                                                           methodology and implementation of data
                                                                                                           collection practices.

                                                                                                           Under Component 2, the training program
                                                                                                           will include specific topics of policy interest
                                                                                                           including how to carry out sub-group
                                                                                                           analysis to assess gender, ethnic and
                                                                                                           regional disparities. This will be linked to
                                                                                                           the work on Early Warning System to help
                                                                                                           assess whether ethnicity and indigeneity
                                                                                                           are predictive variables for early dropouts
                                                                                                           in secondary school.

                                                                                                           The policy will be applied through a TA
                                                                                                           approach. The principles and objectives of
                                                                                                           an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be
                                                                                                           integrated into the TA outputs in the form
                                                                                                           of specific analysis and recommendations
                                                                                                           to promote access and inclusion of IPs. The
                                                                                                           Development Plan for the Student-Level
                                                                                                           Records Module of the Ministerial Platform


                         Sep 26, 2018                                                                                                              Page 6 of 8
                                     The World Bank
                                     Strengthening Statistical Capacity in the Ministry of Public Education



                                                                                                                         will include the requirements for
                                                                                                                         disaggregated data collection to
                                                                                                                         incorporate the ethnic variable and related
                                                                                                                         analysis and a draft plan will be disclosed
                                                                                                                         prior to appraisal. National level indigenous
                                                                                                                         and afro-descendant organizations will be
                                                                                                                         consulted during implementation of the TF
                                                                                                                         as part of the preparation of said Plan.
                                                                                                                         Additionally, the Operations Manual and
                                                                                                                         other consultant TORs will integrate the
                                                                                                                         above-mentioned approach to ensure that
                                                                                                                         training and other activities related with
                                                                                                                         the TA are in line with the principles and
                                                                                                                         objectives of the policy.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                         The policy is not triggered given that no
                                                                                                                         involuntary taking of land and no
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12                              No
                                                                                                                         restrictions of access to protected areas are
                                                                                                                         expected under this project.
                                                                                                                         The policy is not triggered given that the
                                                                                                                         project will not support the construction
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                        No                            and rehabilitation of dams nor will support
                                                                                                                         other investments which rely on the
                                                                                                                         services of existing dams.
                                                                                                                         The policy is not triggered as the project
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   No
                                                                                                                         will not affect international waterways.
                                                                                                                         The policy is not triggered as the proposed
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60                            No
                                                                                                                         project will not affect disputed areas.


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan

                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? No


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                     Melissa Ann Adelman

                              Approved By

                              Safeguards Advisor:                                Noreen Beg                                        17-Sep-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                          Rita Almeida                                      19-Sep-2018


                          1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country


                         Sep 26, 2018                                                                                                                                 Page 7 of 8
                                  The World Bank
                                  Strengthening Statistical Capacity in the Ministry of Public Education



                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Sep 26, 2018                                                                                                                                   Page 8 of 8
