INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR14075
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jun-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Pakistan                   Project ID:  P143661
Project Name: Competitive Industries Project for Khyber Pakhtunkhwa (P143661)
Task Team       Kiran Afzal
Leader(s):
Estimated       31-Jan-2013                Estimated    03-May-2013
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                       Lending      Emergency Recovery Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Agro-industry, marketing, and trade (40%), Other Mining and Extractive
Industries (40%), Public administration- Industry and trade ( 10%), General
finance sector (10%)
Theme:          Infrastructure services for private sector development (65%), Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprise support (25%), Conflict prevention and post-conflict
reconstruction (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
U        Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  Yes
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       9.00            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
MDTF for Crisi Affected Areas of NWFP/FATA/Balochistan           9.00
Total                                                            9.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
Page 1 of 7


﻿The proposed development objective of this project is to improve the competitiveness of the marble
and food processing sectors in KP by providing shared infrast                   ructure
and relevant skills along the marble sector value chain and by addressin
g knowledge and coordination gaps along the food processing sector value chain.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The proposed development objective of this project is to improve the competitiveness of the marble
and food processing sectors in KP by providing shared infrast                   ructure
and relevant skills along the marble sector value chain and by addressin
g knowledge and coordination gaps along the food processing sector value chain.
3. Project Description
This intervention aims to increase the competitiveness of the marble and food processing sectors'
value chains through: i) investment in shared infrastructure for the marble sector; (ii) addressing the
information gaps and enhancing coordination in the food processing sector; and; iii) strengthening
the capacity of the relevant line departments and implementing agencies.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project is located in the conflict affected areas of the KP province of Pakistan. Forestry, mining
and agriculture are the primary occupations in the province. The Project infrastructure will be located
in urban areas or demarcated industrial zones. The terrain in the province is mountainous with large
swaths of pristine land. This may require careful consideration of safety aspects during construction
phase as well as ensuring avoidance of any unnecessary disturbance to flora and fauna in Project
vicinity. Stakeholder engagement, communication and grievance reporting regimes would
additionally have to be sensitive to the social profile of the area and effort would be needed to bring
the stakeholders on board in terms of compliance with the environmental mitigation measures.
Extensive capacity building may be needed both with the project proponent and among the
stakeholders in order to ensure compliance with safeguard requirements.
U         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Imran-ul Haq (GSURR)
O
Javaid Afzal (GENDR)
Mohammad Omar Khalid (GENDR)
Salma Omar (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Page 2 of 7


﻿Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
O
)         4.37
Projects on International  No
O
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project is undergoing a Level 2 restructuring which involves an extension in the Project
closing date. This is a 4 month no-cost extension and entails no changes to the Project
components, Project Development Objective (PDO), or to the EA category of the Project. Much
like the original Project, the Project activities under the restructured Project with potential
environmental impacts could be (i) Siting of Common Facility and Training Center (CFTC) and
machinery pool (ii) Construction and operation of CFTC and machinery pool, and (iii) marble
mining activities.
A brief account of the key environmental and social issues from each component activity is given
below.
(i)    Siting Related Impacts Assessment:
The proposed sites for construction of the CFTC and machinery pool is located in a designated
area of the marble city in Risalpur. Pakistan Stone Development Company (PASDEC) provided
land for the establishment of the CFTC and machinery pool; an Agreement was signed between
Government of KP (GoKP) and PASDEC for this purpose. Original land title deeds confirmed that
the land is owned by PASDEC and pictures of the sites showed that the site is clear from any
potential resettlement impacts. Hence no resettlement or compensation issues are envisaged.
The main site related environmental issues identified in the impact assessment are encroachment
into industrial area, increase pressure on utilities and slight additions to the dust and water
pollution in the area due to siting.
(ii)   Construction and Operation of CFTC and Machinery Pool:
Environmental and social impacts likely to result from the construction and operational stage of
CFTC and machinery pool are soil and water contamination, air and dust emissions, removal of
vegetation, unpleasant noise and health and safety problems.
(iii)  Marble Mining (Quarry and Processing) Activities
Key environmental and social issues associated with marble mining are; changes in existing land
use pattern, soil and water contamination, air and dust emission, noise pollution, chemical hazards
from explosives, damage to flora and fauna, impact on landscape, health and safety issues and
increase in use of child labor.
Page 3 of 7


﻿The Projects impact however is not expected to be severe or irreversible, and will be limited in
temporal and spatial scope. The impacts have been addressed at the planning stage through
incorporation of appropriate mitigation measures in the project design through development of an
O
Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP) and Health and Safety Management Plan
(HSMP).
Social: The Project does not involve land acquisition of private land for any components. Hence
OP 4.12 is not triggered. There are also no indigenous people in the project area. Hence OP 4.10
on Indigenous People is also not triggered.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The environmental and natural resources of KP have been severely stressed due to large scale
migration of Internally Displaced Persons in 2010. However, since their return, the urban,
industrial and natural resources of the province are gradually recuperating. Increased economic
activity and revitalization of industry is expected in the province going forward.
As far as the Project is concerned, potential long term environmental impacts may include
additional greenhouse emissions from the use of modem machinery for mining and processing
marble, solid waste and effluent from marble processing. However, given the scale of the project,
these impacts are expected to be minimal and dissipative and can largely be mitigated through
careful planning.
The long-term social impacts of the Project are likely to be largely beneficial. The machinery will
improve the competitiveness of the marble industry and thus improve incomes. Training will
improve skills and employability. Local communities in the vicinity of the CFTC and Machinery
Pool will benefit from providing related maintenance needs.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The Project components have been identified in response to specific community livelihood
recuperation needs following the militancy crisis of 2008 and 2010 floods. The proposed solutions
are rudimentary and the only less intrusive options are the 'no-action' altematives. Since potential
environmental impacts are largely reversible and moderate and can be reduced or eliminated
through appropriate mitigation measures, and the no action alternative leaves the community with
significant and worsening livelihood impediments, the no-action option should not be considered a
comparable alternative.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental:
The original project was processed as an Emergency operation under OP 8.0. In order to mitigate
any negative environmental impacts, the task team prepared an Environmental and Social
Screening and Assessment Framework (ESSAF), which defined the environmental and social
assessment requirements, the planning approach and requirements for assessing and mitigating
adverse social impacts. The ESSAF will remain active under the restructured project as well. The
implementing agency is responsible for compliance with requirements as set out in the ESSAF,
where applicable.
Page 4 of 7


﻿In pursuance of the ESSAF requirements, a project-specific ESMP was prepared for the activities
to be carried out under the original Project. The ESMP includes sections on project background
and impact identification and assessment. Further, the ESMP includes a Health and Safety
Management Plan (HSMP) in accordance with the guidelines on Environmental Health and Safety
developed by the International Finance Corporation for the mining sector. The ESMP was
approved by the Bank and disclosed according to Bank disclosure requirements. The same ESMP
will be used for the restructured project as well.
A brief summary of the key mitigation measures proposed in the ESMP is given below:
1. Proper treatment of wastewater discharges, provision of septic tanks for sewerage disposal,
control of spills and leakages of oil, reduction in water consumption are some of the key
mitigation options for control of surface and ground water pollution. Depending on the type of
project activity different mitigation measures have been proposed in the ESMP including,
sedimentation tank, filtration method, aeration and coagulation methods for the treatment of
wastewater discharges. Water recycling for cutting, polishing and washing operation are
recommended options for reducing wastewater discharges.
2. Air pollution control measures include tuning and emission testing of vehicles exhausts moving
to and out of project sites, use of carbon absorption method to control Volatile Organic
hydrocarbon (VOH) emissions, isolation and air tight window storage of chemicals, use of suction
pumps for dust control, mist spray and sprinkling of water and installation of dusts containment
enclosures. Mitigation options proposed for noise pollution include proper lubrication and
maintenance of vehicles and machinery, ban on use of pressure horns, provision of buffer strip for
noise suppression and regular maintenance of machinery and equipment used in the project
construction and operation phases.
3. In order to control soil contamination mitigation actions proposed in the ESMP include
segregation of wastes, land-filling for municipal wastes (within the Marble City), and incineration
for hazardous and contaminated wastes. Besides proper storage of hazardous chemicals, careful
handling and storage of explosive materials are also prescribed in the ESMP to control
contamination of soil. Compensatory tree plantation and vegetative measures have been
recommended to avoid damage to flora and fauna during project implementation.
Social:
4. Health and safety of workers is a major issue of concern in all components activities of the
project, however, this problem is more serious in marble mining activities. Therefore, a
comprehensive HSMP was also prepared for the original project which included mitigation actions
such as provision of personal safety equipment, installation of fire protection equipment, provision
of first aid boxes for minimizing health and safety risk for workers during project activities. The
HSMP will continue to remain in place under the restructured project.
5. Appropriate institutional arrangements are in place for implementing the ESMP of the original
Project. The Project Director, CIPK is overall responsible for implementation of mitigation
measures and monitoring at the project level. The safeguard officer ensures coordination with all
stakeholders, removal of bottlenecks, and maintaining a consolidated database of ESMP progress.
Bi-annual progress reports are prepared and submitted to the Bank for review. Similar
arrangements will continue for the project once it has been restructured.
Page 5 of 7


﻿The client has previous experience of working with the Bank and its staff, and therefore has an
understanding of the safeguards requirements.
The PMU has been implementing the ESMP with a performance rating of Moderately
O
Satisfactory. The PMU has engaged a full time resource as a Safeguards Specialist. The Specialist
has been conducting safeguards trainings focusing on environmental degradation and health and
safety aspects associated with the project activities. The PMU has been preparing training reports
and also quarterly progress reports (QPRs) for ESMP implementation. Compliance with the
ESMP will be a greater challenge once the mining machinery being procured under the project is
mobilized in the field. Owing to the prevailing mining practices in the country, ESMP compliance
will require continuous efforts. Rigorous trainings and regular monitoring will be done tackle this
challenge, as specified in the ESMP. The effectiveness of the trainings conducted so far will also
be determined at that stage; additional/modified trainings will be conducted as needed.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Key stakeholders are marble industries, trainees who will benefit from the CFTC and local
communities residing in the vicinity of CFTC. The local communities were consulted during the
ESMP formulation. A plan for community outreach, as part of ESMP, will ensure that local
communities are consulted during project implementation.
A Grievance Redressal Mechanism (GRM) has been established and housed at the Project
Management Unit (PMU) of Government of KP, to address complaints by the general public due
to project activities. It is accessible by all stakeholders and addresses any disagreeable decision,
practice or activity arising from the Project.
The safeguards documents has been translated into local language and disclosed locally and
through the infoshop. ESMP has also been disclosed to the public through websites of
implementing entities (PASDEC and GoKP) and the English and Urdu versions of the executive
summary was distributed to all stakeholders. Hard copies of the ESMP are placed in the project
offices of all implementing partners and would be available to public, in line with the World Bank
Policy on Access to Information 2010.
O
B. Disclosure Requirements
*         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?             Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                                13-Dec-2010
Date of submission to InfoShop                             10-Jan-2011
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 6 of 7


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[  ]  NA[   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Kiran Afzal
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)           Date: 26-Jun-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Esperanza Lasagabaster (PMGR)      Date: 26-Jun-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


