                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA15925
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 10-Nov-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 03-Nov-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          West Bank and Gaza                Project ID:   P151089
                            Project Name:     West Bank and Gaza: Finance for Jobs (P151089)
                            Task Team         Peter J. Mousley,Abdalwahab Khatib
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         08-Nov-2015                       Estimated   18-Dec-2015
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFM11                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General industry and trade sector (20%), Vocational training (20%), SME
                                              Finance (20%), Other domestic and international trade (20%), Other non-bank
                                              financial intermediaries (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Other economic management (25%), Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise
                                              support (25%), Other Private Sector Development (25%), Trade fac ilitation and
                                              market access (25%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       5.00           Total Bank Financing:                 0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                      Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                0.00
                              Special Financing                                                                       5.00
                              Total                                                                                   5.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The SOP development objective (PDO) is to mobilize private investment financing in high potential
                           sectors and generate job opportunities for the West Bank and Gaza.

                                                                      Page 1 of 9
                         The F4J PDO is to test the effectiveness of selected financial interventions.
                         3. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This project (F4J) will represent the first of an anticipated Series of Projects (SOP). In a SOP
                         programmatic approach, a series of two or more projects are designed for implementation over time,
                         building on lessons learned and achievements from previous project(s) in the series. A programmatic
                         framework is proposed as it would allow for a phased approach, commencing with a market
                         readiness and capacity building engagement, together with the upstream detailed design and selected
                         testing of innovative financing in support of private sector led approaches to job-creating
                         investments. This initial project would also entail the design of the robust measurement
                         methodologies to be applied to assess the overall SOP PDO results. Subsequent projects in the SOP
                         series would, building on the foundational work of the F4J, provide for further product testing and
                         potentially scaled-up funding to specific financial products. This experimentation and learning is
                         integral to the F4J project objectives and to the likelihood of success of the overall objectives this
                         F4J SOP programmatic initiative.

                         Component 1: Entrepreneurship Ecosystem Matching Grant (EE-MG) ($1.5 million)

                         While the innovation and entrepreneurship ecosystem in the Palestinian territories is nascent, it is
                         currently gaining substantial momentum. Ranging from seed-stage accelerators, training boot-camps,
                         entrepreneurship university courses, to the establishment of FDI and locally funded venture capital
                         funds, current initiatives are expanding the segment of educated professionals who opt for income
                         generation through entrepreneurship over the traditional job market. As a response to, and to capture
                         the momentum of the rapidly growing sector, local and international institutional investors were
                         quick to commit new capital to invest in Palestinian startups and SMEs, mainly – but not exclusively
                         – in the technology sector. In recent years, several donors have also funded entrepreneurship-support
                         programs. However a clear gap remains between available support services and the development of a
                         steady stream of “investment-ready” startups required to maintain the feasibility of early seed,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         venture and growth-capital funds. This has resulted in significant locked up capital on the investor
                         side.

                         Component 1 will finance the EE-MG, a matching grant (cost-sharing) facility targeting early stage
                         investment funds seeking to build an investible pipeline of projects. The EE-MG will be a
                         specialized fund designed to improve the number and quality of investment-ready entrepreneurship
                         initiatives by enhancing the capacity of enterprises to absorb funding from the investment vehicles
                         already in place. The matching grant funds would be used to finance business development services
                         (BDS) for entrepreneurs in the range of US$10-50K. This can include production/design/quality
                         development; marketing/distribution and other business management support services (refer to
                         Annex 2 for further details). These services would be made available at a “wholesale level” to
                         investment funds that satisfy specific eligibility criteria related to job creation and business growth
                         potential. Depending on the outcome of F4J I (in terms of private investments mobilized) and
                         pipeline demand, additional support could be made available via future SOP projects through an
                         expansion of the matching grant and\or financing into early stage equity financing facilities.

                         The EE-MG will select existing investment funds based on their overall financial strength and other
                         criteria, including adequate capitalization, satisfactory management quality and agreement to pursue
                         development goals in the selection of projects (e.g. jobs created especially for women and youth and
                         level of private sector investment mobilized). Eligible Investment Fund grantees will use the EE-MG


                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                         to finance BDS procured from the market from one of two windows: (i) to develop a business idea to
                         bankable status; (ii) build the internal capacity of existing investment funds to provide in-house
                         advisory services.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project Implementing Agency (PIA) will have the overall responsibility for the implementation
                         of the EE-MG including management of grant funds, investment fund selection and accreditation,
                         compliance with grant eligibility criteria, due diligence prior to and after grant awards, issuing grant
                         agreements, setting disbursement conditions and conducting verification in addition to monitoring
                         and evaluation.

                         Component 2: Market Readiness and Capacity Building ($1.75 million)

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Building a Pipeline of Job-Focused Private Investments Requiring Financial
                         Enhancements ($0.9 million)

                         Initial analysis in consultation with leading Palestinian investors indicate that investment
                         opportunities do exist, even within the currently constrained investment climate, including in agro-
                         processing, IT and light manufacturing - particularly in the case of this last sub-sector via existing
                         industrial park\facility locations. Given the social externalities of job creation, there is a public good
                         case to be made for support to be provided to enable these projects to proceed.

                         In order to assess these benefits and the social rate of return they provide in order then to determine
                         the merits of financial “enhancements”, detailed feasibility work is required. This component will
                         finance these assessments and assist the PA and private sector to build a pipeline of job-focused
                         private sector investments. A cost-benefit analysis (CBA) methodology will be utilized to capture
                         and calculate the potential social value of the jobs created, including three types of additional “social
                         externality” returns: (i) women and more vulnerable beneficiaries; (ii) social stability and; (iii)
                         human capital accumulation. Subsequent projects in the F4J SOP could provide the financial
                         enhancement products to help close private financing investment gaps in order to capture these
Public Disclosure Copy




                         additional social returns.

                         These private investment “assessment” funds will be allocated and managed by the PIA through a
                         competitive “Call for Proposal” process based on job-creating and cost effectiveness criteria. The
                         PIA will also be responsible for the technical oversight of the CBA activities to be undertaken. The
                         development of this CBA methodology, to be applied under the F4J I, will be led by the Jobs CCSA.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Developing the DIB for Skills ($0.5 million)

                         This subcomponent will finance the market preparation work and capacity building needed for the
                         Development Impact Bond (DIB) instrument. Box 1 provides an introduction to impact bonds. The
                         proposed DIB will be focused enhancing the skills of the work of the Palestinian workforce. The DIB
                         will require intensive preparation work during the first year of project implementation to: (i) ensure a
                         sound design (including cohort selection, services, outcomes\outcomes and related p ricing,
                         implementing arrangements); (ii) develop the monitoring and evaluation methodology and put in
                         place the baseline requirements; and (iii) prepare the DIB market, including strengthening of service
                         providers and attracting private investors.

                         In respect of (iii) above, the activities to be undertaken here would complement and build from the
                         success of the World Bank’s Education to Work Transition projects and other donor efforts in

                                                                        Page 3 of 9
                         building capacity for service providers. The capacity building is anticipated to include the following
                         range of activities, although this will be continuously tailored to market-demand: (a) supporting
                         potential providers in developing market-targeted training courses; (b) working with education
Public Disclosure Copy




                         institutions to improve linkages to the private sector; (c) raising awareness of the DIB amongst
                         education institutions and employers, including job portal enhancements.

                         The knowledge learning and enhanced capacity generated from this component will not only prepare
                         the market for the DIB financing under subsequent SOP phases, it will also help lay the foundation
                         for any future investments in subsequent DIBs in the West Bank and Gaza.

                         Subcomponent 2.3: Capacity Building to the Palestinian Authority ($0.35 million)

                         There are numerous market failures confronting the PA as it seeks to address job priorities in what is
                         a uniquely fragile and conflict-affected economy. These are highlighted in the 2014 ICA. Much of
                         this lies beyond the control of the PA through the policy, legal and regulatory instruments currently
                         within its purview. One area where more can be done is through stronger PA partnerships with the
                         private sector. More specifically, it requires more innovative approaches to risk-sharing between the
                         public and private sectors in order to finance new job creating investments.

                         Effectively assessing social and economic returns and structuring financial arrangements that provide
                         both private and public sector with a more manageable distribution of the different project risks that
                         confront the investment choice in the West Bank\Gaza is a specialized expertise. As such it
                         commands a premium market price and is something that governments generally recruit on an as
                         required basis. Notwithstanding this, governments need to have the capacity to manage such
                         externally provided expertise and follow through on recommendations as to financing in ways that
                         ensure fiscal prudence, balance the incentives to avoid the market distortions that can undermine the
                         social gains targeted and ensure effective implementation, monitoring and evaluation of activities
                         and outputs\outcome.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The capacity of the Ministry of Finance in respect of the additional responsibilities that come with
                         assessing (including safeguards), developing and potentially managing innovative financing
                         instruments will need to be augmented. The project will support this – building on a core private
                         sector implementation platform detailed in section C below – through a package of capacity building
                         comprising technical assistance (TA), training (TRN), secondments, internships and placements
                         (SIP) and essential facilities, equipment and software (FES).

                         Component 3: Project Management (US$ 1.75 million)

                         This component will support overall project implementation, fiduciary, safeguards, M&E,
                         communications and technical expertise. As detailed further below, the PIA would be recruited by
                         the MOF from the private sector. The PIA would then be responsible for the contracting of the DIB
                         Advisor (D-Adv) management of the EE-MG for the entrepreneurship ecosystem sub-component,
                         contracting the feasibility study work to be undertaken to assess potential job-focused investments
                         and provision of the capacity building support to the PA. The specific composition of the PIA will
                         include the following eight positions: (i) PIA Manager and senior economist; (ii) procurement
                         specialist; (iii) financial management specialist; (iv) safeguards specialist; (v) project finance
                         specialist; (vi)M&E specialist; (vii) communications officer; (viii) project coordinator in Gaza. In
                         addition, the MOF would be responsible for contracting the specialized third party Independent
                         Verification Agent (IVA) to assess the DIB performance for output and outcome payments from the

                                                                      Page 4 of 9
                         project.

                         As the tracking of outcomes is critical to the DIB instrument, this project component will also
Public Disclosure Copy




                         provide support to activities such as the building of a baseline, data collection, and outcomes
                         measurement.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented throughout the West Bank and Gaza Strip. The project will likely be
                         implemented predominantly in the West Bank in Ramallah and other localities where private sector
                         activity is concentrated. However, the project is expected to support the development of one or
                         more private sector investments in the Gaza Strip.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Hana Salah (GSU05)
                         Tracy Hart (GENDR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            This project is categorized as "B" due to potential adverse
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     environmental and social impacts which are site-specific
                                                                    and reversible; thus easily remediable by applying
                                                                    appropriate mitigation measures. Given current
                                                                    information, these potential adverse environmental
                                                                    impacts may include the
                                                                    following: construction-related air, noise, and water
                                                                    quality issues; worker occupational health and safety.
                                                                    Preparation will continue to focus the menu of possible
                                                                    sub-projects. An ESMF will offer guidance on the
                                                                    potential breadth of sub-project technical interventions.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    The ESMF does so through offering environmental and
                                                                    social screening checklists, possible environmental
                                                                    impacts for each of the five possible "high job-creating"
                                                                    sectors, sample environmental and social management
                                                                    plans (ESMPs), institutional arrangements, training
                                                                    activities, and monitoring and report of safeguards
                                                                    compliance. If additional sectors are to be financed, the
                                                                    ESMF will be revised and redisclosed. The ESMF,
                                                                    including Executive Summaries in English and Arabic,
                                                                    will be disclosed in-country and at the Bank's Infoshop
                                                                    prior to appraisal.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No             The ESMF sub-project screening will exclude any sub-
                          4.04                                      project which involves natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No             The ESMF sub-project screening will exclude any sub-
                                                                    project which involves forests.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes               The ESMF will screen to determine whether potential
                                                                    sub-projects are likely to include the purchase and/or use
                                                                    of pesticides, herbicides, rodenticides, etc. F4J sub-



                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                                                                       projects will not be excluded solely on their inclusion of
                                                                       pest management chemicals. A Pest Management Plan
                                                                       (PMP) is included in the ESMF.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Physical Cultural           No             The ESMF sub-project screening will exclude any sub-
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       project with potential impact on known physical cultural
                                                                       resources. Chance find procedures will be included in the
                                                                       ESMF in the case that physical cultural resources are
                                                                       discovered during sub-project implementation.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No                There are no indigenous peoples in the service area.
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement No                Any land requirements (temporary or permanent) for
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 investments to be financed under the projects will be met
                                                                       through lands that are state owned or owned by private
                                                                       companies. Therefore, any projects that may trigger the
                                                                       World Bank Policy OP 4.12 will be excluded that involve
                                                                       relocation of households, temporary or permanent land
                                                                       take, and impacts on livelihoods, including those that may
                                                                       occur through restriction of access to resources. To
                                                                       screen out for these exclusions, the projects will rely on
                                                                       guidelines in the Operations Manual, which includes a
                                                                       rigorous sub-project screening.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No             This policy is not applicable.
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No             This policy is not applicable.
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No             This policy is not applicable.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60
Public Disclosure Copy




                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              According to initial analysis, the following sectors: (i) agriculture; (ii) IT and digital
                              entrepreneurship; (iii) tourism; (iv) construction; and (v) energy have been identified as offering
                              strong growth and job creation prospects, potentially generating around 40% of the jobs needed to
                              reduce unemployment by 10% to 2030. While more than 20 sectors and sub-sectors were assessed,
                              the five prioritized sectors have been selected because they have the greatest capacity and potential
                              to maximize immediate and long-term opportunities and spur broader multiplier effects in other
                              sectors and across the economy under the existing policy framework. In other words, sectors that
                              offer not only maximum potential for growth and employment but also greatest scope for private
                              sector intervention and ownership under existing constraints, including restrictions on movement
                              and access and other Israeli policies.

                              There is expected to be no potential large-scale, significant, or irreversible impacts associated with
                              support of the sectors identified above. Support to agriculture is expected to be in processing,
                              marketing, and/or export sub-sectors. Support to energy is expected to be in the creation and


                                                                         Page 6 of 9
                           adoption of alternative energy sources, such as photovoltaics and wind energy.

                           Any land requirements (temporary or permanent) for investments to be financed under the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           will be met through lands that are state owned or owned by private companies. Any sub-projects
                           that may trigger the World Bank Policy OP 4.12 will be excluded, which include those that
                           involve relocation of households, temporary or permanent land take, and impacts on livelihoods,
                           including those that may occur through restriction of access to resources. To screen for this
                           exclusion, the projects will rely on guidelines in the Operations Manual (OM), which will include
                           a rigorous sub-project screening process to be done by the F4J PIA. In cases where land may be
                           purchased through a willing-seller willing-buyer approach or in cases of voluntary land donation
                           (VLD), the F4J PIA will need to document for power of choice. This documentation must be
                           provided for sub-projects to be considered eligible for screening. In other words, if the appropriate
                           documentation is not provided, the sub-project is considered ineligible.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           This project is categorized as "B" due to potential adverse environmental and social impacts which
                           are site-specific and reversible; these are easily remediable by applying appropriate mitigation
                           measures. Given current information, these potential adverse environmental impacts may include
                           the following: construction-related air, noise, and water quality issues; pedestrian and vehicular
                           traffic and other construction-related disruptions; as well as worker occupational health and safety.
                           Potential long-term impacts may include additional agricultural-related effluents within fields,
                           hothouses, and/or warehouses; construction industry management of construction phase impacts;
                           and e-waste and other lifecycle disposal management associated with alternative energy source
                           development. The first F4J in the SOP will continue to focus the menu of possible sub-projects as
                           well as further identification of potential impacts, risks, and mitigations for potentially selected
                           sub-projects.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The ESMF screens out for category "A" sub-projects as well as sub-projects will would involve
                           natural habitats, forests, physical cultural resources, dam safety, and involuntary resettlement.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           An environmental and social safeguards officer (ESO) will be hired as part of the PIA to assess
                           and manage safeguards related issues. PIA ESO capacity will be supported by Bank
                           environmental and social safeguards specialists during the course of F4J preparation and
                           implementation, as well as in any subsequent F4J projects. Safeguards staff will not be needed
                           for implementation of the second component of the project (Skills Development Impact Bonds)
                           since this component will not trigger any Bank safeguards policies. The ESMF and OM includes a
                           capacity building plan to train in subject areas including, but not limited to, (i) pre-project
                           screening, monitoring, and reporting; (ii) Palestinian EQA and World Bank environmental and
                           social safeguards standards; (iii) stakeholder consultations, grievance mechanisms, and
                           involuntary resettlement policies; and (iv) design and preparation of sub-project ESMPs. Capacity
                           screening, ESMP preparation, construction supervision, monitoring, and reporting. Training will
                           be for Ministry of Finance staff, PIA staff, and interested parties from the private sector. This is
                           to occur as part of F4J's first phase so that capacity is built prior to sub-project implementation in
                           the second-phase of F4J.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure


                                                                      Page 7 of 9
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include the Ministry of Finance; international, regional, and local private sector
                           investors and entities; local job skill development, marketing, and matchmaking private sector
Public Disclosure Copy




                           entities and NGOs; as well as local private sector enterprises. Three stakeholder consultations have
                           been held during F4J preparation: July 9th, July 30th, and August 5th, 2015. As the sub-projects
                           have not yet been identified, sub-project specific beneficiaries cannot be identified and included in
                           the consultation processes at this time. Each sub-project ESMP will include a site-specific
                           consultation process, to take place during F4J implementation. An Arabic and English and Arabic
                           language Executive Summaries of the ESMF, as well as the English-language full-version ESMFs,
                           will be disclosed in-country as well as in the Info-Shop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Nov-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      00000000
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           West Bank and Gaza                                               04-Nov-2015
                           Comments: www.pmof.ps
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      09-Oct-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   06-Nov-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           West Bank and Gaza                                               04-Nov-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: www.pmof.ps
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated    Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?        Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                       Yes [    ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]

                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a              Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
Public Disclosure Copy




                             in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                             Management Specialist?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter J. Mousley,Abdalwahab Khatib
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                              Date: 11-Nov-2015
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Rolf Behrndt (PMGR)                            Date: 11-Nov-2015
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
