                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC16259

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           China                            Project ID:      P154716
                            Project Name:      Anhui Aged Care System Demonstration Project (P154716)
                            Task Team          Elena E. Glinskaya,Dewen Wang
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          26-Sep-2016                      Estimated        28-Mar-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GSP02                            Lending          Investment Project Financing
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    196.70                     Total Bank Financing:        140.00
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                      56.70
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                        140.00
                              Total                                                                        196.70
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The proposed PDO of this project is to support the government of Anhui province in establishing and
                           managing a diversified (public and private) system of delivery of elderly care services, including
                           home, community and residential services, that serves the key target group: the elderly with physical
                           or mental impairments or limitations of activities of daily living.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project has four components: (i) Supporting the development of government stewardship
                           capacity for the elderly care system; (ii) Strengthening the delivery and management of community
                           and home-based services); (iii) Strengthening the delivery and management of nursing care; and (iv)
                           Project management.
                         Component 1: Supporting the development of government stewardship capacity for the elderly care
                         system
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This project will develop the capacity of the government to exercise stewardship over a diversified
                         elderly care system. The main stewardship functions to be strengthened by this component are (i) to
                         design and manage the delivery of a continuum of care, through developing an information system
                         and designing an architecture for provider-commissioner relations; (ii) to create a system for
                         disability certification/ability evaluation, and (iii) to develop and uphold quality standards. This
                         component will finance TA, capacity building, software and hardware.

                         Component 2: Strengthening the delivery and management of community and home-based services

                         Community-based stations supporting home based care provision are envisaged as a backbone of the
                         aged care strategy in the province. Accordingly, the project activities supported by this component
                         include building and/or upgrading the community-based stations and purchasing home-based care
                         from service providers (Anqing and LuAn). Preparation of meals, basic cleaning, assistance with
                         caring for bedridden seniors, and respite services are among the services envisaged for home based
                         care and in community based settings. Developing Internet of Things (IOT) to expand the outreach of
                         community care and to improve the integration of medical and social care services is also envisaged
                         in this component (Wuhu). This component will finance civil works, equipment, and payments to
                         providers of home-based care.

                         Component 3: Strengthening the delivery and management of nursing care

                         This component will support construction/upgrading tertiary skilled nursing facilities and welfare
                         homes. Urban tertiary skilled nursing facilities will be constructed in LuAn, Wuhu and Anqing. Each
                         nursing facility will be attached to a public tertiary hospital. The design and location of facilities
                         conforms to good international and local practice of concentrating facilities in places with high
Public Disclosure Copy




                         population density and focusing on elderly people with disabilities.

                         This component of the project will also increase the capacity of residential urban welfare homes in
                         Ningguo and Xuanzhou. Further, this component will upgrade the rural facilities and increase the
                         skilled-nursing content of services in Suzhou and Wuhu. Strengthening welfare homes is included in
                         the project in order to support the government in its role of a major direct provider of elderly care for
                         the poor. While current welfare homes started to admit self-paying patients with ADL limitations, it
                         is critically important that welfare homes refrain from prioritize self-paying patients over sun-wu and
                         wu-bao elderly. This component will finance civil works and equipment.

                         Component 4: Project management

                         This component will support project management-related work at the provincial and sub-provincial
                         levels by establishing and maintaining Project Management Offices and by building the capacity of
                         project management staff. This will ensure an effective and efficient implementation in compliance
                         with the operations policies and procedures of the World Bank as well as with domestic rules.
                         D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         There are six major sites in the proposed project - the municipalities of Anqing, LuAn, Wuhu,
                           Xuancheng (Ningguo City and Xuanzhou District), and Suzhou. These proposed sites range from the
                           more economically developed and urbanized areas along the Yangtze River (Wuhu), to the less
                           economically developed and rural areas in the north (LuAn and Suzhou). The sixth site in the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           is the city of Hefei, the capital of Anhui province, where a number of provincial-level activities (i.e.
                           Information System development) is envisaged for the main office of the provincial DOCA.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The implementing agency is the Department of Civil Affairs (DOCA) of Anhui Province, that is
                           responsible for overall project implementation. DOCA is the leading agency overseeing aged care
                           services provision, but other departments, such as the Departments of Finance, Reform and Planning,
                           Health, and Human Resources and Social Security, and private services providers, are also involved.
                           A leading coordination mechanism is recommended to ensure a comprehensive design and smooth
                           implementation of the project. A provincial project management office (PMO) has been initially
                           established and housed in DOCA. Accordingly, the PMOs will be set up at municipality, city, or
                           county levels (wherever the project activities are hosted). The provincial PMO will be responsible for
                           overall coordination with local PMOs through the project preparation and implementation periods.
                           PMOs at all levels will be adequately staffed when the project is ready to move to the preparation
                           stage. Initial training was provided by the Bank team during the identification mission to PMOs on
                           the Bank safeguard policies. Capacity building for the PMOs and tailored training on related the
                           World Bank policies and different aspects of project management will be carried out during project
                           preparation. Experienced consultants will be engaged by provincial PMO to prepare safeguards
                           documents, and provide PMOs staff with safeguards trainings to improve their capacity to the
                           satisfactory level.

                           Anhui province has successfully implemented many projects financed by the World Bank. The
                           Provincial Department of Finance (DOF) and the Provincial Development and Reform Commission
                           (DRC) will provide support and guidance to DOCA and the PMO during project preparation and
                           implementation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Feng Ji (GEN2A)
                           Zhefu Liu (GSU02)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            It is confirmed that Environmental Assessment (OP
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       4.01) is triggered. The proposed physical investments
                                                                            mainly include the construction or improvement of
                                                                            aged care facilities in Anhui Province (e.g.
                                                                            community base stations, urban and rural welfare
                                                                            homes, and nursing facilities). The scale and size of
                                                                            the new construction vary from community based
                                                                            care facilities (hundreds of small buildings with
                                                                            several stories) to three nursing facilities (each with
                                                                            500-600 beds).

                                                                            The rehabilitation work is to finance small scale civil
                         work and equipment for existing communities based
                         and home based care facilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         There will be adverse impacts associated with the
                         facilities: (i) general construction-related impacts
                         such as disposal of spoil, nuisance of dust, noise,
                         wastewater etc.; and (ii) adverse impacts during
                         operation including disposal of domestic waste and
                         wastewater from these facilities, and limited amount
                         of medical waste from three nursing facilities (i.e.
                         LuAn, Anqing, Wuhu). These adverse impacts are
                         localized, limited, and can be readily mitigated.

                         The proposed technical assistance activities are
                         mainly to strengthen client capacity. Capacity
                         building activities include (i) to design and manage
                         the delivery of a continuum of care, through
                         developing an information system and designing an
                         architecture for provider-commissioner relations; (ii)
                         to create a system for disability certification/ability
                         evaluation so as to direct public funding, (iii) to
                         develop and uphold quality standards; (iv) To
                         provide capacity building for PMOs. None of TAs
                         are to support land use planning or natural resources
                         management (NRM) or to preparing feasibility
                         studies, technical designs or other activities directly
                         in support of the preparation of a future investment
                         project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As such, the project is proposed as a category B
                         project considering the type, location, sensitivity, and
                         scale of the project as well as the nature and
                         magnitude of its potential environmental impacts.

                         An Environmental Management Plan (EMP) will be
                         prepared for the project and include:
                         (a)     Environmental Code of Practices (ECOPs) to
                         be developed to address general construction related
                         impact.
                         (b)     Specific mitigation measures including
                         disposal of domestic waste and wastewater from
                         these facilities, and disposal of limited amount of
                         medical waste from three nursing facilities (i.e.
                         Lu'an, Anqing, Wuhu).
                         (c) Specific measures of proper management of
                         asbestos if it is found during civil work.
                         (d) Requirement for universal access design of the
                                                            facilities to be rehabilitated and constructed under
                                                            the project;
                                                            (e) Migration measures on social aspects. The social
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                            assessment should analyze elders? needs and public
                                                            demands and pay particular attention to the needs of
                                                            the most vulnerable groups among the elders. It will
                                                            inform the design of the project to ensure all groups
                                                            have equal access to quality services.
                                                            (f)         An institutional arrangement for project
                                                            preparation and implementation;
                                                            (g) An institutional strengthening plan covering
                                                            training and technical assistance(where applicable);
                                                            (h) A specific monitoring plan.
                                                            (i) EMP implementation budget.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   No   Based on the site visit and discussion with the client,
                                                            activities which may have adverse impacts on natural
                                                            habitats have been excluded from the project, the
                                                            proposed project activities are located in the urban
                                                            and sub-urban areas which have been heavily
                                                            influenced by human activities. The project activities
                                                            will not affect any protected reserves, known as
                                                            natural habitats, or established or proposed critical
                                                            natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            No   The project will not have impacts on the health and
                                                            quality of forests or the rights and welfare of people
                                                            and their level of dependence upon or interaction
                                                            with forests, or aims to bring about changes in its
                                                            management or protection.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09       No   The project will not include procurement of
                                                            pesticides or pesticide application equipment, nor
                                                            lead to substantially increased pesticide use and
                                                            subsequent increase in health and environmental risk,
                                                            or could maintain or expand present pest
                                                            management practices that are unsustainable.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   No   Based on the site visit and the project proposal, the
                         OP/BP 4.11                         project is not likely to cause any significant adverse
                                                            impacts on the Physical Cultural Resources (PCRs)
                                                            in the project influence area.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No   The Task Team reviewed the information provided
                         4.10                               by the engaged cities and had discussions with the
                                                            officials who are responsible to the ethnic minority
                                                            affairs in line to any ethnic minority community in
                                                            the project areas and the community to be affected
                                                            by the activities of the proposed project to determine
                                                            whether or not the IP policy needs to be triggered.
                                                            The team concluded that the project areas in the
                                                                                                                        cities are predominantly Han Chinese and there are
                                                                                                                        no ethnic minority groups as defined by OP4.10 such
                                                                                                                        as Manchu and Mongolian communities present in,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        or have collective attachment to the project areas in
                                                                                                                        the cities. Bank OP 4.10 policy is not triggered and
                                                                                                                        IPDP is not required.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        It is anticipated that some collective land and
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                structures in cities will be required. An experienced
                                                                                                                        social safeguards consulting team will be contracted
                                                                                                                        by the Project Management Office (PMO) to conduct
                                                                                                                        the resettlement impact survey of the entire project
                                                                                                                        areas. Social assessment will be undertaken to
                                                                                                                        analyze elders needs and public demands, specific to
                                                                                                                        citizen engagement and supports to poor families.
                                                                                                                        Those findings will be integrated into the project
                                                                                                                        design and policy reform of aged care system in
                                                                                                                        Anhui province. If detailed information about each
                                                                                                                        subproject is known site-specific, Resettlement
                                                                                                                        Action Plan (RAP) will be prepared by appraisal. If
                                                                                                                        the exact location of subprojects is not yet known
                                                                                                                        before appraisal, Resettlement Policy Framework
                                                                                                                        (RFP) will be prepared.
                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         The project will not finance construction or
                                                                                                                        rehabilitation of any dams as defined under this
                                                                                                                        policy. This polices is not triggered.
                                 Projects on International      No                                                      The project is not on international waterways.
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not in disputed areas.
                                 BP 7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Sep-2016
                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      The Environment Management Plan (EMP), Social Assessment (SA), Resettlement Action Plan
                                      (RAP) and Resettlement Policy Framework (RFP) will be completed prior to the project appraisal
                                      tentatively in September 2016.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Elena E. Glinskaya,Dewen Wang
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                                                                                      Date: 26-Jul-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Jehan Arulpragasam (PMGR)                                                                                              Date: 26-Jul-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
