INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA12380
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 24-Jul-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 28-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:  P148294
Project Name: Wuhan Integrated Transport Development (P148294)
Task Team       Arturo Ardila Gomez
Leader(s):
Estimated       03-Aug-2015                Estimated    24-Nov-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT102                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Urban Transport (90%), Public administration- Transportation (10%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (90%), Municipal governance and
institution building (10%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:    244.66             Total Bank Financing:  120.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                  124.66
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     120.00
Total                                                                     244.66
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The PDO is to improve transport services and management in Wuhan and Anlu Cities.
3. Project Description
The project is designed to strengthen integrated urban transport solutions in Wuhan and Anlu, with
the aim of delivering more efficient and safer services while enhancing a sustainable approach for the
Page 1 of 10


﻿development of the WMR as a whole. In Wuhan, the project comprises a comprehensive ICT
platform to improve the planning, operation and management of the city's transport system.
Integration is addressed at a strategic level to strengthen the foundations for efficient and seamless
trips. In Anlu, the focus is more local and built around the development of integrated public transport
corridors, integrated public transport and NMT networks, road safety measures, and road
infrastructure improvements supporting the refunctioning of key roads (i.e., changing the cross-
section of the road[s] in question through civil works, traffic signals and traffic facilities [signs, lines
and barriers] to make them safer and more appropriate for their urban context). The WMR's
integrated development is enhanced by the improvement of railway and bus stations that connect
Anlu with Wuhan, and the development of analytical tools to better understand and predict travel
patterns between the two cities.
Component 1. Integrated Corridor and Road Safety Improvements in Anlu:
1.     Road network refunctioning through the carrying out of improvements to selected road
infrastructure and construction of new road sections.
2.     Carrying out improvements to non-motorized transport facilities, including junction
channelization, pedestrian facilities, signs, markings and barriers, on selected existing roads in
Anlu's downtown area.
3.     Implementation of traffic management and road safety measures including, inter alia, the
procurement and implementation of systems and related equipment such as a traffic command center,
a traffic-signal control system, traffic enforcement cameras and radars, bus-lane enforcement
mechanisms, construction of a road safety center and implementation of road user education
measures.
Component 2. Public Transport Improvements in Anlu:
1.     Construction of six public transport interchanges, including: (a) three bus transfer stations;
(b) one bus terminal; and (c) two bus transfer and road passenger transport centers.
2.     Procurement of clean-energy buses.
3.     Establishment of an intelligent public transport system including, inter alia, a public transport
control center, onboard bus information systems, bus dispatching systems, telecommunications, and
a smart card system.
Component 3. Intelligent Transport System for Wuhan:
1.             Setting up of a transport information center and associated facilities, including a data backup
center and a public display platform.
2.     Establishment of four system application platforms, namely, basic research, decision support,
industry service and public service platforms.
3.     Carrying out of demonstration subprojects designed to provide information to the public and
facilitate user queries, and also enable monitoring and evaluation, including inter alia: (a) expressway
traffic management demonstration; (b) public transport information demonstration; (c) parking
management; and (d) comprehensive smart transport community demonstration.
Component 4. Technical Assistance for Anlu and Wuhan:
1.     Anlu. Provision of: (a) technical assistance support and training activities, including the
carrying out of Project related studies in areas concerning urban transport strategy and planning, road
safety, parking, and NMT; and (b) Project implementation support, carrying out of monitoring and
evaluation activities, as well as Project management-related training, capacity building, and study
tours.
2.     Wuhan. Provision of: (a) technical assistance support and training activities, including the
Page 2 of 10


﻿carrying out of Project related studies in areas concerning transportation-related big data analytics
and applications, data standard and data sharing; (b) support for knowledge-sharing activities among
the ITS regional community, including local governments, transport service providers, and the
telecommunications, ICT and transport industries; (c) development of a draft road safety plan for
O
U         Wuhan Municipality; and (d) Project management-related training, capacity building, and study
tours.
O
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project activities are located in the cities of Wuhan and Anhu. The component in Wuhan focuses
on technical assistance activities only (intelligent transport system) without physical civil works. The
component in Anlu city includes renovation and widening of existing urban streets, renovation and
construction of 6 bus terminals, as well as improvement of non-motor vehicle transport facilities.
Wuhan is the capital city of Hubei Province in the middle of China. Wuhan and a number
surrounding cities are classified as Wuhan City Circle, and assigned as a pilot area for resource
saving and environmental-friendly society construction the State Council. Anlu is a sub-city level
town under the Xiaogan City in the northeast of Wuhan. The urban core area of Anlu is 18.98km2,
with a population of 172,200. Public infrastructures are mostly in the old urban core area, while
population is mostly in the east of the core area. The road network in the core area cannot meet the
public demand, and the public transport infrastructure is inadequate.
All the physical activities of Anlu component are either within the urban built-up area or the rural
farmland area of the urban fringe which is dominated by human activities. The roads constructions
are rehabilitation and upgrading of existing roads. The location of the bus terminals are all farmland.
There is no sensitive ecological environment site (e.g. natural habitat, protected area, parks etc.).
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Peishen Wang (GENO2)
Zhefu Liu (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The physical activities in Anlu component include
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                renovation, widening and rehabilitation of urban streets
and bus terminals which will have social disturbance and
environmental impacts during construction stage,
including disposal of spoil, nuisance of dust, noise,
wastewater, waste generated from demolished buildings
and disturbance to local communities etc. The potential
adverse impacts during operation stage will include road
safety, air quality, noise impacts from the upgraded roads
and waste management from bus terminals. As the project
construction activity is basically small-scale renovation
and rehabilitation works, the potential environmental and
social impacts are small-scale, site-specific and well
known for such kinds of urban infrastructure projects, and
can be readily avoided, minimized and mitigated with
known mitigation measures and good construction
Page 3 of 10


﻿management practice. Therefore, the project is classified
as Category B project as per OP4.01.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           Based on the environmental assessment, the project is
4.04                                 located in the urban and sub-urban areas which have been
heavily influenced by human activities. The project
activities will not affect any protected reserves, natural
habitats, or established or proposed critical natural
habitats. Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           Given the urban and peri-urban context, there is no forest
within the area of influence of the project. Therefore, this
policy is not triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not include procurement of pesticides or
pesticide application equipment, nor lead to substantially
increased pesticide use and subsequent increase in health
and environmental risk, or could maintain or expand
present pest management practices that are unsustainable.
Therefore, this policy is not triggered.
Physical Cultural       Yes          Two rural family graves are to be relocated for road
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 construction which is addressed through RAP. Chance-
find procedures are incorporated in the EMP.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The project comprises of two project components, one in
BP 4.10                              Wuhan and another in Anlu city. In Wuhan, the project
comprises a comprehensive ICT platform to improve the
planning, operation, management of the city's transport
system and make it more reliable, convenient, safe and
accessible. No land acquisition and resettlement
relocations would be anticipated. In Anlu, the land
acquisition and resettlement relocations will be incurred.
The project will affect ten villages/community by land
acquisition and housing demolition only in Anlu city. The
task team conducted the screening in those affected
villages/community and concluded that no minority
communities which are considered as Indigenous Peoples
according to OP4. 10 are inside or near these villages.
Hence, OP 4.10 was not triggered.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project consists of two components, one is in Wuhan
OP/BP 4.12                           city, the capital city of Hubei Province and Anlu city, the
third grade of city in Hubei Province. In Wuhan, there are
no land acquisition and resettlement relocations to be
anticipated. In Anlu, the land acquisition and resettlement
relocations will be incurred. The Bank Involuntary
Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 will apply to this project. A
resettlement action plan was prepared to address the
resettlement issues in Anlu city, and a resettlement policy
framework was prepared for unanticipated land
acquisition and resettlement relocations for activities
Page 4 of 10


﻿which details were not be available prior to project
appraisal in Wuhan and Anlu city.
The proposed urban transport infrastructure project in
Anlu city will affect 2 villages and one urban community,
required 12.24 hectares (ha) of land, including 10.24 ha of
collective land and 2 ha of state-owned land. Housing
demolition will encompass 17,877 square meters (m2),
including 5,229 m2 of private housing and 12,648 m2 of
shops. Housing demolition will affect 44 families (181
people) and 13 shops.
A resettlement action plan (RAP) and resettlement policy
framework was required and submitted to the Bank for
review before Appraisal.
A due-diligence review to a linked extension of Biyun
Road was conducted. This extension of Biyun Road is
about 700 meters in length, funded by local budget, and
identified as linked road to Biyun Road to be supported
by the project for road surface rehabilitation. The due
diligence review concluded that the resettlement activities
linked to this project were fulfilled in accordance with
Chinese land law, Hubei provincial administrative land
management regulations, and local regulations.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No          The project will not finance construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                of any dams as defined under this policy. This polices is
not triggered.
Projects on International  No       The project is not on international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No          The project is not in disputed areas.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Environmental Safeguards
Since the Wuhan component only focuses on technical assistance activities (intelligent transport
system), the environmental safeguards issues are mainly related to the Anlu component of the
project. The Anlu component includes renovation and upgrading of 5 urban streets, renovation and
construction of 6 bus terminals, as well as improvement of non-motor vehicle transport facilities in
a number of existing urban streets. These physical activities will have potential social disturbance
and environmental impacts during the construction stage, including nuisance of dust and noise,
transportation large quality of material, disposal of excessive spoil waste and solid waste
Page 5 of 10


﻿generated from demolished buildings, wastewater management, traffic disturbance and public
safety concerns, disturbance to daily life of the nearby communities/businesses etc. There will also
be potential adverse impacts during operation stage, which mainly include road safety, air quality,
noise impacts from the upgraded roads and waste management from bus terminals. The project is
O
classified as Category B project as per OP4.01
Based on the environmental assessment, there is no sensitive ecological environment site (e.g.
natural habitat, protected area, parks etc.). There are two rural family graves to be relocated for
road construction. The main sensitive environmental protection receptors are the residential
communities, hospitals, schools and kindergartens along the project streets and bus terminals. The
main environmental impacts of the project are mostly those impacts related to construction stage.
Although the impact of each individual project is site-specific, the aggregated impacts of a number
of roads within the same timeline tend to be large in scale, and require proper management and
adequate mitigation measures. However, these impacts during construction stage is of temporary
in nature which will disappear upon completion of the project, and they are well known for such
kinds of urban infrastructure construction projects and can be readily avoided, minimized and
mitigated with good construction management practice. Two rural family graves to be relocated
are addressed through RAP. Therefore, with adequate development and proper implementation of
the Environmental Management Plan (EMP), the potential environmental and social impacts can
be adequately mitigated to the acceptable level.
Social Safeguards
Since collective land and private structures will be required by the project, Bank Involuntary
Resettlement Policy OP 4.12 is triggered. During the project preparation, the resettlement negative
impacts were analyzed by the institutes in charge of feasibility study and the RAP preparation to
optimize the project design. The project designs were refined to minimize the negative impacts to
land acquisition and to avoid housing demolition. As the result, there are only 44 households with
181 populations to be relocated. The proposed urban transport infrastructure project in Anlu city
will affect 2 villages and one urban community, required 12.24 hectares (ha) of land, including
10.24 ha of collective land and 2 ha of state-owned land. Housing demolition will encompass
17,877 square meters (m2), including 5,229 m2 of private housing and 12, 648 m2 of shops.
The RAP prepared by the project entity provides detail regarding resettlement policy principles
and regulations to be followed, compensation rates and budget, mitigation measures to restore
incomes where necessary and institutional and monitoring arrangements. The RAP and RPF was
disclosed at municipal web site by February 15 and 16, 2015.
A resettlement office under Anlu PMO will be set up to supervise the resettlement implementation
and the branches of the resettlement offices in the district will implement the RAP. The Anlu land
and resources bureaus will be responsible for the land acquisition approval.
A due diligence review to a linked extension of Biyun Road was conducted. This extension of
Biyun Road is about 700 meters in length, funded by Anlu municipal budget in Year 2012. The
Biyun Road will be supported by the Bank for road surface rehabilitation. This extension was
identified as linked road section. The due diligence evaluation of those government-funded
resettlement and land acquisition activities were deemed to be acceptable and in line with Bank
guidelines and procedures. The due diligence review confirmed that these activities were carried
out in accordance with Chinese land law, Hubei provincial land administrative management
Page 6 of 10


﻿regulation and local regulation.
As part of due diligence work a socio-economic impact survey was carried out, which concluded
that there are no minority communities in the affected villages of the project area to be presented.
O
Q           This finding is also confirmed in conclusions of the RAP. Therefore, the Bank Policy on
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10 was not triggered.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
There will be further urbanization development in the project area according to the city's master
plan.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
As the most of the roads and terminals are existing roads and terminals, the location and alignment
of roads and terminals are predefined by the master plan of the city, therefore, the project does not
include alternative alignments or locations for the roads and terminals.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Safeguards
To address the environmental safeguards issues, an EIA, a stand-alone EMP and an EA Executive
Summary have been prepared for the project. The EIA thoroughly addresses the potential adverse
environmental and social impacts, based on which a stand-alone EMP was developed to identify
environmental management setup, mitigation measures, monitoring and reporting and budget
estimate. The preparation of EA documents followed the relevant national laws/regulations and
guidelines, as well as Bank's safeguards policies and EHS General Guidelines. The EMP specifies
the institutional arrangement of environmental management and supervision, mitigation measures,
capacity training plan, monitoring plan, and budget estimates of EMP implementation. It also
includes a generic Environmental Code Of Practices (ECOPs) for contractors for inclusion in the
bidding documents and contracts.
The environmental concerns of the project are mainly related to construction activities, including
nuisance of construction noise and dust, traffic disturbance due to large quantity of material
transportation, safety of pedestrian, waste management, business disturbance etc. These impacts
are of temporary feature and can be readily mitigated with sound planning and construction
management. The key mitigation measures during construction stage include:
-      Social disturbance: proper planning of road traffic diversion; coordination with police
department, and prior notice through public media; proper relocation of public utility facilities
without interrupting usual life of local community; arrangement of temporary access with
adequate safety measures (temporary bridge, protection net, night light etc.) for local residents,
business, schools etc.; bulletin board information disclosure.
-      Noise: use of low noise equipment and proper maintenance; installation of temporary
noise reduction facility if necessary; night-time construction will be restricted, and prior public
notice as well as EPB approval are required for activities that need continuous construction over
nighttime.
-      Dust: Installation of fences around construction areas; frequent water spraying on
construction site and access road to suppress dust; covering of trucks transporting bulk materials
Page 7 of 10


﻿and timely site clean up after construction; proper maintenance of construction machines and
vehicles; etc.
-      Waste management: careful balance of excavation and backfilling and fully reuse of spoil
material; proper disposal of spoil waste following the city's regulations; proper treatment of
O
wastewater and sewage before discharge into municipal sewage network; timely collection of
garbage and disposal through municipal collection/disposal system, etc.
Ecological environment: Minimization of area of disturbance and damage of green space;
relocation of trees; new plantation of trees and green space to off-set the green space loss; timely
removal of spoil material to minimize soil erosion; proper disposal of spoil material according to
city's regulations etc.
EMP implementation will be managed by Anlu PMO which will assign dedicated staff responsible
for overall management and liaison in terms of EMP implementation. The project owner, Anlu
Construction Investment and Development Company will be directly responsible for the
implementation of EMP. An environmental management unit will be established with dedicated
environmental staff. The EMP mitigation measures will be incorporated into bidding documents
and thus the contracts, and implemented by the contractors. The contractors and supervision
engineers will be required to assign qualified environmental staff to their team to ensure effective
implementation of the EMP.
Social Safeguards
The PMO contracted an experienced institute to guide the social safeguards documentation. The
relevant agencies to engage into the project implementation participated into the project
preparation. During the project preparation, the social safeguards consulting institute worked with
the design institute in charge of project feasibility study on the selections of the project locations.
The analytical works were undertaken and the project negative impacts were minimized, and the
mitigation measures were developed according to the Bank requirement. Public consultations were
undertaken by the consulting institute and the project entities in the engaged district to address the
importance of the safeguards policy. The project preparation was a well-done process to
disseminate the Bank requirement on social safeguards and combined the people concerns into the
RAP and also important process to provide on-job training courses to each engaged levels of the
agencies in the district and as well as village level.
An experienced monitoring institute, independent from the PMO and the project agencies, will be
contracted to monitoring the resettlement activities and the monitoring report will be reviewed by
the Bank twice a year as requested.
Safeguards training and guidance are provided for the PMOs during the project preparation stage,
and the Bank will closely supervise the project safeguards performance during implementation
stage.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The project will provide significant benefits to the people who are living in the project areas and
the adjacent areas as local public strongly requested through people's meetings and media. The
project stakeholders are the local communities and the people in the engaged districts. The
affected people considered the project will give them opportunities to have better living
environment and develop their businesses.
Page 8 of 10


﻿During the project preparation process and the stages of the project design, public consultations
were conducted among project-affected public in the project area following to both national
environmental and social policies as well as World Bank policies (OP4.01 and OP4.12). The main
O
public concerns (e.g. land acquisition/resettlement compensation, noise, dust etc.) have been
incorporated in the project design and RAP and EMP mitigation measures. Public consultation
will be continuous by the resettlement offices in the district and also the independent monitoring
agency, and the project information were disseminated to the displaced families for refining the
project design, and the locations of the project.
The EIA/EMP have been locally disclosed in the website of Anlu municipal website on March 19,
2015, and disclosed in InfoShop on April 15, 2015. The RAP has been locally disclosed at Anlu
municipal website by February 15, 2015 and Bank Infoshop by March 3, 2015.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              03-Apr-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           15-Apr-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    19-Mar-2015
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              02-Mar-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Mar-2015
"In country" Disclosure
O
China                                                    15-Feb-2015
Comments: http://www.anlu.gov.cn/alweb/government-getMessageFormzwgk.whbs?
messageld=W14B8C6EFFF21A33FEEA507B
Anlu RAP disclosure at website by Feb. 15, 2015
http://www.whcjwzb.com/gsgg/201502/t20150216_59361.htm
Wuhan RPF disclosure at website by Feb.16, 2015
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[X] No[   ]   NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Page 9 of 10


﻿Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ] No[  ]  NA[  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes[X]  No[       NA
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes[X]  No[     NA
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]   No[    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
O
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[       NA
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Arturo Ardila Gomez
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Svend Jensby (SA)                    Date: 27-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                   Date: 28-Jul-2015
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


