INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC12269
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 17-Nov-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 13-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Southern Africa            Project ID:   P153370
Project Name:    Second South West Indian Ocean Fisheries Governance and Shared Growth
Project (P153370)
Task Team        Xavier F. P. Vincent,Benjamin Garnaud
Leader(s):
Estimated        10-Jan-2017                Estimated      15-Mar-2017
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEN01                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (100%)
Theme(s):        Other environment and natural resources management (66%), Environmental
policies and institutions (34%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      87.00             Total Bank Financing:    67.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                0.00
o          International Development Association (IDA)                      67.00
Global Environment Facility - Cofinancing Trust Funds            20.00
Total                                                            87.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The proposed Project Development Objective is to improve the management effectiveness of
selected priority fisheries at regional, national and community level.
C. Project Description


﻿The proposed project would be the second project within the SWIOFish Series of Projects. The
challenges it intends to address are regional in nature. Addressing these regional challenges also
requires action at the national level, which will yield important regional benefits, enhance country
ownership and efficiency, and strengthen national institutions. Following the approach developed
under SWIOFishl, project implementation will adopt a principle of subsidiarity: only project
activities that are transnational will be managed at the regional level through a regional body
operationalized by the SWIOFish1 (component 1). Most of the activities will then be implemented at
the national level (component 2 and 3). Component 4 will support regional and national project
management activities.
At the regional level, the proposed project would build on and extend the activities supported by the
SWIOFishl. It would increase the participation of the SWIO countries to the IOTC and improve their
compliance with resolutions agreed among the IOTC member countries. This is essential to ensure
the sustainability of the tuna and tuna-like resources and the productivity and profitability of the
fisheries, key to the economies of the region.
At the national level, the proposed project would focus on Madagascar. The improved management
of the Malagasy fisheries is critical to ensure their sustainable contribution to the country's economy
and food security. This will be the focus of the second component. Yet, the economy will only
benefit from better managed fisheries if they are better harnessed to the national economy. Moreover,
in a context of limited production growth perspectives, the development of the sector will have to
focus on enhancing the value-chains. These aspects will be addressed in component 3.
Component 1. Enhanced regional collaboration
This first component will expand the support to regional coordination implemented under the
SWIOFish1 by targeting the management of tuna and tuna-like species, through the IOTC. It would
support the substantial and physical participation of the SWIO countries in the IOTC forum, and
enhance their compliance with their international fisheries obligations, including IOTC resolutions.
o
Component 2. Improved governance of priority fisheries
The component would primarily target policies, strategies, institutional and legal frameworks, and
actions by the public sector necessary to improve priority fisheries management and performance, as
well as coastal and marine environmental health and resilience to climate change. It would be backed
by activities aimed at understanding the resource base, and building human and institutional capacity
necessary to implement fisheries policies and management plans. Three closely-linked and mutually
supportive activities, directed to both the public sector and coastal communities, are envisaged: (2.1)
Efficient and accountable governance; (2.2) Sustainable fisheries management and resource
preservation; and (2.3) Institutional capacity building.
Component 3. Increased economic benefits from priority fisheries
The component would primarily target increasing the value addition and diversifying communities'
livelihoods to reduce poverty and pressure on the fisheries, improving the business climate, enabling
the private sector productivity and investment, and supporting public investments critical to a viable
private sector. Compensation for potential access restrictions among other support measures decided
by the co-management plans developed under component 2 would be implemented here. The project


﻿would support the following sub-components: (3.1) Improved business and investment climate; (3.2)
Promotion of alternative opportunities and activities; (3.3) Expansion of priority fisheries value
chains; and (3.4) Planning of strategic infrastructure.
O
U       Component 4. Project management
The fourth component would support project coordination and implementation at regional and
national levels, including monitoring and evaluation. It will operate through the Regional
Implementation Unit (RIU) already set-up under SWIOFish1 for Component 1, and a Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) for the implementation of the national activities under Components 2 and
3.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be national and take place in specific locations around the coast of Madagascar, still
to be determined.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Ministry of Fish Resources and Fisheries lacks experience and capacity in implementing
safeguards policies in general, and World Bank procedures in particular. Capacity would be
developed during project preparation by hiring and training dedicated staff and capitalizing on other
Governmental institutions' experience on the subject.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Paul-Jean Feno (GENO7)
Shri Vasantt Kumar Jogoo (GENDR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
C)      Environmental Assessment    Yes          Overall, the environmental and social impacts of the
OP/BP 4.01                              project are expected to be positive. However, small-
scale, localized negative effects may arise during the
implementation of limited, site-specific civil works
envisaged under the project. These may include
rehabilitation or expansion of fisheries infrastructure
(landing sites, markets, office buildings). Safeguards
management can be adequately handled through
good engineering practices for design and
construction. In light of the above, we propose that
this project is classified as a Category B project,
which requires a partial assessment of social and
environmental impacts. Since the locations and
impacts of the potential civil works cannot be clearly
defined at this stage, an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF) will be prepared
by the Borrower. The preparation of the ESMF
would involve extensive consultation and
participation of various stakeholders. In addition to


﻿providing a set of implementable mitigation
measures to be used to develop situation specific
Environmental and Social Management Plan
(ESMP), based on Environmental and Social Impact
Assessments as the case may be, the ESMF should
provide social and environmental screening
procedures along with an environmental and social
check-list to be applied on each proposed subproject,
as well as a set of environmental and social clauses
(ESC) to be embedded in Contractors Contracts for
consideration during project implementation.
Moreover, the ESMF will also provide an
institutional arrangement mechanism, a monitoring
and evaluation mechanism, a conflict resolution/
grievance redress mechanism, as well as an estimated
budget to allow safe and adequate implementation of
the ESMF/ESMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         As stated above, the overall environmental and social
impacts of the proposed project are expected to be
overwhelmingly positive and the project expected
impacts on Natural Habitats are also expected to be
significantly positive, through efforts to improve
participatory conservation and management of key
fisheries habitats. Nonetheless, potential civil works
could have minor small-scale impacts on Natural
Habitats. Likewise, additional expansion of areas
under management could have variant impacts on
livelihoods (see OP/BP 4.12 below). Provision would
be made in the ESMF to adequately address such
possibilities. Any subproject funded under the
project will be screened for their potential to cause
negative impacts to natural habitats under the ESMF
procedures. If sub-projects are likely to cause
irreversible or significant damages to habitats they
will be excluded from project funding.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No          The project does not involve forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09     No          Aquaculture investments are envisaged, but it is not
expected that they would involve the use of
pesticides or other pest management products.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         Since project activities are largely going to take place
OP/BP 4.11                              in near-shore and off-shore waters or in rural areas,
and no major movement of earth or excavation is
anticipated, it is unlikely that known physical
cultural resources will be impacted. However, natural
features and landscapes with some level of cultural


﻿significance might be adversely impacted by the
project. To the extent that some of the possible
infrastructure investments that may occur under the
project, such as rehabilitation or expansion of
landing sites, markets, office buildings, may be
located in coastal towns or where there are historical
sites, care will be taken to avoid development plans
that may impact these cultural resources. The ESMFs
will assess this possibility and include a "chance
finds" procedure to be applied during both sub-
project screening processes and during
implementation of Environmental and Social Clauses
embedded in Contractors' contracts.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No           There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes          The project is not expected to involve land
BP 4.12                                    acquisition leading to involuntary resettlement of
project affected persons (PAPs), as project
infrastructure would take place on already existing
sites. However, because the project proposes to
strengthen the effectivemanagement and protection
of natural resources in near-shore or off-shore waters
as well as potentially expand areas under protection,
these access restrictions, be it seasonal, temporary or
permanent, may provide some prospect for negative
impacts on livelihoods for some individuals in some
coastal communities, at least in the short-term.
Footnote 6 of OP 4.12 suggests that in situations
where restrictions to access of resources are taking
place under community-based projects, such as
fisheries co-management arrangements, the policy
does not apply. However, it is reasonable to assume
that some decisions taken to restrict access to
fisheries could be initiated by the Government, and
will not fall solely within the authority of the local
communities. We therefore proposed to trigger this
policy. As part of project preparation, a Process
Framework (PF) will be prepared and extensively
consulted upon to ensure people views and concerns
are fully taken into consideration in the final project
design. The PF will establish a process whereby
individuals, households or communities who may
lose some or all of their livelihoods from fishing or
fisheries-related activities, as a result of project
investments, are able to participate in a process to
minimize such negative impact on project affected
communities livelihood and living condition,


﻿precisely by (i) designing the fisheries resource
restrictions; (ii) determining measures necessary to
restore or improve their livelihood conditions; and
(iii) implementing and monitoring relevant project
activities. The PF will include institutional
arrangements, capacity building, grievance redress
mechanism and an estimated budget for its
implementation. Special attention will be given to
women, youth and other vulnerable groups whose
livelihood are intrinsically linked to the fishing
activities.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No            Project activities will not involve dams.
Projects on International     No            Project activities will not be located or take place in
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                        international waterways.
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No           Project activities will not be located or take place in
BP 7.60                                     disputed areas.
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 10-Jan-2017
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
It is expected that the safeguard related studies will be launched early in the preparation process,
as soon as potential activities are significantly carved out. The safeguards instruments (ESMF and
PF) will be prepared alongside the project and finalized and published before its appraisal.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Xavier F. P. Vincent,Benjamin Garnaud
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)                    Date: 10-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/       Name: Benoit Bosquet (PMGR)                       Date: 13-Jan-2016
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


