INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR16409
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Jan-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        China                      Project ID:   P111421
Project Name: China: Anhui Medium Cities Urban Transport Project (P111421)
Task Team       Yuhui Jiao
Leader(s):
Estimated       21 -Sep-2009               Estimated     20-May-2010
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GT102                       Lending       Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Urban Transport (99%), Public administration- Transportation (1%)
Theme:          City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                   No
Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     268.72            Total Bank Financing:   100.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                Amount
Borrower                                                       168.72
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          100.00
Total                                                          268.72
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The Development Objective (DO) of the proposed Project is to enhance to the mobility of the
citizens of the Project Cities along critical corridors. The DO will             be
achieved in a manner consistent with:
1. The cities# growth patterns;
Page 1 of 12


﻿2. National priorities related to planning including #people centered# development, application of a
scientific process, and incorporation of inclusive particip                 atory
processes; and
3. National priorities related to urban transport including State Council Opinion #46 on giving
U        priority to public transport, and the National Road Safety Law
This objective would be achieved through integrated investments for all modes in key transport
corridors, including selected priority investments to support pub                 lic
and non motorized transport.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The Development Objective (DO) of the proposed Project is to enhance to the mobility of the
citizens of the Project Cities along critical corridors. The DO will                be
achieved in a manner consistent with:
1. The cities# growth patterns;
2. National priorities related to planning including #people centered# development, application of a
scientific process, and incorporation of inclusive particip                 atory
processes; and
3. National priorities related to urban transport including State Council Opinion #46 on giving
priority to public transport, and the National Road Safety Law
This objective would be achieved through integrated investments for all modes in key transport
corridors, including selected priority investments to support pub                 lic
and non motorized transport.
3. Project Description
Project Description
The project is composed of four components. A detailed description can be found in Annex 4 of the
PAD. Briefly:
1.     The Integrated Corridor Development Component (IC) Component (total cost US$ 207.4
million, World Bank proposed loan US$ 72.3 million) consist of improving the capacity, public
transport service and traffic safety on key corridors in the Project Cities.
2.     The Local and Freight Access (LA) Component (total cost US$ 81.5 million, World Bank
proposed loan US$ 19.9 million) consists of construction of selected access roads in the Project
Cities.
3.     The Public Transport (PT) Component (total cost US$ 17.4 million, World Bank proposed
loan US$ 7.5 million) consists of constructing maintenance facilities, bus terminals, bus depots and
stops in the Project Cities.
4.     The Capacity Building (CB) component (total cost US$ 1.0 million, World Bank proposed
loan US$ 1.0 million). This component includes international study tours and training as well as
technical assistance related to the project components.
For the 2nd restructuring
There are four cities, namely as Huaibei, Anqing, Lu'an and Wuhu, included in Anhui Medium Cities
Urban Transport Project (P111421). The previous approved restructuring focused on the Wuhu
component. The current restructuring constitutes the dropping of HUaihai Road Improvement and
the Construction of Tuohe bus maintenance yard at Huaibei, the cross-section change for the middle
segment and north segment of Huxin Road at Anqing, the closing date extension and the bank loan
disbursement percentage for civil work contract at Huaibei.
Page 2 of 12


﻿The cross-section change for Huxin Road at Anqing:
There is no land acquisition required for the improvement of Huxin Road.
Middle segment of Huxin Road: The originally proposed cross-section is four 4-meter wide vehicle
O
)        lanes with two 3-meter wide vegetation area, bike lanes and sidewalks for the middle segment of
Huxin Road. The current cross-section is six 3.5-meter vehicle lanes with two 4-meter wide bike
lane. The sidewalk remains at the same location. In the other word, the space of two additional
vehicles resulting from the removal of existing vegetation area separating the bike lane and vehicle
lanes.
North Segment of Huxin Road: The originally proposed cross-section is four 3.5-meter wide vehicle
lanes with two 6-meter wide bike lanes, two 1.5-meter wide vegetation area separating bike lane and
vehicle lane, two 2-meter wide sidewalk, and two 8-meter wide vegetation area beyond the
sidewalks. The proposed cross-section is eight 3.5-meter vehicle lanes, two 6-meter wide bike lanes,
two 4-meter wide vegetation area, and two 5-meter wide sidewalks when the right-of-way width is
60 meter wide. If the right-of-way is narrow, the two 4-meter wide vegetation area will be removed
and the width of bike lane will reduced to 3 to 4 meters.
The proposed cross-section change for Huxin Road is technically justified and economically feasible.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project includes investments in the central cities of the Municipalities of An Qing, Huai Bei, Lu
An, and Wuhu in Anhui Province. All are medium sized cities with population less than 1 million.
They are located in temperate zone with annual precipitation ranging from 800-1300mm. The project
areas of these cities are on flat terrain long inhabited without critical natural habitats.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Peishen Wang (GENDR)
Xin Ren (GEN02)
Zhefu Liu (GSU02)
0
6. Safeguard Policies  Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36     No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural      Yes
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP   No
4.37
No
Page 3 of 12


﻿Projects on International
WoJecaipl1WlBilkc.50   No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
U
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The proposed restructuring constitutes the second part of the two-part restructuring to improve
project implementation and to enable the project to achieve its development objectives. The first
part focused on changes to the Wuhu part of the project and was approved in June 2015.
The proposed restructuring includes the following changes: (a) extending the loan closing date by
18 months to July 31, 2017 and revising the disbursement estimates for the Bank loan; (b)
eliminating Huaihai Road Improvement from the Integrated Corridor Improvement Component in
the Huaibei part of the project; (c) eliminating construction of the Tuohe bus maintenance yard in
the Public Transport Component in the Huaibei part of the project; (d) increasing the Bank loan
disbursement percentage for civil works in Huaibei from 35 percent to 100 percent, beginning
November 1, 2015; (e) changing the cross-section of Huxin Road in the Integrated Corridor
Improvement Component in the Anqing part of the project; (f) revising the indicator targets for
Roads Rehabilitated, Non-rural, for Huaibei Municipality and for the entire project in the Results
Framework in line with the changes proposed; (g) revising component and project costs in line
with the changes proposed; and (h) revising the procurement plan.
The restructuring does not require any change to the Project Development Objective.
The physical works included in this restructuring comprise of the reconstruction of Huxin Road
(middle segment and north segment) with the revised cross-section, installation of bus-exclusive
lane and bus-bay, removal of existing vegetation area within the current right-of-way, installation
of street lights and traffic signals, installation of crosswalks and sidewalks, and the installation of
storm drainage pipelines underneath Huxin Road at Anqing. As a standard urban transport project,
environmental impacts will be mostly construction-related, such as noise and dust, construction
waste disposal, damage of vegetation, soil erosion, sewage discharge, traffic impact, social
disturbance and safety. There is no large scale, significant or irreversible impacts envisioned in the
project.
Environmental Assessment. The project has been designated as Category B as per OP4.01 by the
Bank due to its limited but material environmental impact. Each project city has developed an
Environmental Assessment (EA) in Chinese. A consolidated EA (CEA) was prepared in English
and Chinese, by experts from a top-level certified EA institute, Anhui Provincial Academy of
Environmental Science. Four city-specific standalone environmental management plans (EMPs)
were also prepared in Chinese and English in order to facilitate implementation and supervision.
Both CEA and the four EMPs cover possible adverse impacts, mitigation measures and
environmental monitoring and training based on experience of similar projects in China.
Physical Cultural Resources. The CEA has analyzed all protected areas and physical cultural
resources in the project areas which are mainly Nanhu wetland park in Huaibei (discussed above)
Page 4 of 12


﻿and an ancient Yingjiang temple in Anqing. The project in Anqing rehabilitates a road abutting
the boundary wall of this temple, a Provincial Level protected cultural relic. The EA investigated
the site, assessed the nature and extent of impacts from the project, and consulted and obtained
consent from the responsible authority (Anqing Bureau for Cultural Relics and Religion). The
O
EMP proposed concrete measures to mitigate impacts during construction. The current
restructuring has no impact to Physical Cultural Resources.
For the second restructuring, the proposals are mainly to extend the loan and reduce the activity
scope in Huaibei compared to the original project. Therefore the old environmental management
plan (EMP) for Huaibei still applies and doesn??t need update. However, for Anqing, the change
proposed is to widen Huxin middle and north roads within their red lines by removing or
narrowing green belts. According to Chinese regulation, a supplementary environmental
assessment (EA) was prepared and approved domestically. Based on it, Anqing??s original EMP
was updated with specific measures added to mitigate adverse impacts of green belt loss. The
updated EMP was considered acceptable to the Bank and disclosed at local newspaper and official
website for public consultation. The updated EMP was disclosed in Infoshop on January 3, 2016.
No new environmental safeguard policy is triggered.
The implementation of original EMP in the project cities was rated as moderately satisfactory.
Therefore, the responsibilities and functions of the executive unit and monitoring unit for
environmental management plan implementation are clearly specified for the restructured project
component design, implementation and operation stages.
Involuntary resettlement.
The project will affect 15 villages/urban communities in 11 townships/urban community units in
Wuhu, Anqing, Luan and Huaibei municipality. The project will require the permanent acquisition
of 2059.9 mu (137.3 hectares) of land, including 1,089.4 mu in Wuhu (52.9 percent), 20 mu in
Anqing (1.0 percent), 362.5 mu in Luan (17.6 percent) and 588.0 mu in Huaibei (28.5 percent). In
the collective land acquisition, 813.61 mu is paddy field (39.5 percent); 320.49mu of dry land
(15.6 percent); 52.53 mu of vegetable plots (2.6 percent); 27.5 mu of garden plot (1.3 percent);
44.2 mu of woodland (2.1 percent); 351.1 mu of water pools (17.0 percent); 324 mu of housing
plots (15.7 percent); 13.3 mu of other rural land occupied by buildings (0.6 percent); 113.21 mu of
a          unused land (5.5 percent). Some temporary land use would be required during project
implementation by contractors and mitigation measures will be taken. The municipal resettlement
office will supervise these activities.
The project will affect 5,480 people in peri-urban areas, including 1,104 in Wuhu (20.1 percent),
348 in Anqing (6.4 percent), 2,332 in Luan (42.6 percent) and 1,696 in Huaibei (30.9 percent).
538 families with a population of 1,808 people will be affected by land acquisition (accounting for
33 percent of the total affected populations); 285 families with a population of 1,287 people will
be affected by both land acquisition and demolition (accounting for 23.5 percent of the total
affected population); and 640 families with a population of 2,056 people will be affected by
structure demolition only (accounting for 37.5 percent of the total affected population); excluding
11 enterprises with 158 employees (accounting for 2.8 percent of the total affected population) and
92 people out of 3 public institutions (accounting for 1.7 percent of the total affected population)
and 85 people out of 16 shops are to be affected (accounting for 1.6 percent of the total affected
population).
Page 5 of 12


﻿For the second restructuring
The construction of Huaihai road and Tuohe bus maintenance yard in Huaibei city will be
eliminated; and the Huxin Road in Anqing city will be widened from four lanes to six lanes on the
O
right-of-way as the existed urban road; other project components in Wuhu and Luan will be kept
the same as the first round of restricting without modification. The project components to be
dropped in Huaibei city will not cause resettlement impacts. The Huxin Road widening will not
lead collective land acquisition and resettlement relocation. The resettlement works in Anqing,
Luan and Huaibei were implemented continuously by the assigned PMOs in the above captured
cities. The resettlement policies are in consistence to the RAPs. The RAPs are still valid to be
implemented up to the Closing of the Bank loan and the satisfactions to the Bank.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project is not expected to cause any significant indirect or long-term impacts. Potentially the
most significant long-term negative impacts could be those related to increased automobile use ?
including air pollution, noise, and road safety. The bus depots built by the project will also
generate wastewater. These impacts are mitigated by the proposed improvements in public
transport and pedestrian and cyclist facilities on the key corridors where road capacity is being
improved.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Alternative Analysis. Analysis of different design alternatives were undertaken for all project
cities including a ??without project?? scenario. Annex 9 of the PAD provides detail. At a design
level, comparison was made for different road alignments of Sanhuan road in Wuhu in terms of
resettlement, environmental impacts and engineering aspects. A slightly longer alignment with
fewer impacts on green area and resettlement was selected. For the Tuohe road in Huaibei, an
alternative alignment as far as practicable from the Nanhu urban wetland park was chosen so as to
minimize the impact on the park.
Different lane configuration was compared for rehabilitation of Jiefang road in Luan, Huaihai road
in Huaibei, Huxin road in Anqing and building of new Sanhuan road in Wuhu. In all cases,
alternatives with less land occupation, fewer lanes for automobiles and more green belt were
recommended.
Three types of building material currently available for urban roads in China were compared from
an environmental, technical and investment perspective: modified asphalt, concrete and noise-
reducing road surface. Noise-reducing surface is recommended for road sections with large
amount of sensitive receptors so as to reduce negative impacts and modified asphalt surface for the
rest.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Environmental Issues
The project??s negative impacts could be readily avoided and mitigated by sound project design
and construction management and operation practice. They were analyzed thoroughly in the EA
for each city. Two rounds of public consultations have been carried out for all project components
and the feedback were incorporated into EA documents and design alternatives. An Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) was designed for each project city detailing comprehensive mitigation
measures to address these impacts. The EMPs will be incorporated into bidding documents and
civil work contracts to ensure their implementation.
Page 6 of 12


﻿The EMP defines institutional arrangement for its implementation and supervision mechanism,
specifies mitigation measures for all potential adverse impacts, and includes an environmental
monitoring plan and a training plan with budget estimate. Key elements of the EA and EMP are
summarized in the following paragraphs.
o
Air pollution and dust. Dust is the major air-borne pollution during construction. Major measures
typically adopted in similar projects include frequent water spraying on construction sites and
access roads, covering trucks and materials on site, and timely clean-up. More attention is needed
near sensitive receptors.
The result of modeling shows that although concentration for NOx and CO will meet relevant
standards in future, they will increase as the traffic flow increases after the project roads are in
operation. A review of existing air pollution management in each city reveals that automobile air
emissions are mainly controlled through compulsory annual inspection of vehicles, ban of those
non-compliant onto road and road-side spot check of emissions during major campaigns. Major
measures proposed by the CEA are to strengthen road-side spot check, speed up the phase-out of
non-compliant polluting vehicles, tighten vehicle testing and maintenance, improve public
transport to divert traffic volume, and increase tree belt along roads to absorb air emissions.
Noise and Vibration. Major measures include careful scheduling of construction activities near
sensitive receptors such as school, hospital and residential areas. High-noise and vibration
machines will be avoided whenever possible, in particular on the site near Linjiang temple in
Anqing. Maintenance of equipments will be carried out according to relevant domestic
requirements to minimize heavy noise and vibration due to mal-function. The construction
supervision team will use portable noise meters to monitor routinely. The modeling results suggest
that noise level in many project roads may exceed relevant standards within urban planning red-
line due to traffic increase. To deal with the impact, development along new roads will be
carefully planned not to add new sensitive receptors within red-line. As necessary, based on ex-
post assessments, noise barriers will be set up and noise insulation windows be installed to protect
sensitive receptors.
o
Spoil and Solid Wastes. The earth work balances were established for all project cities according
to domestic requirements on EA. Sites for disposal of spoil, garbage and demolition wastes were
identified including their location, status and capacity. Measures were proposed to control water
and soil erosion control potentially caused by these activities on these sites. During operation,
solid waste will be mainly generated from the bus depots and will be collected separately and
disposed of respectively in municipal landfill or facilities for hazardous and oily wastes.
Wastewater. Construction wastewater and that from workers camp will be treated first by on-site
septic tank to remove oil and solids before channeling into sewage system and eventually treated
by the municipal wastewater treatment plant (WWTP). Discharge into nearby water bodies will
not be allowed as per domestic regulations. During operation, wastewater will be generated mainly
by the bus depots facilities in Huaibei, Luan and Anqing which will all be connected to municipal
sewage system. The effluents will first to through on-site sedimentation tank to remove solid and
septic tank to remove oil before channeling into WWTP for treatment.
Ecological Impacts. Major impacts will be water and soil erosion caused by temporary land
occupation, spoil and borrow, and change of green belt. In addition to those measures in earth
work and dust control, other measures are careful balancing loss and increase in green area and
protecting existing trees.
Page 7 of 12


﻿Fuel Facility Risk Management at Bus Depots. The fuel storage and filling facility at the bus
depot will be designed and operated according to relevant domestic technical norms and
requirements on safety and environment. An emergency response plan and safe operation
measures will be in place and training will be provided to the staff on implementing the plan and
measures.
Indirect Environmental Impacts. Resettlement of residence and relocation of industries due to the
project might have indirect environmental impacts if not managed properly. The EA provides an
inventory detailing number of people resettled and industries relocation, their nature, potential site
contamination, and conditions in receiving areas (e.g. served by municipal sewage and garbage
system) to ensure no new pollution will be transferred and induced to other areas as a result of the
project.
Impacts on Cultural Properties. In Anqing city, a provincial level cultural heritage site, Yingjiang
Temple, is located by the western side of Huxin Road with about 5m green belt and pedestrian
sidewalk in between. The main entrance of the temple is on the other street. Although no widening
of the road is needed for this section, the construction activities associated with the rehabilitation
(e.g. vibration and noise of vehicles or equipment) may potentially risk affecting the temple due to
its close proximity. The EA team has reviewed the site, assessed the nature and extent of potential
impacts on it, consulted with and obtained consent from the responsible authority (Anqing Bureau
for Cultural Relics and Religion) and developed necessary protective measures in the EMP.For the
overall project, standard chance-fmd procedure was included in EA and EMPs.
Social Disturbance. Urban road work will have impacts on traffic flow and bus route, increase
difficulties to access stores, workplaces, services and business, and affect road safety. Most of
these negative impacts are of temporary nature and can be mitigated through well planned traffic
diversion and prior information on construction schedule to the public. Safety shields will be set
up wherever necessary.
o
Environmental Management Plan (EMP). These EMPs are largely similar in structure,
supervision and management mechanism and mitigation measures, but different in monitoring
plan and additional measures to deal with specificity of individual city. The EMP outlines the
,           institutional arrangement and responsibility of each party in EMP implementation for the project.
It envisages that overall responsibility for ensuring EMP implementation rests with the provincial
PMO with routine operation by PMO at each city. Therefore each PMO should have at least one
staff in charge of EMP implementation, supervision and reporting. The EMP specifies mitigation
measures in tabular format for easier reference during implementation and supervision
corresponding to major negative impacts as identified above during design/preparation,
construction and operation phases. It also designs environmental monitoring plan for major
negative impacts discussed above including indicators monitored, sampling method, location,
frequency, as well as requirements and suggestions on monitoring agency. To ensure effective
EMP implementation by PMO staff, contractors, workers and supervision team, a budgeted
training plan was proposed with their budget as integral part of the project. The environmental
monitoring and training plan should be integrated into the overall implementation plan and budget
of the project.
Resettlement.
Page 8 of 12


﻿The Anhui provincial PMO contracted Hehai University to guide the resettlement inventory aspect
survey and the development of resettlement action plans in each project city. Hehai University has
significant past experience working on Bank supported projects. The PMO has led the detailed
socioeconomic survey on the resettlement inventory aspects in the four engaged municipalities and
O
also analyzed the negative impacts. The RAP has been reviewed by the Bank and has incorporated
the results of the impact analysis; the location of the housing reconstruction and the mitigation
measures to the village facilities affected by the project through public consultation and
participatory approaches. The task team visited all of the municipal social affairs departments and
learnt that some municipalities have already launched social security policy to benefit the
displaced farmers who are affected by land acquisition. Some initiated the concept of benefiting to
the displaced farmers by social security policies which are beyond land compensation. The task
team visited the 4 engaged municipal land and provincial land department in Anhui. That
compensation data information, social security programs issued by some municipalities and to be
issued by the municipalities, including the compensation to be issued in the near term, have been
incorporated into the resettlement action plan.
All of the project components will be located in urban downtown and peri-urban areas. The RAP
sets up two concepts to ensure restoration of incomes for farmers?? who lose land:
a.     Development of the farmer??s remaining farm land to vegetable land as a strategy that
insulates incomes from the decline in total land;
b.     Ensuring that the displaced farmers will receive replacement cost for their land loss.
Moreover, displaced farmers will receive replacement cost for land, plus basic monthly income as
the income loss of their farming land and their retirement programs if they are willing to invest
their social security programs and the project entities could support certain funds for support.
In order to enhance women's roles in family income restoration activities, women are entitled to
endorse the expenditures of their compensation as one of the policies in the RAP.
The independent monitoring institute as Hehai Universtiy will be contracted continuously to
supervise the project twice a year.
o
For the second round of the restructuring, the independent monitoring institute as Hehai Universtiy
will be contracted continuously to supervise the project twice a year prior to the closing day of the
Bank loan extension.
Assessment of borrower's capacity to plan and implement the measures: One of the project cities,
Lu An has just completed a World Bank financed project on sewage treatment plant headed by the
same PMO staff who appeared to be quite familiar with the WB procedures and requirements.
There is also considerable institutional capacity and knowledge of World Bank Safeguard policies
at the Provincial level where there is a lot of experience with World Bank financed investments. In
addition, the technical assistance and capacity building component of the project is designed to
provide training for project cities in project management and EMP implementation following the
detailed training plan designed by the CEA. Both the provincial and city authorities are
committed to carrying out the necessary actions in accordance with the Bank safeguard policies.
The EMP implementation of the original project has been moderately satisfactory mainly because
environmental monitoring required by the EMP for each project city has been delayed to various
degrees. The external environmental monitor hired by the Provincial PMO has carried out
supervision fairly well and reported in the semi-annual monitoring and progress report to the
Bank. The Bank team has conducted supervision including environmental safeguard regularly.
Page 9 of 12


﻿5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Consultation with potential beneficiaries and other stakeholders were of crucial importance in the
EA process. Following China's law on EA, methods used included posting of public letters in
project areas, publishing notices in local TV channel and radio, placing notice in local government
offices, organizing meetings and interviews with project affected people, and distributing
questionnaires.
Public disclosure: The first round of solicitation of public opinion was announced in government
website of each city during November-December 2008 with a brief description of the project, its
objectives, potential environmental impacts and the name of institute that will conduct the EA
process. The second round was conducted during April-May 2009 when the draft EA was ready
for each city. During this round, Luan and Huaibei posted the full EA on the same website and
Wuhu and Anqing at the offices of city construction bureaus. Subsequent public consultation was
carried out during the same period in all project cities.
Public consultation. More than 400 persons of wide range of background were interviewed,
surveyed or consulted through meetings and questionnaires. The majority was unsatisfied with
current traffic conditions, associated noise and air pollution thus believed the project was
necessary for improving mobility and urban environment. The major negative impacts of the
project were perceived to be noise, air pollution, solid wastes and water pollution in descending
sequence. Despite of these concerns, more than 90 percent of surveyed supported the project and
generally concurred with the measures proposed by the EA.
EA/EMP for restructuring were publically disclosed and consulted in Wuhu. The Chinese
language EA/EMP were disclosed locally in Oct 30, 2012 followed by consultation in November
surveying about 100 affected people of different background. The majority supports the
restructuring project and their feedback were incorporated in the final EMP. The English version
EMP was sent to the Infoshop for disclosure on Nov. 13, 2014.
For the second restructuring, the supplementary EA and updated EMP for Anqing were disclosed
at local newspaper and official website of the PMO in December 2015. The English version of the
updated EMP of Anqing was sent to infoshop for disclosure on January 3, 2016
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              17-Dec-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           03-Jan-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
China                                                    17-Dec-2015
Comments: no comment received
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              18-May-2009
Date of submission to InfoShop                           22-May-2009
Page 10 of 12


﻿"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ]  No [   ]  TBD [   ]
o
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Page 11 of 12


﻿Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Yuhui Jiao
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                   Date: 19-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                   Date: 19-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 12 of 12


