                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA16574
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 10-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Kazakhstan                         Project ID:   P153501
                            Project Name:     Center South Road Corridor Project (P153501)
                            Task Team         Fiona J Collin
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         11-Jul-2016               Estimated     17-Nov-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GTI10                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      1766.00           Total Bank Financing:    750.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                       Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                266.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                   750.00
                              Asian Infrastructure Investment Bank                                                    750.00
                              Total                                                                                  1766.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To make safe and sustainable improvements to transport and freight connectivity between Almaty
                           and Astana, and improve access to economic opportunities.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project road totals 660 km, between Zarechny (where Zarechny is just South of Karaganda at the
                           intersection with the Karaganda bypass) and Burylbaital. It will generally be constructed along the
                           existing road alignment, but will deviate where required to accommodate topographical constraints,


                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         and in some cases to bypass towns. The new road will improve the existing 2-lane single carriageway
                         road to a 4-lane dual carriageway road. It will be designed for a traffic speed of 120 kilometres / hour
                         (km/hr) and axle loads up to 13 tons. Bridges, overpasses, and pedestrian and animal passes will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         included where required and informed by social impact assessment.

                         The Social Assessment of the project has provided a road-map to integrate gender aspects into the
                         project. During the design and implementation stages, both genders and vulnerable groups will be
                         actively encouraged to participate in project consultations, and the specific needs of women and
                         children will help to inform the design of the road and ancillary features (e.g. footpaths, road
                         crossings, road-side facilities, security features). In addition, to increase the opportunities for women
                         to benefit from project related-employment, appropriate clauses will be included in the ToRs and
                         bidding documents for contract. The participation of women in the construction activities will be
                         monitored and reflected in quarterly reports.

                         The Implementing Agency will establish a dedicated Safeguards Unit to manage both environmental
                         and social aspects. The Unit will be the focal point for addressing safeguards issues on CSRCP. It
                         will interact with the Environmental and Social specialists within the team of the Supervising
                         Engineer for each Works contracts, where the Supervising Engineers' safeguards team will be a site-
                         based focal point to manage interactions with the community and akimats and other stakeholders
                         relevant to the road construction activities. These arrangements will be an important part of the
                         citizen engagement and grievance redressal mechanisms.

                         Component 1: Transport Infrastructure

                         The component will finance the construction of all transport infrastructure within the project
                         boundary from Zarechny to Burylbaital (approximately 660 km). Transport infrastructure will
                         include:- construction of a dual carriageway four-lane road, with asphalt wearing course. Apart from
                         minor deviations to improve geometry or to bypass smaller towns, the improved road will largely
                         follow the existing alignment. Ancillary facilities such as bus-stops and shelters, road-side market
Public Disclosure Copy




                         areas, pedestrian and livestock crossing facilities, interchange overpasses, bridges and drainage
                         structures, and road furniture and line-marking for road safety will also be included. Other transport
                         infrastructure financed under this component will include that needed for Intelligent Transport
                         Systems and tolling, and the construction of road-side service facilities. Component 1 will also
                         finance consulting services for engineering supervision of all construction activities. Land acquisition
                         and road design costs will be financed through the Republican budget.

                         Component 2 - Jobs and Skills Initiatives

                         Activities within this component are designed to stimulate private sector development along the
                         corridor. Outside of t he urban areas of Karaganda and Balkash, the population is sparse, and jobs are
                         likely to evolve from (a) services provided to road-users transiting the corridor through the
                         development of Road-side Service Facilities; (b) activities and interventions that will strengthen the
                         existing commercial activities and market chains; and (c) vocational education and entrepreneurial
                         training that will develop the social capital of the existing resident population and improve the
                         competency and employability of the workers who will be engaged in road building over the
                         construction period . The sub-components will include:

                          Sub-Component 2.a - Planning for Road-Side Service Facilities.



                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         Technical Assistance (TA) will be financed under this sub-component to develop detailed concept
                         and marketing plans. The Road-Side service facilities will provide much needed amenities, retail
                         outlets and emergency services, whilst simultaneously stimulating private sector participation and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         catalyzing job creation. Key roles of the Road-Side service facilities will be to facilitate trade and
                         road transport; improve road safety, comfort and convenience; and provide job and business
                         opportunities for local communities along the corridor. Under SWRP, CR and KAZ are developing a
                         Strategy for Road-User Services, which will be used to inform the development of the Road-side
                         Service Facilities within the CSRCP.

                         The TA will inventory the existing services, assess the local and transit demand for services, select
                         locations and identify the commercial opportunities, in coordination with other stakeholders, the
                         local community and entrepreneurs. It will develop a detailed standard concept plan, including
                         engineering, mechanical and architectural lay-outs, electricity and water supplies, heating, and back-
                         up generators for emergency situations. The facilities would need to be built up above potential flood
                         plains and safe access/egress to and from both carriageways would need to be considered. The TA
                         will identify locations, manage legal and safeguards issues, and market the facility on behalf of KAZ.
                         The facilities will be constructed by the private sector under Design-Build arrangements under
                         Component 1, and then handed to KAZ, who will act as a developer and lease the various spaces
                         under arrangements established by the TA. This arrangement will generate revenue for KAZ as well
                         as provide opportunities for the private sector to develop businesses and generate employment
                         opportunities, along this important transport corridor. The road-side service facilities will serve
                         multiple purposes, including facilities for fuel sales, vehicle servicing, emergency response services
                         and lavatory / restroom facilities. The facilities will also include retail space for rent by the private
                         sector (eg for restaurants, craft; local agricultural products, etc), and may include the road
                         maintenance depots. The facilities may also become a passenger/coach transport hub by providing a
                         full range of passenger services needed by private operators. The facilities would have an additional
                         purpose of providing an emergency evacuation location in the event of extreme weather, and can
                         serve as a truck-stop so heavy vehicle operators can avoid fatigue.
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Sub-Component 2.b - Implement Market Access Initiatives.

                         While investment in the CSRCP is likely to improve market access significantly and reduce transport
                         costs, it is also well understood that investment in the road alone is unlikely to be sufficient to deliver
                         transformative changes in the competitiveness of the firms and farms along the corridor. And so
                         without complementary investment to unlock other constraints facing these firms and farms,
                         opportunities to have a major impact on job creation, earnings growth, and poverty reduction, may be
                         missed. Thus, a complementary program, funded by the Competitive Industries and Innovation
                         Program (CIIP) has assessed the potential and requirements for increasing the competitiveness of
                         firms and smallholders along the corridor, and to determine the extent to which the proposed
                         transport interventions can raise demand for labor and improve earnings for the self-employed in a
                         sustainable way through more competitive and innovative private sector participation. The identified
                         interventions relate to trade facilitation through improvements to customs processes and the
                         development of logistics hubs and centers.

                           Sub-Component 2.c - Training Initiatives.

                         This sub-component will include development of a curriculum to provide training for entrepreneurial
                         skills specific to enabling the development of specialist road construction and road maintenance sub-
                         contractors and also for HIV-AIDS awareness, substance abuse, and working safely. The Curriculum

                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         will be designed and prepared with TA financed under Component 2, but the actual training will be
                         delivered within the Works contracts financed under Component 1. This initiative will complement
                         the work being financed under the Bank's Skills and Jobs Project (SJP) and Youth Corps Project
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (YCP). The SJP aims to improve employment outcomes and skills of unemployed and
                         unproductively self-employed and current employees in need of training. Road construction workers
                         would benefit from technical and socio-emotional skills development programs. The higher-level
                         skilled-workers employed by construction related firms may benefit from management, and socio-
                         emotional skills development. The objective of the YCP is to promote young people's (18-29 years
                         old) community engagement and life skills. The work of YCP could be promoted to young road
                         construction workers as part of the educational and training initiatives developed under CSP.

                         Component 3 - Road Safety and Sustainability

                         Activities within this component are designed to improve road safety both along the corridor and at a
                         national level. It also seeks to position KAZ with sustainable sources of revenue, which it can use to
                         operate and maintain the republican road network. The sub-components will include:

                         Sub-Component 3.a - Road Safety

                               3.a (i) - Design stage road safety audits will be prepared. Where improvements are identified,
                         these can be incorporated into the Works, during construction phase. Design stage audits will be
                         specific to CSRCP.
                          3.a (ii) - Assessments using the iRAP approach, including preparation of Safer Roads Investment
                         Plans and risk mapping extended to key road arteries, and will be used as a basis for prioritizing
                         subsequent road safety improvements .
                               3.a (iii) - Develop and implement a geo-referenced road accident database within an Accident
                         Management System. This may be additionally linked to the iRAP star ratings.

                          Sub-Component 3.b - Sustainable Assets
Public Disclosure Copy




                          3.b (i) Preparation of a business plan for KAZ for revenue generation based on strategic plans to
                         expand the network of tolled roads in the next five years and development of road side service
                         facilities. Develop Business and Action Plans to ensure that KAZ can continually improve its
                         capacity and processes for managing the tolling revenue and other income streams into the future.
                           3.b (ii) This sub-component will finance the preparation of a concept design and the technical
                         information needed for procurement of a complete and fully integrated e-tolling and/or e-vignette
                         system for the CSRCP. However, installation and construction activities will be financed under the
                         Component 1, using a design build approach.
                               3.b (iii)    The capacity of KAZ to manage it's business and operations will be reviewed and
                         supported, and institutional mechanisms developed to ensure that the client can continually improve
                         its capacity and processes for business management into the future. Institutional development gaps
                         identified during Bank's due-diligence assessment of KAZ can be addressed under this sub-
                         component.
                              3.b (iv)      This sub-component will finance TA to build on previous ITS studies to develop an
                         options analysis and prepare concept designs and the technical information needed for procurement
                         of a complete and fully integrated ITS. However, the actual installation of the ITS infrastructure will
                         be financed under Component 1.

                          Sub-Component 3.c - Transparency and Governance

                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                             3.c (i)       National system to plan and monitor road works construction. The aim of this TA is
                         to develop and implement a pilot e-portal system that will be used for planning and monitoring of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         road construction activities. The system will fully integrate into existing KZ e-Government and
                         inventory models, and maintain, as a minimum, (i) contract details; (ii) key monitoring and
                         evaluation statistics; (iii) financial and payment information. The system will provide real-time
                         project information and monitoring, expenditure data, and performance and evaluation reports.
                             3.c (ii)      Develop and expand the e-portal system to include standard norms and technical
                         documentation. The e-portal system will be further developed to provide differential access to
                         electronic versions of all national normative and technical documents, such as standard drawings and
                         specifications related to road construction, and other technical information that is relevant in the
                         fields of architecture, urban planning and construction.
                             3.c (iii)     Development of cost estimating and pricing guidelines. The aim is to develop a set
                         of guidelines for estimating and pricing the cost of construction, reflecting best international practice
                         and contemporary road techno logies. This data will be kept updated and used for planning and
                         monitoring, and will be integrated with the e-portal system. The results will be used to monitor
                         tender estimates and for forward works planning.

                         Component 4 - Project Management and Impact Assessment

                         Under this component counterpart financing only will be used to (a) to support project management
                         functions including inter-agency coordination, engineering and technical inputs and supervision of
                         safeguards and fiduciary aspects; (b) collect base-line indicators for subsequent use in results and
                         impact evaluation; and (c) undertake completion review assessments, including lessons-learnt studies
                         and impact assessments.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GEN03)
                         Svetlana K. Sharipova (GSU03)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            This is a Category A project. The environmental Category
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      A is justified by scale of the project and potential impacts.
                                                                     The main negative impacts during construction is the
                                                                     operation of borrow areas, generation of waste
                                                                     (construction materials, spent consumables, household
                                                                     waste and wastewater from camps), excessive land use,
                                                                     topsoil destruction and erosion. There is also a potential
                                                                     impact on groundwater and surface water from excessive
                                                                     turbidity and siltation, and accidental spills involving
                                                                     fuels and lubricants. During operation of the
                                                                     environmental aspects would include road storm drainage
                                                                     management, soils, ground and surface water pollution,
                                                                     noise, dust, and air pollution.


                                                                       Page 5 of 13
                                                       In order to address the vulnerability to climate change, the
                                                       Client has adopted some climate resilient road design
                                                       standards, with specific measures for road pavement
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       construction to better withstand extreme seasonal
                                                       temperature differentials. In addition, snow and wind
                                                       barriers and an elevated road formation are approaches
                                                       being used to ensure the road performs better during snow
                                                       and floods. These features will help the road survive
                                                       during extreme weather conditions such as intensive
                                                       snow, flood, and wind, as well as large winter/summer
                                                       temperature gradient. Moreover, modern road-side service
                                                       facilities will provide emergency services and evacuation
                                                       points for road-users caught in extreme events. The
                                                       project will finance Technical Assistance to design, plan
                                                       and implement e-tolling strategies that will lead to green
                                                       and sustainable growth for road transport. E-tolling tariffs
                                                       will be designed so that heavy vehicles, and those with
                                                       high green-house gas (GHG) emissions pay more, a
                                                       policy approach aimed at promoting a switch to cleaner
                                                       vehicles.
                                                       The Borrower has prepared the ESIA for the entire
                                                       CSRCP corridor, and an EMP for sections of the road at
                                                       km 1620-1713.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No   The policy is not triggered. The alignment runs along the
                         4.04                          road, which existed for a long time and the impact on
                                                       flora and fauna will be insignificant. No regular or
                                                       seasonal strong movement of animals is observed in this
                                                       area. A small section of the road in Moyynkum District of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                       Zhambyl Oblast runs through the area with regulated
                                                       regime of economic activity located at the Northern
                                                       boundary of Zhusandalinskaya State Conservation Area.
                                                       There is no indication of concentrations of rare or
                                                       endangered species of this conservation area in the
                                                       proximity of the project area of impact.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No   The project does not involve forestry operations. Policy
                                                       OP 4.36 for Forests is not triggered.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No    The policy is not triggered. No pesticides will be used for
                                                       control of roadside vegetation.




                                                        Page 6 of 13
                            Physical Cultural           Yes        Physical cultural resources have been found in the
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                   construction area: in accordance with Kazakhstan
                                                                   legislation - PCR located within the protected zone 200
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   meters from the road and might directly be affected by the
                                                                   project. Action Plan for Physical Cultural Resources
                                                                   (APPCR) has been prepared by the Client for road
                                                                   sections at km 1620-1713. In case more physical cultural
                                                                   resources are identified in the project area, the APPCR for
                                                                   specific project sections will be developed by the Client.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes           The policy is triggered due to anticipated land acquisition
                            OP/BP 4.12                             and resettlement activities primarily related to
                                                                   construction works associated with expansion to four
                                                                   lanes from the existing two. Additional impacts are
                                                                   expected to allow land allocation for parking of the road-
                                                                   building equipment, bypasses, borrows pits, construction
                                                                   camps, and road-building materials and warehousing
                                                                   sites. The designs for sixteen of the proposed eighteen
                                                                   lots are incomplete at this stage. The client prepared a
                                                                   Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) covering the entire
                                                                   project. There are two lots (Lot 7 and 8) which have
                                                                   completed detailed design. Resettlement Action Plan was
                                                                   prepared prior to appraisal. The RAP identified 8 land
                                                                   plots of primarily pasture land which will only be
                                                                   impacted during construction works. Of these 8 plots, 2
                                                                   are state-owned and 6 are private. No physical
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   resettlement is anticipated on these two lot sections. When
                                                                   designs are finalized for other lots and the land acquisition
                                                                   is necessary, the RAPs for these lots must also be
                                                                   prepared by the client and approved by the Bank. The
                                                                   client shall not commence works on any of the road
                                                                   sections without RAP(s) approved by the Bank and fully
                                                                   implemented by the Borrower.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No         Given that there are no impacts on the international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   waterways associated with the project there are no
                                                                   grounds to trigger OP7.50.
                            Projects in Disputed        No         The project is not located in or near disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                     Page 7 of 13
                         The design of the road has taken into account measures for the minimization of environmental
                         impacts. The routing does not affect sensitive areas and habitats and protected areas, follows
                         existing alignment. The design will include measures to protect the adjacent population from noise
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (routing, barriers), increase traffic safety by speed controls, pedestrian crossings and underpasses.
                         The design will also take into account requirements articulated from farmers along the alignment
                         for safe crossings for animals and farm traffic through sufficiently dimensioned underpasses.
                         Similar underpasses will facilitate wildlife crossings. The design will also include results from
                         hydrological studies, installing sufficient culverts to avoid damming of permanent of seasonal
                         watercourses and the creation of swamps or waterlogged areas, and the dimensioning of bridges
                         will take the seasonality of discharges, as well as the proneness to flash floods into account.

                         Most environmental impacts during the construction period will be mitigated by good
                         housekeeping measures. There will be standard procedures for the control and mitigation of
                         emissions, such as dust, noise, exhaust fumes and liquid discharges from camps and the road
                         platform. Surface watercourses will be protected by settling ponds and filters (e.g. straw bales).
                         Wastewater from construction camps will be treated on site in settlement and aeration basins,
                         where biological waste will be processed, before discharge into surface streams or rivers. Septic
                         sludge from toilets will either be composted on site or trucked to existing water treatment plants
                         along the alignment. Groundwater is not expected to be impacted by the project, as no deep
                         excavations or major cuts are expected. Water for the construction activities as well as the camps
                         will be extracted in relatively small quantities from existing wells or the public supply system.
                         Generally water availability is unconstrained in the project area.

                         The impact on flora and fauna will be insignificant since the alignment runs along the road and
                         areas of economic activity, which existed for a long time . The reconstructed road will not become
                         a barrier to wildlife because no regular or seasonal strong movement of animals is observed in this
                         area. A small section of the road in Moyynkum District of Zhambyl Oblast runs through the area
                         with regulated regime of economic activity located at the Northern boundary of Zhusandalinskaya
Public Disclosure Copy




                         State Conservation Area. There is no indication of concentrations of rare or endangered species of
                         this conservation area in the proximity of the project area of impact.

                         Noise and exhaust emissions will be minimized by the requirement for Contractors to use modern
                         equipment and machinery complying with modern emission standards, and to maintain the
                         equipment in good working order throughout the project. This will be prescribed in the equipment
                         specifications in the tender documents. Nuisance to the public will moreover be minimized by
                         limiting work hours and not allowing nighttime works. Where works are carried out in close
                         vicinity to residential areas additional measures, such as noise barriers or the installation of
                         insulating windows will be implemented in accordance with good practice and in consultation with
                         the community.

                         Borrow pits will be operated by the Contractors only at locations that have been pre-identified
                         previous to project implementation and for which both operational and environmental permits
                         have been obtained. No borrow pit will be operated without a site specific EMP that will contain a
                         plan for its closure, remediation and re-cultivation that will be approved by the local
                         environmental authorities (as required under Kazakh regulations) as well as the supervising
                         engineer (who will ensure that international good practice is followed).

                         All environmental management measures to be carried out by the Contractors during the


                                                                   Page 8 of 13
                           construction period will be integrated in the tender documents and become part of the works
                           contracts. This will also include the Action Plan for PCR for section at km 1620-1713 and similar
                           Action Plans for historic and cultural sites along the alignment and a manual on chance find
Public Disclosure Copy




                           procedures to be followed in case of unanticipated discovery of potential PCR. The Contractors
                           will be required to have permanent staff on site with the specific responsibility of environmental
                           and social management (including a grievance specialist), reporting to the supervision engineers
                           and local authorities. The grievance management and implementation will follow the GRM
                           procedures as defined by the RPF/RAP and will be applied to both safeguards and all other project
                           related grievances.

                           The social management measures, in addition RAP implementation, require particular attention to
                           provision of cattle crossing, ensuring accessibility to settlements and improvements of the road
                           signage. The design contractor, through their social management specialist will provide regular
                           monitoring and work to ensure feasible adjustment needed during construction works in
                           consultations with local beneficiarie s.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           While we expect that in future the improved access will have broader economic/social
                           development implications particularly of new roads or significantly improved roads, these future
                           developments are not considered to be associated with this project in the sense of needing to apply
                           our SG policies to them. This is because there are no specific developments that we can expect to
                           occur as a result of the project (as would be the case, e.g., for a road providing direct access to an
                           area which could be developed, for example, for a ski resort).

                           Component 2 a will finance preparation of detailed standard concept plans for Roadside Service
                           Facilities. Facility types include facilities for fuel sales, vehicle servicing, emergency response
                           services and lavatory / restroom facilities, retail space for restaurants, craft; local agricultural
                           products, road maintenance depots, etc. The facilities may also become a passenger/coach
Public Disclosure Copy




                           transport hub by providing a full range of passenger services needed by private operators. The
                           facilities would have an additional purpose of providing an emergency evacuation location in the
                           event of extreme weather, and can serve as a truck-stop so heavy vehicle operators can avoid
                           fatigue. The concept plans will take into account potential environmental profile of the facilities
                           and will provide guidance on mitigation measures to avoid or minimize negative environmental
                           impacts.

                           Component 3a will finance various road safety measures which will generally have positive social
                           impact in the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project will finance widening of the existing and functional road and only "without a project"
                           alternative was discussed for the corridor broadly. At the same time alternative routes are being
                           discussed for bypasses, bridges, interchanges etc. by design companies involved in preparation of
                           the design. The criteria for consideration of alternative alignments for bypasses, bridges,
                           interchanges, etc. include presence or proximity of nature protected areas, physical cultural
                           resources, environmentally sensitive elements of environment (e.g. rivers, lakes, wetlands),
                           residential areas, sensitive receptors (i.e. schools, hospitals, daycare facilities, elderly housing and
                           convalescent facilities), various types of property and/or residential housing which may be subject
                           to resettlement. Alternative options for bypasses and engineering structures will be presented in

                                                                       Page 9 of 13
                           the design documentation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The EIA process in Kazakhstan is described in the Environmental code (2007) and a set of
                           detailed implementation instructions. It foresees 4 stages, which correlate with the respective
                           design activities and range from (i) a desk study for pre-feasibility level, (ii) a preliminary EIA and
                           (iii) a detailed ("full") EIA for the detailed design stage and (iv) an EMP as separate section of the
                           design documentation. In this respect the EIA process is both logical and deemed compatible with
                           international good practice.

                           The CR and KAZ has built capacity on safeguards through implementing projects financed by the
                           World Bank and other international development institutions such as ADB and EBRD. In
                           particular, environmental and social safeguards has become an integral part of the requirements
                           stipulated in the tender documentation for the civil works contractors. Each contractor employs
                           environmental specialists responsible for environmental control, monitoring and reporting. There
                           are two people in KAZ Department for Roads Network Development and Investment Projects
                           responsible for the implementation of the environmental safeguards. KAZ has also benefitted from
                           the safeguards trainings provided by the ADB and the World Bank during last two years.
                           Significant progress is observed in relation to the public participation and consultation regarding
                           the road construction works during the project preparation as well as the project implementation
                           and completion. Safeguards related documents are publically disclosed by KAZ on the existing
                           projects website with the opportunity for the public feedback and discussion.

                           The borrower prepared ESIA report. The ESIA was reviewed by the Bank team, a gap analysis
                           carried out and issues to be rectified and improved identified. The team, the PMC (project
                           management consultant) from the ongoing SWRP (South West Roads Project) and a qualified
                           Consultant assisted the Borrower to address the identified gaps and upgrade the ESIAs to a quality
                           acceptable to the Bank before project appraisal. Physical cultural resources have been found in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           construction area: in accordance with Kazakhstan legislation - PCR located within the protected
                           zone 200 meters from the road and might directly be affected by the project. Action Plan for
                           Physical Cultural Resources (APPCR) has been prepared by the Client for road sections at km
                           1620-1713. In case more physical cultural resources are identified in the project area, the APPCR
                           for specific project sections will be developed by the Client.

                           The need for diligent and consistent supervision of safeguards is well recognized by KAZ. KAZ
                           will rely on environmental and social specialists, who will be integrated into one of the
                           departments of the central office of KAZ, or be hired by KAZ either individually or as part of
                           external entity contracted for project implementation. It is important that the function of
                           supervision of safeguards (both environmental and social aspects) is maintained by KAZ through
                           its Safeguards Unit irrespective of arrangements on other aspects of project implementation, such
                           as procurement, FM, etc.

                           Representatives of oblast departments of KAZ, Akimats and other oblast authorities will be
                           organized in an Oblast Working Group to facilitate implementation of the project broadly at oblast
                           level. Regarding safeguards - this working group will interact with Safeguards Unit of KAZ,
                           contractors and supervision engineers on specific problem issues of incompliance with safeguards
                           requirements when engagement and support from local authorities is required.



                                                                      Page 10 of 13
                           Supervising Engineer teams shall have full-time involvement by local social and environmental
                           staff, for the entire construction period of each Lot. Inputs shall cover both social and
                           environmental aspects, or if separate specialists are needed, then the total aggregated engagement
Public Disclosure Copy




                           across both social and environmental aspects shall be 12 person-months per year per Works Lot,
                           although the relative inputs by each of the environmental and social specialists may vary
                           dependent on the needs of the site and the stage of construction. Qualification requirements will
                           include relevant technical education (environment, civil engineering, social science), and
                           experience of on-site safeguards supervision of road or other projects, involving civil works.
                           Given that interaction with local communities is essential, the environmental and social specialists
                           forming part of the Supervising Engineer team, should be fluent in Kazakh and Russian.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders of the road are (a) the Committee for Roads, an agency of the Government of
                           Kazakhstan, as the project proponent; (b) KazAutoZhol Joint Stock Company (KAZ), a State
                           Owned Company with a mandate to manage and operate the Republican road network, as
                           Borrower and Implementing Agency; (c) commercial and private road users, who will be the
                           primary beneficiaries from improved road quality; and (d) PAPs such as the residents of
                           communities along the road, farmers, herders and proprietors of roadside services. For this last
                           group there will be benefits as well as some disadvantages and negative impacts caused by the
                           project.

                           To ensure that all views and concerns of all stakeholders are appropriately reflected in project
                           design and implementation, and environmental and social safeguards instruments fully capture the
                           baseline situation, the expected impacts and the views and concerns of the PAPs, two sets of
                           consultations were undertaken during the preparation of the Bank financed project. KazdorNII JSC
                           and KazCEP LLP held public hearings on June 05-06, 2015 in Aksu-Ayuly, Akshatau, Saryshagan
                           villages and on June 17-18, 2015 in Balkhash town, Gulshat, Kurminka, Kash-kanteniz, Shyganak
                           villages. These public consultations provided the local residents and the parties involved in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           project with an opportunity to review and discuss the issues of concern related to environmental
                           and social aspects, express their demands and recommendations that should be included in the the
                           ESIA and RAP. The preliminary public hearings were held successfully. Additional public
                           consultations were held on November 04-05, 2015 in Aksu-Ayuly, Balkhash town, Saryshagan,
                           Shuganak. The discussed issues were mainly about ESIA design and environmental protection
                           activities, locations of border crossings and cattle passes, location of construction facilities
                           (concrete constructions, construction camps, parking and etc.) and water supply sources were
                           discussed. The final draft ESIA report was disclosed on 6 May 2016 in Kazakhstan and 4 May
                           2016 in the Infoshop. Public consultations were held during May 23-27, 2016 in the following
                           villages/towns along the alignment: Kurma, Nurataldy, Akshatau, Balkhash, Saryshagan,
                           Priozersk, Mynaral, and Shyganak.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                         08-Dec-2015
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                      04-May-2016
                          For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive         04-May-2016
                          Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors




                                                                    Page 11 of 13
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kazakhstan                                                       06-May-2016
                           Comments: Public consultations with communities along the alignment were held during May
Public Disclosure Copy




                                         23-27 2016, in the following villages and towns: Kurma, Nurataldy, Akshatau,
                                         Balkhash, Saryshagan, Priozersk, Mynaral, and Shyganak.
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Sep-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Apr-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kazakhstan                                                       25-Apr-2016
                           Comments: The displayed information is for the Resettlement Policy Framework. Apart from it,
                                         the Resettlement Action Plan was received by the Bank in November 2015,
                                         submitted to InfoShop on May 19, 2016, and disclosed in country (Kazakhstan) on
                                         May 17, 2016.
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected




                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             livelihoods)

                             6 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Fiona J Collin
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                             Date: 10-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                           Date: 10-Aug-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 13 of 13
