INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14612
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 31-Jul-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 31-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Ukraine                    Project ID:  P149322
Project Name: Road Sector Development Project (P149322)
Task Team       Simon David Ellis
Leader(s):
Estimated       10-Aug-2015                Estimated    30-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO3                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (95%), General transportation sector
(5%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (80%), Trade facilitation
and market access (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     800.00            Total Bank Financing:  800.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
P           International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                     800.00
Total                                                                     800.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
19.   The objective of the project is to improve transport connectivity, maintenance operations and
road safety for road users on selected sections of the national roads network and improve road
network management in Ukraine.
Page 1 of 9


﻿3. Project Description
The proposed project would be an Investment Project Financing (IPF) consisting of a loan in the
amount of US$800 million to Ukraine. The proposed loan will finance 100 percent of eligible
expenditures including value added tax (VAT) and land acquisition costs. This project will be a
continuation of RSIP and RSIP2, and will continue the improvement of the main road between Kiev
and Kharkiv, the first and second largest cities respectively, strengthening economic and political
integration with the East of the country. The project will also have a substantial component on capital
a        repairs and maintenance to reverse the overall decline in the condition of the network. These
elements will be complemented by an institutional program with a strong focus on the
implementation of the sector's renewed reform and innovation process including: (i) introduction of
modern road safety and network management principles to reduce accident fatalities, protect network
assets and move towards sustainable finance; (ii) support in implementation of prioritized
maintenance plans and restructuring of maintenance industry; and (iii) the development of a robust
pipeline of sustainably financed road investments. The project will include the following
components:
Component 1: Road Rehabilitation and Safety Improvement (total estimated cost US$510.5 million
from IBRD loan). This component would continue finance for the improvement to motorway
standard of the road between Kiev to Kharkiv. The road would provide a high standard and safe
corridor to integrate with the EU extended TEN-T network and further the connection of Ukraine's
two largest cities. This component will finance the civil works for the improvement of approximately
100 kilometers of selected sections of the M03 highway, initially between Poltava and Valky. The
road would be built to a category 1 standard which is a four lane divided highway with high safety
specifications including central crash barriers and side crash barriers where required. The project
would finance all necessary bridges, interchanges, site supervision and land acquisition.
Component 2: Program of Maintenance and Capital repairs (total estimated cost US$265.3 million
from IBRD loan): This activity will finance urgent maintenance, rehabiliation and capital repairs on
selected sections of the core national road corridors. The primary focus of this component will be on
protecting the existing maintainable core network from further deterioration and undertaking capital
repairs on priority sections to bring the road surface back up to maintainable condition. In
undertaking this work any outstanding road safety issues will be addressed. This component will
finance all necessary design, site supervision and land acquisition. The following two sub-
components will be financed:
Sub-component 2(i): Maintenance of Core National Road Corridors (total estimated cost US$133.3
million from IBRD loan): This sub-component will finance maintenance on approximately 1,100
kms of the country's most strategic road network. This will include the M-06, M-07 and M-03 which
are the main international and domestic corridors. These roads have been improved over the last
decade and are generally in good or fair condition. This will be done through 5 year performance
based maintenance contracts, the objective of these contracts is to maintain the roads in good
condition through regular routine maintenance and timely periodic maintenance. This activity will
build on the experience of the on-going performance based contract designed under RSIP and
implemented using EBRD funds. It will also contribute to the Mol strategic objective of having
5,000 kms in the country under performance based contracts and the divestiture of the DAKs.
Sub-component 2(ii): Rehabilitation and Capital repairs on Core National Road Corridors (total
estimated cost US$132 million from IBRD loan): This sub-component will focus on capital repairs
Page 2 of 9


﻿and maintenance of the Kirovograd - Mykolayiv - Kherson corridor (M- 14 and RI 6) which is one of
the principal corridors for the movement of grains to the ports. The total corridor is approximately
245km and some widening is anticipated for approximately 30km on the Mykolayiv to Kherson
section which has high traffic volumes.
o
Component 3: Network Management and Development (estimated cost of US$24.2 Million from
IBRD loan). This component will finance institutional support to implementation of road
management reform and cover the following areas:
Sub-component 3(i): Road Safety and Network Management (total estimated cost US$5 million
from IBRD loan): This activity will finance activities to implement an integrated network
management system to improve the safety and sustainability of the national road network. The
network management system will include e-tolling, weigh-in-motion system for axle load control and
automatic speed enforcement cameras. Broader road safety activities will also be supported to
improve coordination between key stakeholders and ensure project financed road corridors have
integrated approach to road safety. The sub-component will finance specialist support to the
government working group, consultancy services and equipment if required. The following activities
are envisaged:
*      Support in the preparation of relevant legislation and implementation of findings from a road
safety capacity review which was prepared under a recent Global Road Safety Fund (GRSF) grant;
*      Support to increase social and key stakeholder awareness through public awareness
campaigns and consultations;
*      The preparation of a feasibility study and functional specification for a national system of
tolling, weigh-in-motion and automatic speed enforcement;
*      The preparation of concession documents for an operator to finance, install and operate the
national system and any procurement documents that may be needed for an initial roll out of the
system;
*      Consultants to oversee evaluation of the procurement process, supervise installation and
monitor initial stages of operations and results.
o
Sub-component 3(ii): Maintenance Management (estimated cost of 1 million). Given the overall
underfunding of the sector and in the context of the proposed reform of the maintenance industry and
decentralization agenda, this sub-component would finance the institutional work required to
a        implement key aspects of the reform agenda. It would also finance the necessary work to monitor the
maintenance works in Component 2 (i). The following key activities would be supported:
*      Necessary data collection, planning, design, safety audits and project management support to
ensure effective implementation of prioritized maintenance plans and performance based road
contracts;
*      Consultancy services to support Ukravtodor reform plans for maintenance industry including
capacity building and institutional arrangements to facilitate implementation of improved systems
and monitor subsequent implementation and impact.
Sub-component 3(iii): Preparation of Feasibility Studies and Design Designs (estimated cost $11
million from IBRD loan). This component would finance the preparation of feasibility studies,
associated social and environmental documents compliant with World Bank safeguard standards,
detailed design and bidding documents for priority road improvement schemes. The objective of this
activity is to prepare a pipeline of high quality projects for external financiers and also to support the
Mol objective of divestiture of the design capacity from Ukravtodor controlled entities to the private
Page 3 of 9


﻿sector. Two main road schemes will be supported:
Boryspil Bypass - Boryspil bypass is part of the proposed Kiev ring road and will be one of
the most heavily trafficked roads in the country. For this reason the feasibility study will also explore
O
U         private finance options.
*      Lviv - Kirovograd road - This 700 km corridor will form a key route between Lviv and the
port cities in the south and will connect with the Kirovograd - Mykolayiv - Kherson section which is
being financed in sub-component 2(ii).
Sub-component 3(iv): Project Management and Implementation Support (estimated cost $7.2 million
from IBRD loan): This sub-component will finance activities necessary for the effective
implementation of the project including technical audits, safety audits, financial audits, design
reviews, incremental operating costs (IOC) and consultancy services.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project locations/sites for the upgrade and bypasses construction identified at appraisal are along the
existing road networks in Poltava and Kharkiv oblasts . The project will be improving the existing
M-03 road between Poltava and Valky between km 341 and km 431 (about 100 km) and will
construct four bypasses. The road passes mainly through the landscapes which have been
significantly modified by human activities during the last centuries. The terrain is flat, lowland
agricultural land: large-scale farming has dominated land use for several decades. The landscape was
also significantly modified by the development of infrastructure associated with large-scale
agribusiness, populated villages and towns along the road (private housing, shops, public buildings
and various local infrastructure facilities). There are five railway lines crossings which will require
grade separation and bridges over five small rivers: Vorskla, Chutivka, Kolomak, Mza and
Karamushina. In addition, the existing main road between Poltava and Kharkiv was constructed more
than 50 years ago and has changed the landscape and local ecosystems in the broader road corridor.
Given that the ecosystems and biological communities have been historically affected by the above
economic and social activities, and taking into account that the road upgrading works generally will
not result in significant conversion or degradation of natural habitats. Based on the above, OP 4.04
(Natural Habitats) is not triggered.
Forested land in the project area do not represent natural forests or related natural habitats. The
predominant type of land use in the project area is agricultural and not dependent on forest cover.
The project may potentially affect only small segments of forested land as a result of construction of
bypasses. All forested land potentially affected by the project are planted with low-value tree species.
Based on the above, OP 4.36 (Forests) is not triggered.
The M-03 road is one of the main corridors in the country and mainly consists of category II road
(two lanes with asphalt-concrete pavement). Some sections (i.e. exit from Poltava, between Sharivka
and Sanzhari, and the approach to Kharkiv) are Category I standard (four lanes with asphalt-concrete
pavement and dividing strip). The project will finance upgrade (widening) of the road from two to
four lanes, and construction of associated road infrastructure (bridges, culverts, underpasses for
cattle, crossings, etc.)
Under Component 2 the project will finance 5 year performance based maintenance contracts on
approximately 1,100 kms of the country's most strategic road network. This will include the M-06,
M-07 and M-03 which are the main international and domestic corridors. These roads have been
improved over the last decade and are generally in good or fair condition. The objective of these
Page 4 of 9


﻿contracts is to maintain the roads in good condition through regular routine maintenance and timely
periodic maintenance. The maintenance of core national corridors will be happening within the right
of way of the existing corridors M-06, M-07 and M-03 which are the main international and
domestic corridors. Also, this component will finance capital repairs and maintenance of the
U         Kirovograd - Mykolayiv - Kherson corridor (M- 14 and R16) which is one of the principal corridors
for the movement of grains to the ports. The total corridor is approximately 245km and some
widening is anticipated for approximately 30km on the Mykolayiv to Kherson section which has high
traffic volumes. This sub-component will include finance for design, site supervision and land
acquisition if it is necessary.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
Klavdiya Maksymenko (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Policy on Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01) is
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               triggered. Widening and capital repairs will generally be
undertaken within the existing right of way of the road
and environmental impacts can be mitigated by good
construction and housekeeping practices. Environmental
issues will be similar to those under the ongoing RSIP 1
and 2. All bypasses to be built under the RSDP will go
through farmland. No protected areas will be affected by
the project. An ESMF for the sections of the M-03 road
where designs are not ready (mainly bypasses) was
prepared by the Client. The ESMF will also cover
component 2 of the project which will mainly be
maintenance within the existing right of way and sections
of the Kirovograd to Kherson road where no design work
has started yet. Site-specific EIAs which incorporate
EMPs have been prepared by Ukrdorinvest for Section 3.2
(previously section 3.1.1) and section 3.3, and the
remaining site-specific EIA/EMPs will be prepared by
Ukrdorinvest, disclosed and consulted upon once design
work has been completed and prior to works start. The
ESMF will serve as a framework for preparation of site-
specific EMPs (as part of preparation of final working
designs by Contractors). The ESMF was disclosed by
Ukravtodor and by Poltava oblast administration and
public hearings were organized. All design works
financed by the project (the Boryspil Bypass and the
Kirovograd to Kherson road) will include the preparation
of safeguard document in accordance with Bank policies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Page 5 of 9


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        At appraisal the design was ready only for the linear
OP/BP 4.12                          sections of the M03 corridor (sections 3.2 and 3.3). The
upgrade of the linear sections to four lane is expected to
happen within right of way or require the acquisition of
the land owned by the the local authorities, no private
land permanent or temporary acquisition is expected. It is
expected that mainly private farmland will be acquired for
the bypasses however physical displacement of a few
households could also be caused by construction of
bypasses. The designs of the bypasses are not ready by
appraisal thus abbreviated RAP(s) covering bypasses will
be prepared by the borrower satisfactory to the Bank, duly
disclosed and implemented prior to freeing up the land to
stat any construction works. The design of the upgrade
for the 30 km high traffic sections on the Mykoliaiv-
Kherson road will be prepared during the project
implementation and once the need for land acquisition is
clarified an abbreviated RAP(s) covering this section will
be prepared by the borrower satisfactory to the Bank, duly
disclosed and implemented prior to freeing up the land to
stat any construction works. The draft RAP for the land
acquisition for the construction of the Boryspil bypass
around Kyiv will be financed by the project along with
the design. In order to cover for all design and
construction works that may be funded by or result from
the project an RPF is prepared satisfactory to the Bank
disclosed on the web-site of UAD and Bank's Inforshop
prior to appraisal. Ukrdorinvest has a good track record
working on involuntary resettlement under the ongoing
RSIP2. The staff member is assigned to work on
safeguards issues and monitor implementation of the RPF
and RAP by the local authorities and the Road services of
the respective oblasts. The fact that the cost of land
acquisition is going to be financed from the project
provides the UAD more control over planning and
implementation of resettlement while reducing the risks of
delays in land acquisition. Poltava regional roads
administration will appoint a focal responsible for
implementation of the resettlement plans.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
Page 6 of 9


﻿4.37
Projects on International No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is not expected to have any large scale environmental and social impacts. The land
acquisition is expected to to have marginal effects on the affected households as majority of them
will be loosing small share of their land and the few loosing significant share will receive land in
exchange or adequate monetary compensation based on their choice. The community consultations
at the design stage will ensure that all the pathways that are essential for the local communities
will be preserved or even upgraded to be safer. The maintenance component will most likely
create the opportunities for local contractors and suppliers of the construction materials therefore
stimulating income generation opportunities for local budgets and employment for the low-skilled
local workers.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Long-term effects of the project are anticipated to be positive as they will improve safety of the
road for the users and local communities. The improved economic access to the areas will
potentially make them more attractive for business and investments thus stimulating economic
growth and employment opportunities.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The alternatives were considered in the context of location of bypasses and optimization of
technical and economic parameters of bridges, overpasses, and other engineering solutions.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Ukravtodor is the Ukrainian Government Agency responsible for the network of National roads. It
is under the general oversight of the Minister of Infrastructure. Ukravtodor will be responsible for
the overall implementation of the Road Sector Development Project(RSDP). Ukrdorinvest is the
Project Implementation Unit (PIU) presently carrying out many of the implementation functions
for the RSIP-2, such as procurement, financial management, compliance with safeguards and
others.
Ukrdorinvest has experience of working on environmental safeguards under the ongoing Road and
Safety Improvement Projects (RSIP and RSIP-2 respectively). A designated staff at Ukrdorinvest
has been assigned to work on environmental and social safeguards issues in close collaboration
with road design institute (UKRGIPRODOR), local environmental authorities, rayon
administrations and Oblast-level Road Service units. Ukrdorinvest has prior experience in
organizing public consultations and will organize such consultations on Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) and respective Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) in project
Page 7 of 9


﻿locations.
Supervision of environmental performance of contracts through site visits and preparation of
regular environmental reports by supervision engineers under RSIP- 1 and RSIP-2 suggest that
O
environmental performance of these projects was satisfactory broadly. Works under new project
will be monitored closely by the environmental specialist of Ukrdorinvest and supervision
engineers. This will allow to assess compliance with environmental requirements and provide
guidance, if needed.
The PIU has an experience of implementing the resettlement instruments under RSIP and RSIP-2
projects. The PIU has a good track record in reporting on the resettlement implementation to the
Bank. The Bank's Social Safeguards Specialist will provide additional training and support in
preparing the site specific RAPs and will supervise resettlement implementation in course of the
regular supervision missions.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Stakeholders for the purpose of this project shall be defined as all those people and institutions that
have an interest in the successful planning and execution of the project. This includes all persons
and institutions positively and negatively affected by the project. Records of public consultations
will be kept by the PIU. Affected persons and communities will be notified twice through the mass
media of plans to construct the needed structures for some part of rehabilitation sections. In
addition, announcements will be posted in offices of local administrations and in local self-
governments or executive power authorities (depending on the relevant land plot location). The
first round of consultations will be held on the RPF. Affected persons will also be contacted
individually at least two times: when ?Ukravtodor? applies for design preparation and when ?
Ukravtodor? applies for a construction permit. The negotiations occur both at the first and at the
second notification and continue until an agreement is reached or ?Ukravtodor? files a request for
court intervention. Resettlement Action Plans will be disclosed at public meeting with affected
persons as well as through local media and Ukravtodor websites.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
O
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           13-Jul-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Ukraine                                                  30-Jul-2015
Comments: The ESMF and EIA/EMPs for sections 3.2 (previously 3.1.1) and 3.3 have been
disclosed in the infoshop and in-country.
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              28-Jun-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Jul-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Ukraine                                                  22-Jul-2015
Comments: The RPF has been disclosed in the infoshop and in-country
Page 8 of 9


﻿If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes[  ] No[X]   NA[    ]
report?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes[X] No[  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Simon David Ellis
Approved By
Practice Manager/     Name: Juan Gaviria (PMGR)                Date: 31-Jul-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


