                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA17847
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 01-Aug-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Aug-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Cameroon                          Project ID:    P152755
                            Project Name:      Electricity Transmission and Reform Project (P152755)
                            Task Team          Stephan Claude Frederic Garnier,Jan Friedrich Kappen
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          12-Sep-2016              Estimated     07-Dec-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEE07                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       375.00           Total Bank Financing:    325.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                   50.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                     325.00
                              Total                                                                                     375.00
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to improve the capacity, efficiency and stability of Cameroon's
                           national electricity transmission network.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will support Cameroon's choice to improve the quality of power supply and unlock
                           private sector investment though the implementation of the Third Party Access (TPA) model guided
                           by the principles of efficiency and transparency. Activities will be geared to swiftly complete the
                           institutional set-up of a fully unbundled transmission sector and to overcome the backlog of urgent


                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         infrastructure investments.

                         The project consists of three components: (1) establishment and operationalization of SONATREL;
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (2) strengthening of the national transmission grid; and (3) project management support and capacity
                         building.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project will finance transmission lines and power substations in both rural and urban
                         areas. Transmission lines require large Right Of Ways (ROW) and may affect environmental
                         sensitive areas such as wetlands, forests, national parks. While the physical footprint of the works
                         themselves is relatively small, large areas are required by law for the ROW and therefore land
                         acquisition, displacement and loss of livelihoods are likely.
                         The potential environmental and social impacts of infrastructure investments under the proposed
                         project are expected to be cumulatively significant with regard to the national scope of the project.
                         The transmission lines and power substation that will be financed under this project might be located
                         in sensitive agro ecological areas, thus requiring careful analysis, consideration of routings that avoid
                         large settlements of people and, where not possible to avoid negative impacts, appropriate mitigation
                         including best environmental and social management practices.

                         The proposed project will finance a subset of a larger Program, which final design, including
                         technical parameters, will be established based on the conclusions of a Network Stability Study. The
                         study will assess and optimize the coherence, sequencing and prioritization of the program.

                         As a result, it was agreed that a framework approach will be used in order to provide guidance for the
                         preparation of the site specific safeguard instruments once the exact alignment and routing of the
                         transmission line and the location of the power substation have been identified. An Environmental
                         and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been
                         prepared by the Borrower and reviewed by the Bank. As there are indigenous peoples in two of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         regions in which the project might be implemented - the Centre and South regions - OP/BP 4.10 -
                         Indigenous Peoples has also been triggered. A social assessment was undertaken to identify the
                         general locations of indigenous peoples and gather information about these communities relevant to
                         the project. The results of the social assessment have been used to prepare an Indigenous People
                         Policy Framework (IPPF) that identifies the locations of the indigenous communities in these two
                         regions, potential impacts of project financed activities and the process by which an Indigenous
                         Peoples Plan will be prepared. Per the requirements of the OPs, these documents have been disclosed
                         both in country and in Infoshop prior to appraisal on July 27, 2016.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Emeran Serge M. Menang Evouna (GEN07)
                         Kristyna Bishop (GSU01)

                          6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental                Yes           The activities that will be financed through component 2
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      will generate adverse environmental and social impacts
                                                                     and for that, this process will be integrated as a routine
                                                                     activity within the sub project cycle processes. Regulatory
                                                                     screening and analysis procedures outline different project



                                                                       Page 2 of 9
                                                        categories and institutional responsibilities for
                                                        environmental and social mainstreaming. Category "A"
                                                        projects (Very High Voltage and High Voltage lines) will
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        go through a full ESIA (Bank's OP 4.01)/detailed ESIA
                                                        (local regulation), whereas Category "B" projects
                                                        (Substation subprojects) will go through separate ESIA
                                                        (Bank's OP 4.01) or Summary ESIA (local regulation).
                                                        Upgrading, adding transformers, replace transformers, etc.
                                                        will be subject to local regulations, smaller-scale
                                                        investment environmental screening process called
                                                        "Notice d'Impact Environnemental".
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes   The transmission lines to be rehabilitated and those to be
                         4.04                           constructed will likely cross forest areas mainly in the
                                                        South and East Interconnected Networks areas. The
                                                        ESMF indicates Ramsar sites that could be impacted by
                                                        transmission lines, however, it was agreed that no
                                                        transmission line will be supported by the project if it
                                                        could have any negative impact in RAMSAR sites or any
                                                        critical natural habitats identified as such.

                                                        However, the ESMF recommends to trigger the policy.
                                                        The ESMF provides guidance that clearly indicates the
                                                        commitment to not cause significant conversion or
                                                        degradation of any critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       Yes   The transmission lines to be rehabilitated and those to be
                                                        constructed will likely cross forest areas mainly in the
                                                        South and East Interconnected Networks areas. The right
                                                        of way of the transmission line will need to be cleared and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        several trees will have to be cut. This could result in
                                                        changes in few forest areas. The ESMF provides relevant
                                                        guidance to consider during the Specific Environmental
                                                        Impact Assessment the process to be followed to avoid or
                                                        reduce potential negative impact on health and quality of
                                                        in forest.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                         Physical Cultural        Yes   The ESMF indicated that the regions that could be
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           integrated in the project areas have physical cultural sites.
                                                        The Policy has been triggered and the ESMF provides an
                                                        annex on how potential impacts on Physical cultural
                                                        Resources will be managed.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   This policy has been triggered as there are indigenous
                         BP 4.10                        peoples in two of the regions, Centre and South that have
                                                        been identified as potential locations for some sections of
                                                        the transmission line that will be financed under
                                                        Component 2. A social assessment was undertaken during



                                                         Page 3 of 9
                                                                     preparation to identify the general locations of indigenous
                                                                     peoples in these regions and to gather information about
                                                                     these communities relevant to the project. The results of
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     the social assessment have been used to prepare an
                                                                     Indigenous People Policy Framework (IPPF) that
                                                                     identifies the locations of the indigenous communities,
                                                                     potential impacts of project financed activities and the
                                                                     process by which an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be
                                                                     prepared (if necessary) once the exact locations of the
                                                                     IBRD financed transmission lines are identified. Per the
                                                                     requirements of the policy, the cleared version of the IPPF
                                                                     was disclosed both in country and on Infoshop prior to
                                                                     appraisal on July 27, 2016.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes             This policy has been triggered as the transmission lines
                            OP/BP 4.12                               and power substations to be financed under Component 2
                                                                     will require land acquisition, some displacement and will
                                                                     negatively impact livelihoods along the ROW. This
                                                                     impact is likely to be significant as transmission lines in
                                                                     particular require a large ROW even though the physical
                                                                     footprint of the works themselves is relatively small. As
                                                                     the sections of the transmission lines to be financed by
                                                                     this project have not yet been confirmed and the
                                                                     government is also seeking other financing, a final
                                                                     agreement regarding which sections will be financed by
                                                                     the IBRD will be made. As a result, it was agreed that a
                                                                     framework approach will be used in order to provide
                                                                     guidance for the preparation of the site specific safeguard
                                                                     instruments once the exact alignment and routing of the
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     transmission line and the location of the power substation
                                                                     have been identified. An RPF has been prepared and
                                                                     reviewed by the Bank. It was disclosed in country and on
                                                                     Infoshop prior to appraisal per the requirements of the
                                                                     policy on July 27, 2016.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              This is a large scale project with many activities that will be implemented across a large
                              geographic area. Many of the activities are focused on planning and reform but Component 2 will


                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                           finance the physical expansion of the grid which involves the construction of transmission towers
                           and power substations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The following negative impacts were identified at the ESMF stage:
                           - Soil erosion;
                           - Soil pollution by PCBs;
                           - Birds and Monkey electrocution;
                           - Artefacts damages, archeological resources or burial or artefact;
                           - Crops damages to crops;
                           - Tree cutting;
                           - Resettlement in urban areas; and
                           - Negative impacts on agriculture livelihoods in rural areas.

                           Transmission lines in particular require a large ROW even though the physical footprint of the
                           works themselves is relatively small. It is likely that there will be negative impacts on land owners
                           and users, agricultural communities and other infrastructure such as roads and
                           telecommunications. These impacts will be both temporary during construction and permanent. As
                           the sections of the transmission lines to be financed by this project have not yet been confirmed
                           and the government is also seeking other financing, a final agreement regarding which sections
                           will be financed by the IBRD will be made by the end of 2016. A social assessment was
                           undertaken during preparation in order to identify potential project affected persons, gather
                           information about possible impacts related to project financed activities and to provide important
                           information regarding their current access to energy and potential use after the project is
                           completed. The social assessment also identified the locations of indigenous communities in the
                           regions across which the transmission lines are likely to cross. The main impacts identified are
                           related to social conflict and health issues during construction, loss of access to natural resources
                           including hunting and loss of use of land for agriculture.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the project area:
                           Many of the activities to be financed by this project are likely to have positive impacts in the
                           future on access to energy for those previously excluded and better access for those that currently
                           have sub-par access. However, the positive impacts can be maximized if important environmental
                           and social considerations are taken into consideration.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The ESMF, RPF and IPPF provide important information regarding impacts that can be used to
                           inform the final alignment of the transmission lines. These alternatives will be considered during
                           implementation in order to minimize environmental destruction, resettlement and negative impacts
                           on livelihoods.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Each sub-project will be assessed for potential adverse environmental and social impacts and for
                           that, this process will be integrated as a routine activity within the sub project cycle processes.
                           Regulatory screening and analysis procedures outline different project categories and institutional
                           responsibilities for environmental and social mainstreaming. Category "A" projects (Very High
                           Voltage and High Voltage lines) will go through a full ESIA (Bank's OP 4.01)/detailed ESIA
                           (local regulation), whereas Category "B" projects ( Substation subprojects) will go through


                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                         separate ESIA (Bank's OP 4.01)/Summary ESIA (local regulation). Upgrading, adding
                         transformers, replace transformers will be subjected to a smaller scale investment environmental
                         screening process called "Notice d➢❨ impact Environnemental" under local regulations.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Substations and transmission lines will be subject to hazard studies. These studies will be updated
                         every 5 years. Hazard studies shall also identify vulnerabilities, interdependencies, capabilities,
                         and cascading effects of impacts of extreme weather events on substations and transmission lines.


                         Subprojects will be implemented in urban and peri-urban settings (very sensitive areas).
                         Meaningful public consultation and involvement will be undertaken in urban areas to avoid
                         involuntary resettlement and social conflict.

                         For subprojects that will also affect agricultural and forest lands in various agro-ecological zones,
                         EA processes will propose proper mitigation, compensation and realistic follow up measures.
                         Proper guidelines were proposed for Physical Cultural Resources management during the
                         implementation phase.

                         Cameroon has a complicated and labor intensive administrative process for determining eligibility
                         and levels of compensation due to expropriation for a public purpose. It requires coordination
                         among many ministries and local governments and has taken up to 2 years to complete and is
                         generally only started after project approval. In order to minimize the risk of delays, the team is
                         working with the GoC to use a unified approach that started very early during preparation. This
                         approach includes the request for the DUP, establishment of the departmental evaluation
                         committees (CCE) which will identify the project affected persons and determine the level of
                         compensation. This work is required for the RAP (s). The team has also proposed that payment of
                         compensation is a condition of disbursement and that the Borrower ensure that the international
                         organization recruited to provide technical support for implementation has a social development
                         specialist that can monitor the implementation of the livelihoods restoration measures. While
Public Disclosure Copy




                         much of the compensation process is governed by Cameroonian law, the GoC has prepared a RPF
                         that outlines the principles and standard to be used for the preparation of the methodological note
                         for the CCE. It is expected that this unified approach will reduce the amount of time required to
                         complete the process and avoid duplication of efforts and discrepancies between the Bank process
                         and the process under Cameroonian national law.

                         SONATREL is embryonic; it has a board but his operational organizational chart is still to be
                         defined. A functional Environment, Social and Safety Department (ESSD) should be part of this
                         chart under the Deputy General Manager Office. An international technical assistance (ITA) will
                         be competitively recruited to support SONATREL start-up and operationalization. ITA duties will
                         include support for individual and institutional capacity building (development of a capacity
                         building plan for SONATREL; elaboration of an environmental policy for an integrated ISO
                         certification scheme; development of environmental and social management tools, etc.). ITA shall
                         propose ESSD man date, organizational chart, generic job profiles and logistics needed for a
                         gradually deployment of an Environment, Social and Safety function at SONATREL.

                         The Project Implementing Unit will hire a socio-environmental specialist who will prepare the
                         relevant environmental and social instruments that are needed prior the arrival of ITA. The ITA
                         will continue to collaborate with this Specialist during an interim period that will be defined
                         during the first year of project implementation.

                                                                    Page 6 of 9
                           During the preparation of the various frameworks, a comprehensive consultation was carried out
                           in the area of the three networks (South, North, and East Interconnected Networks).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The proposed project beneficiaries are current and future electricity consumers, including the poor,
                           who are disproportionately excluded due to the lack of reliable and efficient transmission capacity
                           to service demand. Additional transmission capacity created under the proposed project will help
                           increase productivity and spur economic growth that will benefit all Cameroonians through
                           improved stability in power supply and advances in job creation, poverty reduction, and improved
                           prospects for shared prosperity. A robust consultation process was undertaken as part of the
                           preparation of the ESMF, RPF and IPPF.

                           The ESMF includes a proposed consultation framework for each site specific investment and the
                           IPPF outlines the process to identify and consult with potentially affected indigenous
                           communities. During the first six months, the APM will prepare a consultation and communication
                           plan for the whole project and will implement it with the collaboration of SONATREL.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Jul-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          28-Jul-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Jul-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          28-Jul-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      01-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   27-Jul-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Senegal                                                          28-Jul-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

                          100 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          100 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         OP/BP 4.36 - Forests


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             and constraints been carried out?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project design include satisfactory measures to          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             overcome these constraints?
                             Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             does it include provisions for certification system?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Stephan Claude Frederic Garnier,Jan Friedrich Kappen
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                    Date: 23-Aug-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Richard H. Hosier (PMGR)               Date: 24-Aug-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 9 of 9
