                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                APPRAISAL STAGE
.




                                                                                           Report No.:ISDSA22013
Date ISDSPrepared/Updated:                  03-May-2017
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed                20-Mar-2017
I. BASIC INFORMATION
    1. Basic Project Data
    Country:                           Afghanistan                  Project ID:               P147147
    Project Name:                      URBAN DEVELOPMENT SUPPORT PROJECT (P147147)
    Task Team Leader(s):               Sateh Chafic El-Arnaout,Hyoung Gun Wang
    Estimated Appraisal                21-Mar-2017                  Estimated Board           13-Jun-2017
    Date:                                                           Date:
    Managing Unit:                     GSU12                        Financing                 Investment Project
                                                                    Instrument:               Financing
    Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency                    Recovery) or OP             No
    8.00(Rapid Response to Crises and         Emergencies)?
                                               Financing (In USD Million)
    Total Project Cost:           20.00                           Total Bank Financing: 20.00
    Financing Gap:                0.00
      Financing Source                                                                                         Amount
    BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                              0.00
    IDA Grant                                                                                                      20.00
    Total                                                                                                          20.00
    Environmental Category:            B - Partial Assessment
    Is this a Repeater project?        No

    2. Project Development Objective(s)
    The Project Development Objectives are to (i) create an enabling policy framework and enhance urban policy
    making capacity in relevant agencies at the national level; and (ii) strengthen city planning, management and
    service delivery capacity in five Provincial Capital Cities (PCCs).
    3. Project Description
    The Project will provide technical assistance and training to national level urban policy makers, city level
    planners and technical personnel. It will help to develop an Urban Management Information System (UMIS) to
    support informed policy decision-making; capacity development through structured training on urban policy,
    land use planning, affordable housing policies and urban redevelopment, among other areas; specific urban
    diagnostic tools will be introduced at the local level, such as an Urban Audit, to diagnose deficiencies in current
    service delivery and to help develop strategies for responding. The project will also support participating
    municipalities in preparing strategic development plans to promote sustainability in future development. Each

                                                     Page 1 of 7
city will have a Capital Investment Plan (CIP) prepared and priority investments will be developed into
bankable, tender-ready projects through the Urban Development Support Project (UDSP)-supported feasibility
and design studies under Component 4.

Project Components

The Project design consists of five components to be implemented by the Ministry of Urban Development and
Housing (MUDH) in close collaboration with the five participating municipalities of Herat, Jalalabad,
Kandahar, Khost and Mazar-e-Sharif. This Project design builds on the premise that spatial planning, urban
development and service provision require sound transversal management and strong vertical and horizontal
coordination among various stakeholders concerned. This is essential in a context where major cities in
Afghanistan are facing mounting socio-economic challenges coupled with tight fiscal constraints. The total
estimated project cost is US$20.00 million focusing on building the 4 Urban “I”s (i.e. Urban Information, Urban
Institutions, Urban Integration and Urban Investments), as follows:

Component 1- Urban Information: Building an Urban Management Information System (UMIS, US$1.50
million). This component will finance: (i) technical assistance to create the database and web architecture for the
UMIS; (ii) design and implementation of surveys, and analysis of data gathered by municipalities; and (iii)
annual data updates as well as maintenance of hardware and software of the UMIS.

Component 2 – Urban Institutions: Institutional and Capacity Development (US$4.50 million). This component
will finance: (i) implementation of an Urban Planning Functional Review of the urban planning functions and
capacities of MUDH and other relevant agencies, as well as the planning functions and capacities under the
participating PCCs, and the preparation of an Action Plan for technical assistance to be supported by UDSP
over the course of its three year implementation period; (ii) technical assistance and advisory services for
capacity development in MUDH and the Participating PCCs in select areas, including urban policies,
procurement, contract management, financial management and internal audit, all in accordance with the
functional review; (iii) preparation of a series of policy notes and strategy papers in four defined policy work
streams as follows: (a) Planning and Land Use Management, (b) Urban Regeneration through public-private
partnerships, (c) Affordable Housing, and (d) Municipal Finance; and (iv) provision of training through in-
country structured training programs, as well as customized out-of-country group and individual training
programs. This will include, inter alia, setting an urban policy agenda, urban redevelopment guidelines, zoning
regulations, affordable housing policy, mechanisms that promote private-public partnerships in urban
development, and municipal finance, as well as strategies for urban disaster risk management/resilience and in-
country structured training programs and custom-designed out-of-country group and individualized training
programs.

Component 3 – Urban Integration: Strengthening Urban Planning at National and Local Levels (US$5 million).
This component will integrate urban planning and development, supported by technical consultancies, goods,
and information technology-related hardware and software, including training, for: (i) development of
curriculum for urban planning practitioners; and (ii) preparation of local Strategic Development Plans (SDPs) at
the five PCCs, taking into account an inventory of existing planning and land use conditions, land use efficiency
and service provision. The component will include development of guidelines, manuals, tools and systems,
including procurement of satellite imagery, for carrying out local planning functions. Each of the SDPs will be
widely discussed with community groups through a series of workshops and will include a gender-based
assessment of access to municipal services to identify specific gaps and options for addressing them in the SDP.
This assessment and at least one priority project for women to be included in each participating city's SDP will
be indicators monitored under UDSP.

Component 4 – Urban Investments: Feasibility and Design Studies for Urban Infrastructure (US$7 million).


                                                 Page 2 of 7
This Component will be implemented by MUDH in coordination with IDLG and the five participating PCCs to
support the preparation of multi-year Capital Investment Plans (CIPs) linked to the SDPs and feasibility studies
for both priority and catalytic projects in the five participating PCCs. Priority investments are "no regret"
projects that can be implemented quickly that will be identified in consultation with local stakeholders. Catalytic
investments will be identified under the SDPs and will help attract productive investments to the cities, aimed at
supporting economic development and job creation.

UDSP will support sub-projects that protect and improve tangible urban built heritage and urban and city region
eco-systems. All supportive infrastructure to the above will be part of the feasibility studies. This is of critical
importance today given the formidable demographic, social and economic pressures being exerted on PCCs as a
result of the massive and sudden influx of Afghan IDPs and returnees. As such, establishing a level-playing field
for economic opportunities to both the host communities and the forcibly displaced population becomes a top
urban policy priority. Only the detailed designs of priority investments would be financed under this
component. These will be based on economic/financial analysis and alternative design considerations, with the
aim of minimizing any potential social or environmental impacts and will pave the way for a follow-on
performance-based “Cities Investment Program (CIP)” proposed for financing by the World Bank.
4. Project location and Salient physical characteristics                 relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known)
The Project will be focused on supporting national agencies based in Kabul and 5 participating municipalities of
Herat, Jalalabad, Kandahar, Khost and Mazar-e-Sharif in regional provinces. No physical works will be
financed under the project. Two areas identified where a focus on safeguards will be needed are the Project's
support for land use planning, and for preparation of design and feasibility studies for priority infrastructure
investments to improve service delivery. Both sets of activities will include in their TOR provisions for
appropriate public consultations and for exploring and developing mitigation measures for any environmental or
social safeguards risks that might emerge.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the                     Team
 Mohammad Arif Rasuli( GEN06 )
 Mohammad Yasin Noori( GSU06 )
6. Safeguard Policies That Might Apply
Safeguard Policies                             Triggered?      Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01            Yes             The Project is classified as Category B for
                                                               environmental assessment purposes. Components 3
                                                               (Urban Planning) and 4 (Investment Feasibility and
                                                               Design Studies) are foreseen to have potential
                                                               downstream environmental and social impacts, for
                                                               which an ESMF/RPF has been prepared as a
                                                               guiding framework, including guidance on
                                                               preparing ESMPs and RAPs as relevant.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                    No              The Project is not foreseen to trigger this safeguard
                                                               policy as it will be implemented in urban areas
                                                               where natural habitats are not involved.
Forests OP/BP 4.36                             No              The Project is not foreseen to trigger this safeguard
                                                               policy as it will be implemented in urban areas
                                                               where there are no forests.
Pest Management OP 4.09                        No              The Project is not foreseen to trigger this safeguard

                                                 Page 3 of 7
                                                        policy as it does not involve pest management.
Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11   Yes            This policy is triggered because the feasibility and
                                                        design studies for critical infrastructure in the
                                                        selected cities may cover the old city areas, which
                                                        are rich in physical cultural resources. The ESMF
                                                        includes screening provisions for evaluating
                                                        potential impacts and provides specific guidance for
                                                        the preparation of requisite cultural heritage
                                                        management plans.

                                                        The ESMF will also comprise guidelines for
                                                        Chance Find Procedures according to national law.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10            No             This policy is not triggered as there are no
                                                        Indigenous Peoples that meet the criteria of OP/BP
                                                        4.10 within the selected areas that could potentially
                                                        benefit or be adversely affected by the Project's
                                                        activities.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12      Yes            This policy is triggered because the TA activities
                                                        under components 3 & 4 may result in downstream
                                                        implications that could impact individuals and/or
                                                        communities in different ways.
                                                        Given that the precise details of all TA activities,
                                                        particularly the preparation of feasibility and design
                                                        studies for critical infrastructure under component
                                                        4, are unknown, an ESMF and Resettlement Policy
                                                        Framework (RPF) were prepared to guide
                                                        preparation of ESMPs and RAPs (where needed).
                                                        Any policies that may be developed that might have
                                                        a social impact will be assessed as part of the TORs
                                                        of the Consultants. Participating municipalities will
                                                        prepare and implement ESMPs and RAPs (where
                                                        needed) as part of the Feasibility/Design Studies for
                                                        critical infrastructure investments under Component
                                                        4.
                                                        The ESMF contains the requisite comprehensive
                                                        Terms of Reference (TORs) for the ESMPs and
                                                        RAPs. ESMF consultations with stakeholders,
                                                        including the participating municipalities were
                                                        conducted on February 13, 2017 in Kabul and
                                                        minutes from consultation are included in the final
                                                        ESMF. TORs for ESMPs and RAPs will be
                                                        disclosed and consulted on in the cities where
                                                        feasibility studies are carried out that warrant the
                                                        use of these safeguard instruments prior to
                                                        implementing the feasibility studies. The ESMF and
                                                        RPF were disclosed in-country on MUDH and at
                                                        the participating municipalities’ websites on March
                                                        18, 2017, and at the WB’s external website prior to
                                                        project appraisal.

                                          Page 4 of 7
    Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                      No              This safeguard policy was not triggered, as Dams
                                                                   are not within the scope of the Project.
    Projects on International Waterways OP/BP No                   This safeguard policy was not triggered, as the
    7.50                                                           Project does not address any international
                                                                   waterways.
    Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60          No              This safeguard policy was not triggered, as there are
                                                                   no disputed areas within the Project scope.
.




    II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
    1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify and describe
    any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
    The Project is fully devoted to providing critical training and technical assistance to targeted national agencies
    and local governments. It involves no physical works and has no footprint. However, it involves developing
    strategic development plans and land use plans at the city level, which will have a bearing on future physical
    works. As such, all planning elements of the project will be subjected to public consultations, as specific stages
    and tasks in the consultant TORs are implemented. in keeping with international good urban planning practices.
    This provision will be assured through the World Bank team's review of draft TORs and monitoring of
    consultant service deliverables to ensure compliance with the TORs.
    2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the
    project area:
    Physical planning is likely to have downstream impacts on areas that will benefit from prepared infrastructure
    investments, as well as proposed new land uses. These will be the focus of the planned community consultations
    under the project. Land use planning carried out under the project will need to be formally reviewed, presented
    and adopted by the local councils in consultation with their communities.
    3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse impacts.
    The project is designed to set the stage for an ambitious investment program over time. Investments were
    explicitly left out of the project design to ensure simplicity of project design and a concerted focus on planning
    and preparing high priority investment projects that will require performance-based measures to access
    financing at a later stage by local governments.
    4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an assessment of
    borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
    MUDH has experience in implementing World Bank investment projects and the Bank's guidelines on social
    and environmental safeguards were reviewed at the launch workshop for the Project Preparation Grant. The
    Borrower intends to hire a dedicated Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialist (ESSS) at MUDH to
    follow up on all social and environmental safeguards issues. The ESSS will be providing inputs to the quarterly
    UDSP progress report, which will be reviewed and monitored by the World Bank team. MUDH will ensure
    inclusion in the TORs of consulting firms preparing feasibility and design studies provisions for preparing
    ESMPs and RAPs in the event that relevant social and environmental safeguards are triggered. Because there
    are no physical works to be financed under the project, the Project design ensures that implementation risks are
    limited to the planning phase only.
    5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure on
    safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
    The main stakeholders for the Project are MUDH, participating municipalities and the residents of the five
    participating PCCs. Specific project design measures adopted to ensure consultation include formal staged

                                                     Page 5 of 7
   public consultations for all key phases of the land use planning elements of the project. In addition, MUDH,
   with support from the team ESSS, will set up a Grievance Redress Mechanism, so that any community that
   wishes to voice its views about the Project may do so through a transparent and clear mechanism. All TORs for
   feasibility and design studies will include a specific task to review potential adverse social or environmental
   impacts and appropriate mitigation measures for potential investment projects.
   .




B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                                            13-Feb-2017
Date of submission to InfoShop                                         17-Mar-2017
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
PHENVCTRY




    Afghanistan                                                                  20-Mar-2017
 Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
 Date of receipt by the Bank                                      13-Feb-2017
 Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Mar-2017
 "In country" Disclosure
PHRESCTRY




 Afghanistan                                                                20-Mar-2017
 Comments:
 If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the respective
issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/Audit/or EMP.
 If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why::



C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
PHCompliance




 OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)         Yes []        No [X]        NA           []
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice        Yes []        No []         NA           []
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP                 Yes []        No []         NA           []
 incorporated in the credit/loan?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
 Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural         Yes []        No []         NA           [X]
 property?
 Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the       Yes [X]       No []         NA           []
 potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
PHCompliance




 OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy                   Yes [X]       No []         NA           []
 framework/process framework (as appropriate) been
 prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards     Yes [X]       No []         NA           []
 or Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                     Yes []        No [X]        TBD          []


                                                   Page 6 of 7
          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access    Yes []      No [X]      TBD   []
          to assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means
          of livelihoods)
PHCompliance




          The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          World Bank's Infoshop?
          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a          Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          public place in a form and language that are understandable
          and accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
PHCompliance




          All Safeguard Policies
          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
          measures related to safeguard policies?
          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been            Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          included in the project cost?
          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
          related to safeguard policies?
          Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [X]     No []       NA    []
          with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
          the project legal documents?


         III. Approval
         Task Team Leader(s):                  Name:Sateh Chafic El-Arnaout,Hyoung Gun Wang
         Approved By:
         Practice Manager/Manager:             Name: Peter D. Ellis (PMGR)          Date: 03-May-2017




                                                         Page 7 of 7
