INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 12904
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 18-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        Bulgaria                   Project ID:   P154219
Project Name:   Deposit Insurance Strengthening Project (P154219)
Task Team       Alexander Pankov
Leader(s):
Estimated        16-Sep-2015               Estimated     30-Oct-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFMDR                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Banking (100%)
Theme(s):       International financial standards and systems (100%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     230.00            Total Bank Financing:  230.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                         0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development         230.00
Total                                                         230.00
Environmental C - Not Required
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to help maintain the confidence of depositors and strengthen
the financial safety net, by improving the financial and institutional capacity of the Bulgarian Deposit
Insurance Fund (BDIF).
C. Project Description
The proposed operation responds to the request from authorities for the WB's financial support for
BDIF in order to maintain confidence in the market, and improve BDIF's capacity to perform its


﻿legally-mandated functions (deposit payout and overseeing the liquidation of insolvent banks). The
Ministry of Finance (MOF) has indicated their preference that the WB enters into a financing
agreement directly with BDIF, under a sovereign guarantee.
Two possible instruments have been considered by the team: (i) investment loan with contingent
O
U       financing; and (ii) investment loan with direct financing based on disbursement linked indicators
(DLIs).
Strengthening the market confidence by promptly rebuilding BDIF's financial capacity should be the
key consideration in choosing the instrument of WB's engagement. In parallel to providing prompt
financing, the WB engagement should ideally support the BDIF's further institutional development.
Possible areas for improvement noted during pre-identification mission include: (i) achieving and
maintaining a more prudent funding ratio using various sources (bank premiums (including risk-
based and extraordinary ones), recoveries from insolvent banks, external creditors, and government
back up funding, if necessary); (ii) improving BDIF's independence as an important player in the
financial safety net and information sharing between BDIF and other financial safety net participants;
(iii) improving the performance of BDIF's mandate to pay-out deposits within a shorter pay out
timeframe; and (iv) recover assets from insolvent banks.
In the case of Bulgaria, the team's preferred option would be a results-based IPF of at least £200
million to replenish the BDIF's reserves. The funds to be provided under the results-based IPF meet
the OP/BP 10.00 productive use requirement as funding for a Deposit Insurance Scheme helps to
increase confidence in the financial system and thus maintain macroeconomic stability. The
instrument would be disbursed using the results of the upcoming assessment against IADI Core
Principles.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Due to its nature, the Project is not expected to entail any environmental, social or other safeguards
issues.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
Not applicable
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
0
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    No          There will not be any type of civil/rehabilitation
OP/BP 4.01                              works and land acquisition for the project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11


﻿Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  No
BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
O
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 30-Jun-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Not applicable
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alexander Pankov
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                          Date: 12-May-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Ilias Skamnelos (PMGR)                      Date: 18-May-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


