INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC1401 1
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 30-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 07-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Kosovo                     Project ID:   P152881
Project Name:    Kosovo: Competitiveness and Jobs (P15288 1)
Task Team        Jieun Choi,Blerta Qerimi
Leader(s):
Estimated        17-Feb-2016                Estimated     06-Jul-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTC03                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General public administration sector (10%), SME Finance (20%), Other social
services (20%), General industry and trade sector (50%)
Theme(s):        Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (20%), Technology diffusion
(20%), Export development and competitiveness (30%), Improvin g labor
markets (20%), Trade facilitation and market access (10%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      25.00             Total Bank Financing:     0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                         25.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development             0.00
Total                                                            25.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
Enhance Kosovo's competitiveness and impact on employment by facilitating trade, fostering SME
growth, and improving labor market intermediation and relevance of vocational training.
C. Project Description


﻿Component 1 - Trade quality facilitation and integration (US$ 8 million)
This component aims to support the government to receive international accreditation for metrology/
accreditation/certification system, thus to protect domestic market against low quality products and
to be compliant with EU and WTO rules regarding free movement of goods. Also, this component
will support the government to reduce administration burden for exporters/importers in cross borders,
thus lower the costs of products thus increasing the competitiveness of Kosovar products. All of
these activities are ultimately expected to result in more exports and integration with the EU and
neighboring countries. There are two sub-components under this component: 1.1 Improving national
quality infrastructure and systems, and 1.2. Trade facilitation.
Sub-component 1.1. Modernization of the National Quality Infrastructure (NQI) - This sub
component with proposed allocation of US$ 5.5 million comprises of investment lending in:
(i) Strengthening capacities of NQI staff (metrology, accreditation, standardization) through
providing technical advice to quality institutions (metrology and accreditation in particular, as well as
sanitary and phytosanitary [SPS] agencies) in order to become internationally recognized;
(ii)   Equipping metrology and FVA laboratories and help them become internationally accredited;
(iii)  In addition, the project will support the Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI) to create
management processes between MTI and NQI institutions for quality oversight.
And US$ 0.5 million results based lending in:
(iv)   Creation of feedback mechanisms and feedback loops between the private sector, ministries,
and NQI agencies that should influence policy change going forward;
(v)    Assistance in adoption of NQI strategy, and in adapting the legal and regulatory framework
to enable operational independency of accreditation and metrology agencies;
(vi)   Support the government to establish a central coordinating point for market surveillance,
while technical advice will be provided to improve market surveillance inspection, as well as other
inspections.
Sub-component 1.2. Trade facilitation - This sub component with proposed allocation of US$ 1.5
O
million comprises of investment lending in:
(i) Kosovo's border agencies to operationally implement the transit facilitation corridors with
neighboring country(ies);
(ii)   Helping to establish a single-window online G2B platform for border agencies (customs,
food and venerate agency laboratories, and a central coordinating point for market surveillance).
And US$0.5 million results based lending in:
(iii)  Customs and other border agencies, including quarantine and food safety agencies operating
at the border, to align their processes and procedures with WTO's Trade Facilitation Agreement and
reduce documentation requirements;
(iv)   Kosovo customs with further development of trusted traders' regimes and post clearance
audit competencies;
Component 2 - SME development and investment climate reforms (US$ 7.5 million)
The aim of this component is to promote SME development by providing targeted support to
increase standards, foster exports, and improve their competitiveness, as well as improve the business
environment and reduce the administrative burden for businesses in order to create a transparent and
efficient operating environment for both local and foreign companies.
The work will partially build on ongoing advisory support provided under the IFC Kosovo


﻿Investment Climate Project (2013 - 2016) which focuses on business regulation and investment
policy. A follow-up T&C Investment Climate II advisory project will be designed to provide
continued technical assistance with potential SECO financing. This component consists of two sub-
components: Sub-component 2.1. Enhancing Business Environment and sub-component 2.2.
Developing SMEs.
Sub-component 2.1. Enhancing Business Environment - This sub-component aims to increase
transparency and efficiency in interactions between the state and firms, both foreign and local,
through upgrading business registration, improving regulatory quality, and targeting investment
policy. Investment lending will be provided mainly for: (i) business registration and (ii) inspections
reform, while results based financing will be provided to support: (i) introducing regulatory impact
assessment, (ii) streamlining permits and licenses, and (iii) strengthen investment policy framework.
A one stop shop model might be used. To supplement the technical assistance necessary to achieve
these results the advisory project Investment Climate II will be used.
This sub component with proposed allocation of US$ 3 million comprises of investment lending in:
(i) Support to KBRA to extend business registration services in the north of Kosovo through
establishing three to four new MBCs;
(ii)   enhance activities of seven regional MBCs and equip them to provide a wider range of
services for businesses;
(iii)  upgrade the current software KBRA uses to achieve online business registration and
implement a unique business identifier for registered companies;
(iv)   introduce standard procedures for business inspections in Kosovo at all levels; reduce the
number of individual inspection bodies (through mergers, and organizational and operational
changes); introduce better internal controls, better governance standards, and a risk-based approach
and business enabling inspections, while at the same time protecting public health and safety; and
finally reduce ambiguity and close the regulatory implementation gap.
And US$0.5 million results based lending in:
(i)    Further support in the establishment of a RIA unit in the central government, and creation of
RIA units across ministries. Technical assistance for continuous capacity building can be provided
through the supplementary advisory project.
o       Sub-component 2.2 Developing SMEs - This sub-component supports SMEs to increase standards,
improve access to markets, and foster innovation by improving the effectiveness of KIESA through
results based finance and providing matching grants through investment lending.
This sub component with proposed allocation of US$ 3.5 million comprises of investment lending in:
(i) Establishment of the matching grants facility for enterprise upgrades and export readiness.
Currently lack of access to finance and poor quality of goods/services produced impede firm growth
and exports. The matching grants scheme will address these issues. Additionally, the scheme will
help increase demand for the NQI, help build a culture of use of management consultants, and
improve competitiveness of firms (especially export-oriented firms) in key sectors.
And US$0.5 million results based lending in support to KIESA that is based on the following
achievements:
(i) Improving the capacity of the organization through staffing and imparting required skills sets
to personnel,
(ii)   Improving the monitoring and evaluation process of KIESA by incorporating annual reviews
and action plans and independent evaluations, and


﻿(iii)  Providing the necessary state budget for the staff and activities outlined in its action plans.
Technical assistance to increase KIESA's capacity will be provided through the Investment Climate
2 advisory project.
O
U       Component 3 - Labor market intermediation and skills development (US$ 8 million)
This component will support the Kosovo Employment 2020 Strategy and the Skills Vision 2020
Strategy. The aim of this component is to (i) implement competency-based learning and improving
the responsiveness of the education and training system to labor market demands; (ii) foster
entrepreneurship and innovation; (iii) modernize employment services to meet the needs of the labor
market; and (iv) enhance capacities for coordinated sector policy development and implementation.
This is planned to be achieved by implementation of two sub-components: 3.1 Improving labor
market intermediation and active labor market programs and 3.2. Improve relevance of vocational
education and training.
Sub-component 3.1 Improving labor market intermediation and active labor market programs - This
sub-component aims to strengthen labor market intermediation services, by supporting the public
employ ment services (PES) for unemployed and inactive people and the active labor market
programs. The following will be supported:
(i) Public employment services (PES) modernization,
(ii)   Development of labor management information system (LMIS),
(iii)  Improving design of active labor market programs,
(iv)  Improving access to childcare - testing a new child care in Kosovo.
Sub-component 3.2 Improve relevance of vocational education and training - This sub-component
would support the reform agenda led by the Ministry of Education, Science, and Technology
(MEST) and the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare (MLSW) to improve quality assurance and
relevance of vocational education and training (VET) provision in Kosovo. It would also aim to
strengthen inter-ministerial and interagency coordination in the development and implementation of
the main improvements needed in VET.
0
This sub-component would finance following activities:
(i) Establishing systems and processes that ensure a sustainable link of the vocational training
provision with the National Qualifications Framework (NQF) and the quality assurance and
a certification process led by the National Qualifications Agency (NQA). These activities lead to
improvements in the quality and relevance of training profiles, clear definition of occupational
competencies, and accreditation of training programs and providers of vocational education and
training.
(ii)   Technical assistance to carry out the mapping of profiles, the consolidation of professional
profiles, and the development of specific occupational standards and learning outcomes. This
component would also support and facilitate the update and modernizations of training programs for
select priority professional fields
(iii)  Modernization of vocational training centers
(iv)   Strengthening the foundation of a modem upper secondary VET system.
Rather than being stand-alone components, they are designed to be complementary, as synergies
between the components continue to evolve and be elaborated.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)


﻿Competitiveness and Job Creation Project has a national scope. The sub-project activities are
expected to take place throughout Kosovo. The activities consist mostly of technical assistance to
Kosovo government and relevant competent bodies (such as Ministry of Education, Science and
Technology Development, Ministry of Trade and Industry, Ministry of Economy), policy and system
reforms as well as implementation of programs for improving institutional capacities to facilitate
trade, export in particular, create climate for SMEs and foreign and domestic investments, and
harmonization of vocational education with labor market needs. In addition, some equipment
purchase will take place and, potentially, some smaller construction work on rehabilitation of
buildings.
Construction works, in form of rehabilitation of buildings, are possible within sub-component 1.1.
Modernization of the National Quality Infrastructure (NQI) for upgrading of laboratories to
accreditation level; 2.1 Establishing Business Environment as a part of the investment in
establishment of three to four new Municipal Business Centers; 3.1. Improving labor market
intermediation and active labor market programs for modernization of Public employment services
buildings and sub-component 3.2 Improve relevance of vocational education and training in the part
of modernization of vocational training centers. There will be no construction of new buildings. In all
cases, the location of centers and laboratories as well as size of works are unknown at this point
although expected to be only minor rehabilitation or small-scale building construction. Also, it can be
expected that the location of works will be in urbanized areas. The exact locations and size of works
will be known prior to the appraisal stage. Sub-component 2.2 Developing SMEs (especially export
oriented firms), will provide matching grants through investment lending. The funds will be used to
improve competitiveness of firms, implying investments and working capital. SMEs throughout a
country will be supported. There are several potential exported oriented key sectors identified so far,
namely: agro processing, textile, vegetable products, hides and skins, and ICT sector.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The overall government's capacity is rated low, so is the safeguard policy implementation capacity.
In general, there is a small pool of available human resources resulting in low technical expertise in
0
U       all areas.
There are three implementing agencies to the Project: Ministry of Trade and Industry (MTI),
Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare (MLSW) and Ministry of Education, Science and Technology
*       (MEST), which will carry out main activities of the project. It was recommended that the Project
Implementation Unit (PIU) would be set within MTI since most of the beneficiary agencies are
placed under MTI. The implementing agencies have different levels of capacity, though all have a
certain level of experience working with the WB. While MEST and MSWL have some experience
implementing WB projects (via international Development and Education Project and Development
Policy Operations), MTI has carried out FIY projects. Nevertheless, the experience was gained
mostly on policy development projects and there is an evident lack of capacity in understanding
Bank's safeguards procedures for investment lending and for the eligible expenditure programs.
Capacity is also generally weak at the municipal level. A one day training of the staff in the MTI,
MEST and MLSW is envisaged during project preparation by WB environmental specialist.
Some activities, including setting up three one stop shops within the sub-component 2.1. Enhancing
Business Environment will take place in parts of Kosovo which is predominantly inhabited by
Serbian minority (e.g. Municipalities Zubin Potok, Zvecan, Leposavic) that does not accept Republic
of Kosovo as an independent state, but require governance from the Republic of Serbia. Inclusion of
the northern territories creates additional uncertainties since the competent bodies of the Republic of


﻿Kosovo, including MTI, MLSW and MEST, are not recognized as legitimate, by the local
population, on these territories.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
0
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The investments proposed in the sub-components
OP/BP 4.01                               1.1., 2.1, 3.1. and 3.2 include carrying out
rehabilitation works on buildings. If financed, the
works will consist of rehabilitation works carried out
in already used government owned facilities (e.g.
laboratories and cross-border agencies) or
municipality offices (one stop shops). For the sub-
component 2.2. Development of SMEs, the project
will provide matching grants (investments / working
capital) to variety of SME (export oriented). Key
(export oriented) sectors, identified until this point,
are ICT services, food processing, agriculture, textile
and mining (coal).
A two-part ESMF is proposed which will cover (a)
sub-components with rehabilitations of buildings and
(b) for sub-component 2.2 which includes
development of SMEs. The objective of the ESMF
should be that all investments and reforms supported
under the Project will be environmentally and
socially sound and sustainable (e.g., improvement of
quality of goods/services as a result of matching
grants facility leads to inclusive market access) and
consistent with WB Safeguards Policies and Kosovar
national legislation. The ESMF will include
guidance and assignment of responsibilities for
monitoring and mitigating sector specific social and
environmental risks relevant for project financed
SMEs.
For sub-components with refurbishment and
construction the ESMF should include a basic
resettlement screening checklist to identify early any
land acquisition issues (e.g., land ownership,
informal use of government land/facilities). For those
building works already identified, environmental due
diligence documents will be prepared prior to
appraisal. Rehabilitation works on buildings present
temporary, predictable and site specific


﻿environmental impacts for which EMP Checklists
will be prepared. In the case of larger construction
works would be necessary at a particular location or
the location of works proves to have special
historical or environmental value, EMP should be
developed.
Part of the ESMF sealing with the development of
SMEs will be prepared in line with the eligibility
criteria for SME financing agreed between the Bank
and the Borrower.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No         Works are expected to take place in highly urbanized
areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
Pest Management OP 4.09    TBD          Agriculture and food processing is one of Kosovo's
export oriented key sectors and it is possible the sub-
component 2.2. Development of SMEs will support
agriculture and food related sub-projects thus ESMF
will include guidance on Pest management, as well
as screening criteria for the assessing the need for
Pest Management Plan (PMP). If needed, the PMP
will be developed for individual sub-projects under
the aforementioned component.
Physical Cultural Resources  TBD        The scope of works include rehabilitation of existing
OP/BP 4.11                              governmental and municipality offices and buildings.
Possibility of works taking place in protected
historical buildings cannot be excluded at this point.
ESMF will set the procedures and/or instructions for
the cases of rehabilitation works taking pace in
historical buildings within the components 1.1, 2.1,
3.2 as well as chance findings and working in
historically significant areas within the sub-
component 2.2. Development of SMEs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP   No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ Yes        Given the limited physical nature of project
BP 4.12                                 components, it is unlikely that the project will have
negative social impacts in terms of land acquisition
and/or physical and economic displacement.
However, rehabilitation of public buildings
(component 3.2) and proposed establishment of 4
new business centers (component 2.1) may induce
land acquisition and displacement (e.g., of informal
occupants of government land/facilities). At this
point in time, all physical works are anticipated to
take place on public property, but a precautionary


﻿RPF will be developed in case the project causes
unexpected land acquisition or resettlement
(including informal occupants). By the time of
Appraisal, the risk of induced land acquisition will
be assessed and some assurance that the affected
public land is free from informal occupants will be
provided. The risk of unexpected land acquisition
and resettlement will be monitored throughout the
project preparation and implementation with a
resettlement screening checklist (part of ESMF).
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    No
Projects on International    No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Oct-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
EMP checklist will be prepared for all rehabilitations/ reconstructions that will be confirmed prior
to appraisal.
ESMF should be prepared prior to appraisal for SME sub-component. If rehabilitations /
reconstructions envisaged under other components will not beknown by the appraisal, ESMF
should include those as well.
O
Q)         The ESMF will require one public consultation and the pre-cautionary RPF will be made publicly
available on the Client's website and a hard copy should be available at the Client's premises. All
documents will be disclosed in local (Albanian and Serbian) languages and English and publically
discussed prior to appraisal. Local media will be used for the public consultation call.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jieun Choi,Blerta Qerimi
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Nina Chee (SA)                            Date: 07-Aug-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Paloma Anos Casero (PMGR)                 Date: 07-Aug-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


