                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSA5775
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 14-Jul-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jul-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kyrgyz Republic                   Project ID:    P132754
                            Project Name:      AGRICULTURE PRODUCTIVITY AND NUTRITION IMPROVEMENT
                                               PROJECT (P132754)
                            Task Team          Pieter David Meerbach,Kunduz Masylkanova
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       09-Mar-2015                          Estimated   08-Jan-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GWA03                                 Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                 Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (60%), Agricultural extension and research (20%),
                                              Health (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Nutrition and food security (30%),
                                              Water resource management (30%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:      38.00           Total Bank Financing:                   0.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                    0.00
                              Global Agriculture and Food Security Program                                               38.00
                              Total                                                                                      38.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          Yes
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective is to increase agricultural productivity and food and
                           nutrition security of rural households in selected areas nationwide.



                                                                       Page 1 of 9
                         3. Project Description
                         The project will have four components: (i) rehabilitation and modernization of irrigation and
                         drainage (I&D) infrastructure, (ii) agricultural advisory services; (iii) nutrition interventions; and (iv)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         project management. The project will be implemented in selected areas nationwide. The original
                         Government proposal to the GAFSP included a component on institutional development and capacity
                         building, and this component will be financed through a separate trust fund financed by the Swiss
                         Agency for Development and Cooperation (SDC).

                         Component 1: Rehabilitation and Modernization of I&D Infrastructure (estimated costs US$ 28.0
                         million). This component finances: (i) civil works for the rehabilitation and modernization of the
                         existing command area of I&D systems on about 60,000 ha managed by approximately 30 Water
                         Users Associations (WUAs) and Federations of WUAs (FWUAs); (ii) the provision of essential
                         maintenance equipment to WUAs and FWUAs; (iii) off-farm irrigation infrastructure, and water
                         measurement structures at the intakes of around 300 WUAs for measurement of water delivered; and
                         (iv) limited rehabilitation works on critical off-farm structures managed by the Department of Water
                         Resources and Land Improvement (DWRLI). Works to be carried out include the rehabilitation and
                         construction of on-farm I&D canals, outlets, water measurement and other hydraulic structures; and
                         some limited rehabilitation works on critical off-farm infrastructure to increase the capacity of six
                         pilot Raion Irrigation Department. Capacity-building for WUAs will be financed under a technical
                         assistance project under parallel-financing of SDC.

                         Component 2: Agricultural Advisory Services (estimated costs US$ 3.5 million). This component
                         will provide agriculture advisory services to WUA members within selected villages to increase
                         irrigated agricultural production and improve access to markets. The project will finance: (i) training
                         of WUAs selected for rehabilitation of I&D systems to contract and manage advisory services; (ii)
                         technical advisory services for 30 WUAs selected for rehabilitation works through provision of
                         grants; (iii) technical advisory services to WUA members in the 30 adjacent villages selected for
                         Components 2 and 3; (iv) advisory services for knowledge dissemination; and (v) on-farm water
Public Disclosure Copy




                         management demonstrations.

                         Component 3: Nutrition Improvements (estimated costs US$4.6 million). This component will
                         improve productivity, food security and nutrition levels of beneficiaries, especially women, female
                         adolescents and children, in 60 selected villages. The adjacent AA will be selected based on poverty,
                         health and nutrition indicators that are currently being monitored by the Ministry of Health at the
                         village level. It will also improve the coordination of food and nutrition security at the national level.

                         Component 4: Project Management (estimated costs US$ 1.9 million). This component will finance
                         project management staff, training, equipment and operational costs for the daily management,
                         administration, coordination, procurement, financial management (FM) and monitoring and
                         evaluation (M&E), in line with World Bank and GAFSP requirements and procedures.

                         The geographical scope is determined by the raions where the WUAs are selected, according to
                         selection criteria used under the Second On-farm Irrigation Project (OIP-2). To align with ongoing
                         efforts for inclusion and enhanced participation, the WUAs selected under the project will reflect
                         demographic and geographic balance. This will ensure a balanced beneficiary population with
                         equitable representation of various demographic groups. The WUAs will provide the initial target for
                         the agricultural advisory services and nutrition intervention components. Both components will be
                         aimed at WUA members but will be extended appropriately to include household plot owners,


                                                                        Page 2 of 9
                         vulnerable groups, and Village Health Committees (VHCs) to identify women, children and
                         vulnerable groups.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The project does not introduce new interventions, but expands or builds on activities under on-going
                         or successfully completed projects. Component 1, Rehabilitation and Modernization of I&D
                         Infrastructure , expands WUA rehabilitation financed by the World Bank and the Asian Development
                         Bank (ADB). Component 2, Agricultural Advisory Services, builds on experiences with the Rural
                         Advisory Services supported by the World Bank, International Fund for Agricultural Development
                         (IFAD) and the SDC. Component 3, Nutrition Improvements, builds on established VHCs and
                         nutrition interventions supported through projects financed or implemented by the World Bank,
                         ADB, UNICEF and the Global Alliance for Improved Nutrition (GAIN). This component further
                         contributes to better targeting of the most vulnerable population using a community-based approach.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project will target a number of irrigation systems that draw water from rivers that are
                         international waterways as defined by of OP 7.50. The exact locations of these irrigation systems are
                         not known at this point. Nevertheless, as with OIP-2, the most likely rivers to be affected by the
                         project include the Naryn River and its tributaries, the Talas River and its tributaries, and the Chui
                         River and its tributaries.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Alexei Slenzak (GENDR)
                         Asli Gurkan (GSURR)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The project has been classified as Category 'B' for
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     purposes of OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment
                                                                    because it is not expected to involve any large scale,
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    significant or irreversible adverse environmental impacts.
                                                                    Experience with both OIP-1 and OIP-2 to date has shown
                                                                    this to be the case. The project will not involve the
                                                                    construction of new irrigation systems. Any potential
                                                                    adverse environmental impacts are not expected to be
                                                                    significant and can be effectively prevented or minimized
                                                                    by application of appropriate preventive actions and/or
                                                                    mitigation measures. These measures are identified in the
                                                                    Environmental Management Plan (EMP), which has been
                                                                    prepared, based on the EMP of the OIP-2 AF. Since the
                                                                    original EMP of the OIP-2 AF was disclosed and subject
                                                                    to public consultation at the national level, the EMP for
                                                                    this project will be disclosed and consulted with WUAs
                                                                    and project areas which will directly benefit from the
                                                                    project activities, during project implementation. The
                                                                    updated EMP was disclosed prior to appraisal (on April
                                                                    16, 2014 in the country and on February 18, 2015 in
                                                                    Infoshop). There was no formal public consultation
                                                                    meeting prior to Appraisal because this was done for the



                                                                      Page 3 of 9
                                                        current version of the EMP recently, and no substantive
                                                        changes to the EMP were made. It was agreed that the
                                                        Team will share the draft TOR for the Advisory Services
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        component with the RSA when it is available.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP   No
                         4.04
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36       No

                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes    Training on Integrated Pest Management will be provided
                                                        under the project by the Rural Advisory Services (RAS).
                                                        The RAS are well experienced in this kind of training.
                         Physical Cultural        No
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   No
                         BP 4.10
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   Resettlement impact is expected at the rehabilitation site
                         OP/BP 4.12                     of Shakaftar headworks and canal that supplies irrigation
                                                        water to 1,500 ha of agricultural lands owned by farmers.
                                                        A basin for settling sediments in the canal is expected to
                                                        be partially situated on private land and will require land
                                                        acquisition. A Resettlement Action Plan was prepared for
                                                        the site, consulted, finalized and disclosed (April 16,
                                                        2014) prior to appraisal. In case there are other sites
                                                        detected later on with resettlement impacts, a
                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework was prepared to provide
                                                        the overall guidance. RPF was finalized and disclosed
                                                        prior to appraisal (March 18, 2015). For all other sites that
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        will lead to OP 4.12 -related impacts, site specific RAPS
                                                        will be disclosed and implemented before any
                                                        construction work can start.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP     Yes   As did OIP-2 before it, the project will follow a program
                         4.37                           approach, with the WUA-managed irrigation systems
                                                        eligible for rehabilitation to be selected during the first
                                                        years of AF implementation. Therefore, it is not yet
                                                        known whether there are any systems with water storage
                                                        reservoirs implicated in the project. However, experience
                                                        under OIP-1 and OIP-2 indicates that it is likely that
                                                        several systems will be selected that have small (less than
                                                        15 m in height) dams. Once this has been determined,
                                                        appropriate actions to ensure dam safety, including more
                                                        detailed inspections and safety measures, will be taken. In
                                                        the case of small-scale irrigation dams and night storage
                                                        reservoirs that may be part of a selected irrigation system,
                                                        special guidelines governing this situation will prepared
                                                        and the EMP will be updated.
                                                        Before any rehabilitation activities can take place at an


                                                         Page 4 of 9
                                                                   irrigation system to which these guidelines apply, the PIU
                                                                   will contract a qualified national design firm to make an
                                                                   engineering and safety assessment of the irrigation dam or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   storage reservoir in question, and prepare designs for the
                                                                   recommended measures. The consultants who will carry
                                                                   out the safety assessment will also look into the potential
                                                                   consequences of dam failure, including such principal
                                                                   criteria as the number of people at risk, and economic
                                                                   assets downstream that should be used to prioritize any
                                                                   intervention aimed at improving dam safety. The design
                                                                   engineers will also be retained to provide construction
                                                                   supervision of the rehabilitation works.
                                                                   The PIU will contract a qualified engineering contractor,
                                                                   one that has experience with small earthen dams and/or
                                                                   small storage reservoir systems, to perform the remedial
                                                                   measures recommended in the engineering and safety
                                                                   assessment. The PIU, through the engineering team, will
                                                                   oversee the implementation of any remedial measures
                                                                   performed at irrigation dams or storage reservoirs under
                                                                   the project. This procedure has worked satisfactorily
                                                                   under OIP-1.
                            Projects on International   Yes        The irrigation systems that will be rehabilitated under the
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                   project draw water from rivers that are international
                                                                   waterways shared by the Kyrgyz Republic with
                                                                   neighboring Kazakhstan, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan.
                                                                   Potential changes in water flow or deterioration in water
                                                                   quality during the construction works will be mitigated
                                                                   through implementation of the EMP. As there will not be
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   any enlargement of existing irrigation systems or
                                                                   development of any new irrigation areas, project
                                                                   interventions are not expected to adversely affect the
                                                                   quality or quantity of water flows to downstream riparian
                                                                   states. The rehabilitation and modernization of
                                                                   infrastructure and improvements in water management
                                                                   should result in an increase in system efficiency, thereby
                                                                   generating water savings and providing reliable water
                                                                   supply to the users. Consequently, the project falls under
                                                                   the exception to the riparian notification requirement
                                                                   contained in the safeguard policy. The RVP approved the
                                                                   request for exemption on May 28, 2015.
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:


                                                                     Page 5 of 9
                           Positive environmental impacts include reduction of water losses, enhanced water resource
                           management, increased agricultural productivity, and improved soil fertility. Negative
                           environmental impacts would include: (i) construction-related damage caused by contractors
Public Disclosure Copy




                           during construction activities, including dumping of excavated sediments and other materials from
                           irrigation canals and drainage collectors; (ii) a long-term risk of surface water contamination from
                           agrochemical pollution resulting from an increased use of pesticides in the future; and (iii) soil
                           erosion associated with existing practices of agricultural production.

                           Positive social impacts include agricultural productivity, nutritional improvements in particular for
                           women and children and livelihood and income gains resulting from rehabilitated irrigation
                           systems. Potential negative social impacts include land acquisition, resettlement, temporary loss of
                           economic livelihood as a result of potential crop losses, cutting of trees etc. caused by the
                           construction/rehabilitation of existing irrigation systems.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No indirect and/or long-term impacts are anticipated in the project area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Given that the APNIP is limited, by design, to rehabilitation of existing I&D infrastructure at
                           selected locations throughout the country, the usual analysis of alternatives in terms of location,
                           design or technology has limited applicability in this case. The decade of successes with the
                           proven approach taken by both OIP-1 and OIP-2 also argues against selecting alternatives for
                           APNIP. The "no action" alternative is not desirable from an economic, ecological or social point
                           of view. This alternative would allow the existing systems to continue to deteriorate, decreasing
                           water availability at the water user level, reducing the productivity of the agricultural lands,
                           increasing the loss and irrational use of water resources, increasing the likelihood of waterlogging
                           and soil salinization in some locations and, finally, increasing migration from rural areas. Given
Public Disclosure Copy




                           the importance of agriculture to the welfare of the local population and the critical role irrigation
                           plays for the country as a whole, the "no action" alternative would not be an acceptable option.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           To mitigate construction impacts, a site-specific environmental management plan (EMP) will be
                           prepared by the design consultants for each WUA-managed irrigation system, which will describe
                           in detail the measures proposed to prevent or mitigate construction-related environmental impacts.
                           Also, all construction contracts will have standard environmental, health and safety clauses
                           required by Kyrgyz legislation and IDA procedures. These two preventive measures should
                           address any potential adverse impacts from the rehabilitation activities.

                           Water quality issues will be addressed through preventive actions rather than mitigation measures.
                           The APNIP will ensure that farmers in the project WUAs receive information, training, and
                           extension services on proper irrigation and agricultural practices in order to: (i) minimize impacts
                           of drainage from saline soils; and (ii) promote the use of safe pest and pesticide. In order to
                           prevent soil erosion the project should ensure that farmers in the project WUAs receive
                           information, training and extension services on proper irrigation and agricultural practices
                           necessary to minimize impacts of soil erosion in areas prone to these problems.

                           In order to mitigate the land acquisition and resettlement-related impacts, the Borrower has


                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           prepared a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) to guide the preparation of site-specific
                           Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) later. A framework approach has been adopted as not all sub-
                           project sites will be known until project implementation is underway. Furthermore, for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Shafaktar site that is already selected, the Borrower has prepared a RAP. The PIU has recruited an
                           experienced safeguard specialist for APNIP, who will be responsible for both social and
                           environmental issues. The Borrower also has staff working on social mobilization - who will be
                           able to support consultations during implementation. The project has a robust Grievance Redress
                           Mechanism that is designed to address all project-related issues, including safeguards. Social risks
                           and impacts will be closely monitored throughout project implementation, as the PIU will be
                           required to submit the summary of the queries and complaints received and actions taken as part of
                           its regular M&E reports submitted to the Bank.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Farmers and WUAs, Department for Water Resources and Land Improvement, local governments.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        31-Mar-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     18-Feb-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive        ////
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                    09-Apr-2014
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-Jan-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     20-Mar-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Kyrgyz Republic                                                    18-Mar-2015
                           Comments:
                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                     NA
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        ////
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     ////
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level

                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                         OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                          Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                          Bank?
                          Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                         OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
                          Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                          notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
                          Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
                          Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?


                                                                     Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pieter David Meerbach,Kunduz Masylkanova
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)         Date: 15-Jul-2015
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
