                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA16697
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 24-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Vietnam                            Project ID:   P154387
                            Project Name:      Vietnam: Project for Improved Land Governance and Databases (VILG)
                                               (P154387)
                            Task Team          Hoa Thi Mong Pham
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       29-Mar-2016                           Estimated   26-May-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSULN                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        General information and communications sector (50%), General public
                                              administration sector (30%), General agriculture, fishing and fo restry sector
                                              (20%)
                            Theme(s):         Land administration and management (60%), e-Government (20%),
                                              Administrative and civil service reform (20%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:     180.00           Total Bank Financing:                 150.00
                            Financing Gap:            0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                          30.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                150.00
                              Total                                                                                      180.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to improve efficiency and transparency in land
                           administration services in selected provinces of Vietnam.

                                                                       Page 1 of 15
                         The PDO will be achieved through the development and implementation of the national Multi-
                         Purpose Land Information System (MPLIS), a unified system of Land Registration Offices (LROs),
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and a system to monitor the implementation of the Land Law, both at national and sub-national
                         levels.
                         3. Project Description
                         The project includes three components to be implemented at both the national and sub-national levels
                         as follows:
                         Component 1: Strengthening Quality of Land Service Delivery (US$ 8.98 million). This component
                         will support (a) modernizing and strengthening Land Registration Offices (LROs) to provide better
                         land services; (b) training and providing communication systems and awareness raising for
                         stakeholders, including implementation of ethnic minority development plans; and (c) establishing
                         and operating a monitoring and evaluation (M&E) system for land-use management.

                         This component aims to support quality enhancement of land service delivery by streamlining
                         service procedures and standards, renovating facilities, and building up the capacity of personnel
                         working in LROs in project provinces. The component will also help monitor the implementation of
                         land use and land management in accordance with Land Law 2013 and progressively respond to
                         current and emerging economic and social demands for better access to land information and better
                         land services. The component will support unification of business standards and LRO working
                         infrastructure at provincial and district levels. In addition, it will also enhance the participation of the
                         public, corporates, and other stakeholders through communication and awareness campaigns. The
                         activities under this component will facilitate and operationalize the technological advances that will
                         have been brought about in Component 2 of the project.

                         This component comprises three sub-components:
                         a.       Modernizing and strengthening LROs and encouraging change management processes;
                         b.       Training and providing communication systems, awareness raising, and engagement with
Public Disclosure Copy




                         civil society; and
                         c.       Establishing and operating an M&E system for land-use management.

                         Sub-component 1.1: Modernizing and strengthening LROs to provide better land services (US$ 7.56
                         million). This sub-component will help enhance the quality of land service delivery by developing
                         nationally consistent LRO procedures, guidelines, and standards and establishing unified LRO
                         service infrastructure necessary for the consistent implementation of Land Law 2013. At the national
                         level, support will include institutionalizing and modernizing standard services for land
                         administration and land management, including administrative reforms and change management for
                         modernizing LROs. At the sub-national level, local regulatory tools will be regularly reviewed and
                         updated, and LROs will be strengthened in line with nationally established service standards. These
                         standards will ensure that land-related information is available to land users, communities, and
                         concerned stakeholders in accordance with Land Law stipulations and that land services are properly
                         delivered, regardless of where and when they are rendered.

                         This sub-component will follow a three-part approach: (1) assess compliance to service standards by
                         provincial LROs followed by the preparation of an institutional development plan for LROs that
                         would be piloted and experiences reviewed; (2) based on the institutional development plan, provide
                         equipment and facilities to LROs such as computers, equipment for customer service area, feedback
                         and assessment devices, and public display boards and panels; and (3) train LRO personnel and build


                                                                        Page 2 of 15
                         up their capacities. As part of this, a training needs assessment will also be conducted and a master
                         training plan prepared. The training system must be expanded to reach not only those working in
                         LROs but all staff in the land administration sector within respective DONREs. Training curriculum
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and materials developed during VLAP will also be drawn and adopted for use.
                         GDLA has expressed its commitment to implement the institutional development plan and on-the-job
                         training to strengthen LRO institutional framework for improved service delivery and land database
                         updating. The relevant national and sub-national staff will provide the foundation for future learning
                         and training. These efforts will also strengthen public confidence in the government’s policies and
                         programs and local mass organizations will provide an ongoing forum for consultation.
                         This subcomponent will finance equipment, consultant services, training, goods, and incremental
                         operating costs.

                         Sub-component 1.2: Training and provision of communication systems, awareness raising, and
                         engagement with civil society including implementation of ethnic minority development plans (US$
                         0.57 million). The objective of this sub-component is to ensure that all concerned stakeholders and
                         entities, including the public and private sectors, at national and sub-national levels, and communities
                         improve awareness of and confidence in the land administration system. This is expected to lead to
                         increased use of MPLIS and services and a gradual increase in registration of land-use rights and
                         transactions. Increased awareness of and confidence in the land administration and database system
                         will lead to a cross-fertilization of information, and hence more efficiency in land management.

                         The sub-component will support “soft” investments in training and awareness-raising critical to
                         enhancing the behavior of key stakeholders, including government officials and land users. The sub-
                         component will also provide resources for developing institutional activities such as re-engineering
                         LRO/DONREs business practices and the environment, technical aspects such as the distributed
                         architecture and ICT solutions, and procedural issues regarding transactions. Areas such as human
                         resource development, information dissemination, community participation, and inclusion of women
                         and other vulnerable groups (such as ethnic minorities) that also require strengthening, will be
                         supported through the activities of this sub-component.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         As part of this sub-component, related provincial ethnic minority development plans will be prepared
                         and implemented to promote social inclusion of ethnic minority people. Good communication and
                         understanding of land users’ rights and obligations under the land-administration system and the
                         availability of and access to services and products is vital. Assessing the awareness of stakeholders
                         and their satisfaction with processes and products will be an important activity to shape
                         communication campaigns. Awareness raising and communication efforts will focus on informing
                         and encouraging wider public engagement to improve service delivery and good land governance,
                         and change existing public behavior in registering land use and transactions. Attention will be given
                         to vulnerable groups, such as ethnic minorities and women, in project provinces to ensure access to
                         land information, facilitating their demands for land rights registration.

                         This sub-component will support the preparation and finalization of communication and awareness-
                         raising programs, training, and preparation of information, education, and communication (IEC)
                         materials, tools, dissemination, and their implementation and monitoring. It will support the
                         development or update of the existing strategy and communication plan and its implementation in all
                         project provinces at provincial, district, and commune levels. Accordingly, this sub-component will
                         develop and implement an appropriate mix of communication, its delivery plan, and its
                         implementation to meet diversified stakeholder requirements throughout the country, including
                         necessary associate training, based on the Communication and Awareness Raising Strategy

                                                                      Page 3 of 15
                         developed under VLAP. To ensure that such communication is effective and relevant, the sub-
                         component will support a monitoring system to measure the impact of awareness raising and enable
                         appropriate course corrections as may be assessed throughout implementation. After monitoring
Public Disclosure Copy




                         feedback, adjustments will be made to systems and tools for public awareness and communications.

                         This sub-component will finance consultant services, the provision of hardware and software, and
                         training and incremental operating costs. Where feasible and where resources are available, VLAP’s
                         Local Facilitator methodology will be adopted and replicated to disseminate information and
                         encourage community monitoring of land service delivery.

                         Sub-component 1.3: Strengthening M&E in land use management (US$ 0.85 million). This sub-
                         component will establish a system for regular and sustainable monitoring and evaluation of the
                         implementation of land use and land management in accordance with Land Law 2013. This will
                         entail developing monitoring tools and instruments, which will cover the specific elements to be
                         monitored at both national and sub-national levels. It will involve enumerating the criteria to rate
                         implementation drawing upon best international instruments including the “Voluntary Guidelines on
                         the Responsible Governance of Tenure of Land, Fisheries and Forests in the Context of National
                         Food Security” (VGGT) endorsed in 2012 by the United Nations, the World Bank-funded “Land
                         Governance Assessment Framework” (LGAF) study of 2012-2014 and “Land Transparency” study
                         of 2013-14. A pilot of the sub-national monitoring will be undertaken in at least one province of each
                         of the three regions under the project. Thereafter, the system will be rolled out to all provinces under
                         the project and the frequency of monitoring, which could be annual, will be confirmed. More
                         comprehensive and detailed assessment would be undertaken in the second and final years of project
                         implementation.

                         As part of this sub-component, support will be provided to pilot innovative policy dialogue and field
                         experiments to improve knowledge transfer in land governance. The critical policy areas identified
                         for further research and elaboration include: rationalization of land registration and service delivery
                         processes; financial sustainability of land services including operationalizing of the MPLIS
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (including provision of incentives); and further elaboration of GDLA’s action plan on MPLIS and
                         NSDI.

                         This sub-component will finance consultant services, hardware, software, training, and incremental
                         operating costs.

                         Component 2: Establishment of the Multi-Purpose Land Information System ($ 159.11 million). This
                         component will support; (i) the development of the software by funding an IT Expert Panel and
                         covering costs for leasing of infrastructure and equipment, purchasing software licenses and
                         deployment activities, etc; (ii) implementation of the software for the national Multipurpose Land
                         Information System (MPLIS) – the foundation for more efficient and transparent land governance,
                         (iii) development of the National Land Database (NLD), including cadastral and legal data, land
                         price data, land use plan data, and key land resources thematic information. The development of the
                         National Land Database will constitute the project’s major investment (estimated at about US$90
                         million). This subcomponent also includes funding for limited updating of cadastral data and
                         mapping to improve the completeness and accuracy of the existing cadastral maps (up to approx. $36
                         million) and updates to the Land Portal to enhance use of the facilities and public engagement in
                         land and land information services. These activities will be done in close coordination with on-going
                         and planned related efforts funded by the government, both central and local levels.



                                                                      Page 4 of 15
                         At this stage, MPLIS cannot envisage the complete system with regard to data standards and sharing
                         as the demands are emerging. Therefore, the project will build on the existing national land
                         information portal and develop additional modules to support integration and information sharing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         with other entities as well as promote engagement with the public. The government intends that all
                         line ministries and agencies will have access to and use the NLD through the MPLIS. Furthermore
                         the private sector and the public will also have online access to MPLIS through a Land Portal. In
                         addition to the requirements for public access mandated under the 2013 Land Law, access to land
                         information through the Land Portal is consistent with the government’s IT and e-governance
                         strategies.

                         During the course of project implementation, the fundamental core data sets for MPLIS will be
                         defined. The Project will develop information frameworks, innovation platforms, ease of access and
                         ease of use of accurate maintained geographic information which are needed to address local to
                         national challenges, efficiently and effectively. Access to nationally consistent and complete
                         geospatial data, through the national portal and MPLIS, will be developed to improve land
                         governance. In turn, the government will also further elaborate the generic role of NSDI in building
                         geospatial information. In the longer-term, MONRE/GDLA will designate its Center for Land
                         Information as the custodian of the MPLIS and databases produced through project investments. At
                         present, this Center lacks capacity and experience to manage such a large task. Therefore, during the
                         course of project implementation, CPMU, through its technical team, will drive the work on MPLIS
                         and be responsible for its development and implementation, and will nurture the Center and
                         incrementally turn over responsibilities to it.

                         This component comprises the following three sub-components:
                         a.     Development of the Multi-Purpose Land Information System
                         b.     Development and Implementation of the National Land Database
                         c.     Enabling public engagement in land information

                         Sub-component 2.1: Development of the Multiple Purpose Land Information System ($ 25.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                         million). This subcomponent will support: (a) the establishment and operation of an IT Expert Panel
                         comprising of national and international IT experts that will provide technical guidance and advice to
                         GDLA as they progress through the design, development and deployment stages of the MPLIS, (b)
                         procurement of hardware and software; (c) training and capacity building of central and provincial
                         staff with MPLIS. This subcomponent will also support data migration from existing sources (e.g.,
                         ViLIS, ELIS, TMVLIS, VietLIS, SouthLIS), the development of modules to support additional land
                         thematic information (e.g. land use plans, land valuation/prices, and land resources).

                         The MPLIS is a major initiative for both GDLA and the government of Vietnam. To assist GDLA
                         with the development of the MPLIS software, an IT Expert Panel will be established to provide
                         technical guidance and advice through the design, development and deployment stages of the project.
                         The IT Expert Panel will include consultants with experience in developing national level IT systems
                         in Vietnam and Land Administration Systems in other countries. Panel members will include both
                         international experts, Vietnamese IT consultants and IT experts from other ministries so that GLDA
                         can benefit from the software development experiences and lessons learned by other Vietnamese
                         organizations. Regular review sessions (e.g., once a month) will be conducted allowing the panel to
                         meet and assess the progress of the software development activities. Selected members of the panel
                         will be available to GDLA on a full time basis.

                         MPLIS is a further development of the experiences gained under VLAP with the existing Vietnam

                                                                     Page 5 of 15
                         Land Information System (ViLIS). Consistent with good international practices, a nationally unified
                         MPLIS will be developed in accordance with fit-for-purpose principles for land administration and
                         management. The MPLIS will be developed at the central level, utilizing a modern system and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         software architecture and current technology trends that are capable of: supporting land registration
                         and other land-related public functions at central, province, district and commune levels; providing
                         improved access to land information; and providing a platform to enable the public to interact with
                         MPLIS. In particular, MPLIS architecture and software extend the functionality currently provided
                         by the existing ViLIS software that implements “One-Door, One Level” LRO functions. The
                         MPLIS’s scope will also be extended to support new functions of land administration required by the
                         2013 Land Law in the areas of gathering, integration, and dissemination of information concerning
                         land use plans, land valuation/prices, land resources, land inventories and land-related grievances and
                         complaints. In addition, the software will support the migration of land registration and parcel data
                         from legacy (superseded) databases associated with other land registration software applications (e.
                         g., ViLIS, ELIS, TMVLIS, VietLIS, SouthLIS) currently used in district and province LROs, and
                         efficient data exchanges and synchronization between levels and among land-related agencies and
                         land information provision to stakeholders.

                         Furthermore, the MPLIS will be implemented at national and sub-national levels. The
                         implementation and operation of the MPLIS in provincial DONRE and other government agencies
                         will facilitate significant institutional reforms involving efficiency and service delivery gains, an
                         improved environment for business in Vietnam and provide a solid foundation for the further
                         development of the a National Spatial Data Infrastructure in Vietnam with MPLIS providing the core
                         land-relation foundation databases of the NSDI.

                         This sub-component will finance consultant services, the provision of hardware and software and
                         training and incremental operating costs.

                         Sub-component 2.2: Development and Implementation of the National Land Database ($ 133.24
                         million). This subcomponent aims to develop and implement a national unified land databases for the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         operation of the MPLIS. It will support: (a) development of land databases – the foundation for the
                         operation of the MPLIS; (b) updating some cadastral surveying and mapping to improve the
                         completeness and accuracy of land information captured in the system; and (c) enabling public
                         engagement in information.

                         The development and implementation of the national land database is a high priority of the
                         Government. LURCs have been granted to some 90 percent of the “eligible” land parcels, i.e., those
                         used by individuals, households and organizations and meet LURC issuance conditions. However,
                         the completion of this land registration work remains incomplete primarily because 30 percent of
                         land parcels are either mapped on old maps without coordinates (“299 Map Sheets”) or are not
                         mapped. It is estimated that there may be as many as 20 million land parcels without a land
                         registration record or with an incomplete land registration record across the country .

                         The national land database will be developed on the basis of existing cadastral profiles. Thus its
                         development will entail the verification of existing cadastral land information, digitization of existing
                         land records, maps and supporting legal documents; integration of geospatial (mapping) of land
                         parcels with their textual information, and then integration of land records into land databases.
                         Further, land database is also designed to accommodate a broader range of land information
                         requirements mandated under the Land Law 2013. In addition to cadastral data, it will also include a
                         wide ranges of the other thematic land data which are beyond the core requirements of land

                                                                       Page 6 of 15
                         registration, surveying and land parcel mapping and land records management but need to be
                         integrated well with land parcel and registration details in order to meet stakeholders’ demands.
                         Some of these data will be captured and shared in the MPLIS by other government agencies.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         This sub-component also entails updating and improving land registration information in the priority
                         areas where the existing coverage doesn’t meet current technical requirements and updating land
                         parcel mapping that is based on superseded datum to the current standard geographic coordinate
                         system (datum) VN2000 . This land registration will build on the lessons and experiences of VLAP,
                         be prioritized, and adopt more affordable, cost-effective approaches to surveying in accordance with
                         agreed fit-for-purpose principles. One such method of “fit-for-purpose” approach will involve the
                         development of a prioritized plan of updating land data capturing and registration and application of
                         modern data capturing technologies. For example, it is encourages the use of computer tablets and
                         open source mapping software that allows the use of downloaded satellite or ortho-photo imagery or
                         “base map” as a reference map layer and the mapping of general parcel boundaries relative to
                         features visible on the imagery or using the built-in satellite positioning. Parcel and right holder
                         details (including photos) and supporting documents will also be captured on the tablet in the field,
                         subject to publication and verification by the community, and then the whole package for each parcel
                         loaded into MPLIS when field work is complete.

                         This sub-component will finance consultant services, the provision of hardware and software, and
                         training and incremental operating costs.

                         Sub-component 2.3: Enabling Public Engagement in Land Information ($ 0.50 million). The
                         objective of this subcomponent is to establish and implement an MPLIS Land Portal as the platform
                         to enhance public engagement in land and land information services across both the public and
                         private sectors and ensure greater confidence and transparency in land administration. The general
                         public’s access to land information is expected to be at a less intensive level than that required by
                         professional and business users in the public sector (e.g., taxation offices, notary offices, and courts)
                         and private sectors (e.g., commercial banks and property agents). Thus, the tools and systems that
Public Disclosure Copy




                         will be developed to support access to land information by these different user groups will require
                         different approaches. In accordance with the government’s IT and e-governance strategies, access to
                         and use of land information and the undertaking of land-related business transactions online will
                         become increasingly important and a key to economic development.

                         Under this sub-component a Land Portal will be established to facilitate access to land information
                         made available publicly from the MPLIS. Data security and the privacy of personal information will
                         be a priority requirement in the development of the public and business interfaces of the Land Portal.
                         The Land Portal will build on the developments and experiences under VLAP and will be piloted in
                         selected provinces under the project. Due consideration will need to be given to the proposed Law
                         for Information Access and governments strategies for ICT, e-governance and information security.
                         Fees and charges for access to the proposed portal will require consideration and possibly there will
                         be two levels: (a) general public access which could either be free-of-charge or low-cost; and (b)
                         professional and business access level which will be a at higher rate and accordingly provide access
                         to a greater range and level of information. Development of the Land Portal should be driven by
                         needs of the market to ensure demands are best met, especially for the expected wider range of
                         business and professional users and then specific needs of each user group. The requirements of the
                         banking and financial sector involving checking of collateral, registering and discharging mortgages
                         varies markedly from the needs of land taxation offices which need information on land parcels’
                         actual uses, size, soil quality, users and so forth. Sub-component will also support pilots for

                                                                       Page 7 of 15
                         information exchange to learn user requirements for land information. It will be implemented along
                         with capacity building activities with emphasis on the promotion of innovation. More specifically,
                         through innovative pilots, links with Land Law and governance will be established allowing mutual
Public Disclosure Copy




                         learning and exchange of best practices for enhanced MPLIS platforms in the long run.

                         Specifically, this sub-component will finance consultant services, the provision of hardware and
                         software, and training and incremental operating costs.

                         Component 3: Project Management ($ 11.91 million). The aim of this component is to support the
                         overall supervision and coordination of project activities.

                         This component comprises the following two sub-components:
                         a.     Support to Project Management
                         b.     Support to Project M&E

                         Sub-component 3.1: Support to Project Management (US$ 4.33 million). This sub-component
                         provides technical assistance to support project management and improve the in-house capacity of
                         GDLA at central level and in project provinces. Training will also be provided in project
                         management, planning, financial management and procurement. The costs of bi-annual meetings of
                         provincial and district advisory groups will also be covered. In view of the high share and number of
                         contracted staff at district and province level, it will be important to minimize staff turnover
                         throughout the entire project implementation period. (

                         Sub-component 3.2: Support to M&E and Reporting (US$ 7.58 million) Under this sub-component,
                         MONRE/GDLA will establish and implement an M&E system for regular monitoring and evaluation
                         (M&E) of project activities and their achievements and compliance with safeguards and fiduciary
                         requirements at all levels (central, province and district). The M&E system will be developed
                         drawing from VLAP and other recent experiences. The M&E system will reflect the requirements of
                         the new project, particularly the PRF and the changed information needs for management decisions
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and impact monitoring under the project. The detailed project M&E plan will be elaborated in the
                         Project Operations Manual (POM). M&E will be implemented at national, province, LRO and
                         district levels. In addition to government personnel, required consultants and/or contract staff will
                         supplement human resources. This sub-component will also fund Technical Assistance to conduct
                         regular and periodic independent impact assessments and client satisfactory surveys during the
                         course of project implementation.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The Project will build on the successful implementation and achievements under the Vietnam Land
                         Administration Project (VLAP, 2008-2015) and will scale-up and strengthen progress made in a
                         larger number of provinces. The Project will be implemented at the central level and in 33 selected
                         provinces. These include two well-performing VLAP provinces, namely Vinh Long in the South and
                         Thai Binh in the North to provide a reference for expertise, experience and knowledge in support of
                         the other neighbor provinces. The project activities will cover entire prioritized districts in each of
                         the target provinces. It is expected that eight provinces identified meet criteria agreed during project
                         design and implementation can commence immediately upon declaration of effectiveness (namely,
                         An Giang, Ninh Binh, Thai Nguyen, Ha Nam, Ha Tinh, Quang Binh, Bac Ninh and Thai Binh; of
                         these only one province was a VLAP site) will implement the project in its first year. Other selected
                         project provinces will join later as their readiness is improved, project implementation and


                                                                      Page 8 of 15
                         management capacities strengthened, and the project approaches and implementation arrangements
                         verified. Entry of these provinces to the project will be done in agreement between the World Bank
                         and government.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Giang Tam Nguyen (GSP02)
                         Khang Van Pham (GEN02)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes           The project is classified as Category B. This policy is
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     triggered due to the potential downstream environmental
                                                                   and social impacts linked with project activities,
                                                                   specifically with subcomponent 1.3 on strengthening
                                                                   M&E in land use management. The relevant
                                                                   environmental and social criteria will be taken into
                                                                   account in designing the M&E system to be in line with
                                                                   the Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the Application of
                                                                   Safeguard Policies to TA Activities in Bank-Financed
                                                                   Project. There is no requirement for a separate
                                                                   environmental instrument

                                                                   A social assessment (SA) was carried out during project
                                                                   preparation to inform project design, especially for
                                                                   component 1 on strengthening institutional environment,
                                                                   including communication and awareness-raising and land
                                                                   use management monitoring. Ethnic minority people and
                                                                   women were paid special attention during social
                                                                   assessment to ensure they will benefit from the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                   equally, and an EMPF and EMDPs were prepared. In
                                                                   addition, the conduct of SA was to identify potential
                                                                   downstream environmental impacts, particularly on
                                                                   natural habitats, forests and physical cultural resources
                                                                   resulting from mapping, surveying and land use plan
                                                                   recording.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      No            Project activities, including mapping, surveying and land
                         4.04                                      use plan recording, will have no impact on natural
                                                                   habitats, e.g. national parks, natural reserves, wetlands of
                                                                   biodiversity preservation, natural rivers and lakes. As
                                                                   mentioned above, the relevant environmental and social
                                                                   criteria will be taken into account in designing the M&E
                                                                   system of land use management to be in line with the
                                                                   Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the Application of
                                                                   Safeguard Policies to TA Activities in Bank-Financed
                                                                   Project.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No            Project activities, including mapping, surveying and land
                                                                   use plan recording, will have no impact on forests, e.g.
                                                                   primary, protection and production forests. As mentioned



                                                                    Page 9 of 15
                                                        above, the relevant environmental and social criteria will
                                                        be taken into account in designing the M&E system of
                                                        land use management to be in line with the Bank’s
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard
                                                        Policies to TA Activities in Bank-Financed Project.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No     The project does not finance procurement of any
                                                        pesticides or cause an increase in use of pesticides as
                                                        results of the project.
                         Physical Cultural        No    Project activities, including mapping, surveying and land
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           use plan recording, will have no impact on physical
                                                        cultural resources, e.g. religious works, historical relics,
                                                        archaeological sites and cemeteries. As mentioned above,
                                                        the relevant environmental and social criteria will be
                                                        taken into account in designing the M&E system of land
                                                        use management to be in line with the Bank’s Interim
                                                        Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to
                                                        TA Activities in Bank-Financed Project.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The project with improved land information and land
                         BP 4.10                        related service provisions would potentially benefit all
                                                        those with an interest in land, including ethnic minorities
                                                        as potential beneficiaries. The project will be phasing, and
                                                        twenty-three of the 33 proposed project provinces and
                                                        four of the 8 first-year implementation provinces (Phase-1
                                                        project sites) include EMs. This will trigger the World
                                                        Bank’s Policy OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous People. Since
                                                        the project will be implemented in a phased manner, an
                                                        Ethnic Minorities Planning Framework (EMPF) has been
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        prepared. In addition, Ethnic Minorities Development
                                                        Plans (EMDPs) for four provinces (Thai Nguyen,
                                                        QuảngBình, Ha Tinh, and An Giang) have been
                                                        developed for Phase-1. Similar EMDPs will be prepared
                                                        for the other provinces where ethnic minorities live before
                                                        they will be included in the project during project
                                                        implementation.

                                                        There is Muong group in Ninh Binh province. However,
                                                        screening process showed that this group has a very high
                                                        level of assimilation with the Kinh group (the majority)
                                                        and does not meet the definition of Indigenous People as
                                                        per OP4.10; therefore, EMDP is not required for this
                                                        province.
                         Involuntary Resettlement No    No civil works have been proposed for this project so land
                         OP/BP 4.12                     acquisition will not take place. Restrictions on access to
                                                        and exploitation of natural resources will also not be
                                                        affected. The project will only establish database on
                                                        existing land use certifications and status. There will not



                                                        Page 10 of 15
                                                                      be any new land rights adjudicated or amended, and there
                                                                      will be no land acquisition policy support. Therefore, OP
                                                                      4.12 is not triggered for this project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project does not finance construction or rehabilitation
                            4.37                                      of any dams. No project activities rely on existing dams or
                                                                      dams under construction.
                            Projects on International   No            The project does not include activities that take place on
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      international waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The project is not located in any disputed areas.
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environmental Safeguards:

                             The project is classified as Category B. The project triggers OP 4.01 due to the potential
                             downstream environmental and social impacts associated with project activities, specifically with
                             subcomponent 1.3 on strengthening M&E in land use management. Project activities aim to
                             support the strengthening of institutional environment for land management, including improving
                             access to land information, and strengthening land information system and land governance. Thus,
                             the project will mostly have positive environmental and social impacts by improving the quality,
                             quantity and access to social and environment-related information in the land information system.
                             During project preparation, a social assessment (SA) was carried out to inform project design,
                             especially for component 1 on strengthening institutional environment, including communication
Public Disclosure Copy




                             and awareness-raising and land use management monitoring. Ethnic minority people and women
                             were paid special attention during social assessment to ensure they will benefit from the project
                             equally. In addition, the conduct of SA was to identify potential downstream environmental
                             impacts, particularly on natural habitats, forests and physical cultural resources resulting from
                             mapping, surveying and land use plan recording. Results from the SA confirmed that under VILG,
                             mapping, surveying , and land use plan recording would not impact on natural habitats, e.g.
                             national parks, natural reserves, wetlands of biodiversity preservation, natural rivers and lakes;
                             forests, e.g. primary, protection and production forests; and physical cultural resources, e.g.
                             religious works, historical relics, archaeological sites, and cemeteries. So the project does not
                             trigger OP 4.04, OP 4.36 and OP 4.11. As mentioned above, the main potential downstream
                             environmental and social impact relates to M&E of land use management. So the relevant
                             environmental and social criteria will be taken into account in designing the M&E system to be in
                             line with the Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to TA Activities
                             in Bank-Financed Project.

                             Social Safeguards:

                             The social risk is rated as Moderate for the proposed project. It builds on the successful
                             implementation of the VLAP from 2008-2015 that sought to increase community awareness on
                             tenure security and their participation in the registration process and in enhancing inclusion of


                                                                       Page 11 of 15
                           ethnic minorities through the implementation of site-specific action plans. The project promotes
                           transparency and informed participation of the targeted beneficiaries, encouraging landholder
                           participation and supporting the realization of the project’s expected broad range of positive social
Public Disclosure Copy




                           impacts including better access to land information, more reliable services at Land Registration
                           Offices (LROs), reduced time and efforts needed for land transactions, and increased participation
                           of women and ethnic minorities. The Project would maintain close engagement with the
                           beneficiaries i.e., public, land users, including disadvantaged and vulnerable groups, and business
                           community, who will have increased and better access to land information and better services with
                           integrated digital data vital for improving land governance. The Project will support incentives and
                           provide improved equipment, capacities and resources to LROs vital for future sustainability. All
                           activities are designed to involve stakeholder participation and civic engagement, including
                           extensive community consultations, involving entities like local Farmers’ Unions or Women's
                           Unions. For this purpose, the Project will build on the successful process established under VLAP
                           through Local Facilitators (LFs) to address the needs of targeted beneficiaries. Access to land
                           information and better land services are expected to increase with the improvement of LROs and
                           the promotion of e-governance, and the building of stakeholders’ capacity.

                           A Social Assessment (SA) was conducted in six (Thai Nguyen, Bắc Ninh, Ninh Binh, QuảngBình,
                           Ha Tinh, and An Giang) of the 8 provinces selected for implementation in the first year. The SA
                           found that, in general, rural land users and respondents, including Ethnic Minority people
                           expressed their support for the project from their own perspectives, depending on their work
                           situation or interest in land information. They acknowledged three potential benefits from the
                           proposed project: reduced time and effort to access and us e land services; improved business
                           environment; and better guidelines and improved administration of public services. However,
                           some respondents including those engaged in businesses or small- and medium-scale enterprises,
                           notary offices, and lawyers expressed concern over the project’s potential negative impacts and
                           risks (e.g., dispute over inheritance, increased/new land taxes).

                           As mentioned above, the project with improved land information and land related service
Public Disclosure Copy




                           provisions will potentially benefit all those with an interest in land, including ethnic minorities as
                           potential beneficiaries. The project will be phasing, and twenty-three of the 33 proposed project
                           provinces and four of the 8 first-year implementation provinces (Phase-1 project sites) include
                           EMs. This will trigger the World Bank’s Policy OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples. Though there
                           will be no policy development under the project, the OP 4.10 would also be applied to any related
                           TA during the project implementation in line with the Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the
                           Application of Safeguard Policies to TA Activities in Bank-Financed Project
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           No potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities in the project
                           area are envisaged.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           None.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Environmental Safeguards:



                                                                      Page 12 of 15
                          A social assessment (SA) was carried out during project preparation to identify potential
                          downstream environmental impacts, particularly on natural habitats, forests and physical cultural
                          resources resulting from mapping, surveying and land use plan recording. And, it was confirmed
Public Disclosure Copy




                          that mapping, surveying and land use plan recording would not cause any impacts on natural
                          habitats, forests, and physical cultural resources.

                          The need and process to address potential environmental impacts to be mainstreamed in the
                          project activities during implementation would require MONRE to incorporate environmental
                          objectives into TOR for the project TA activities, especially in design of M&E system of land use
                          management to be in line with the Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard
                          Policies to TA Activities in Bank-Financed Project and the expected reports will need to describe
                          how potential environmental issues are identified and addressed through provisions in proposed
                          policies and institutional design. In addition, training activities, where applicable, will include
                          issues related to environmental safeguards. No separate EA instrument is required.

                          Social Safeguards:

                          Regarding OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples, since the project will be implemented in a phased
                          manner, an Ethnic Minorities Plan Framework (EMPF) has been prepared. In addition, Ethnic
                          Minorities Development Plans (EMDPs) for four provinces (Thai Nguyen, QuảngBình, Ha Tinh,
                          and An Giang) have been developed for Phase-1 with focus on helping ethnic minority people to
                          have better access to land information and land services. Similar EMDPs will be prepared for the
                          other provinces where ethnic minorities live before they will be included in the project during
                          project implementation. Though there will be no policy development under the project, the OP
                          4.10 would also be applied to any related TA during the project implementation in line with the
                          Bank’s Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to TA Activities in Bank-
                          Financed Project

                           Capacity of the Borrower:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The main counterpart of the project will be GDLA under MONRE and respective provincial
                           DONREs. GDLA will be responsible for social and environmental safeguard issues. The proposed
                           project is similar in nature with VLAP, so the Borrower has experiences in dealing with the same
                           type of safeguards policies to be applied for the project. Training on EMDPs implementation has
                           been included in the project design since OP 4.10 is triggered with EMDPs as instruments.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Key stakeholders include:
                           •        Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment
                           •        Provincial Department of Natural Resources and Environment
                           •        Land holders and general public, including Ethnic Minority and vulnerable groups
                           •        Investors, business community
                           •        Government Officials and Institutions
                           •        Development Partners

                          Consultation and disclosure:
                          Free, prior and informed consultation: During project preparation and implementation, as a
                          principle of ensuring inclusion, participation and cultural suitability, the project has held and will
                          hold continuous consultations including soliciting feedback from all communities so that remedial


                                                                     Page 13 of 15
                           actions can be taken to support improved participation and provision of benefits to households
                           including those of EMs. The consultation methods to be used are appropriate to social and cultural
                           traits of EM groups that the consultations target, with particular attention given to land
Public Disclosure Copy




                           administrators, household land users, village leaders, business community and other service
                           providers related, including Gov. institutions. Land users from EM groups will be provided with
                           relevant information about the project in a culturally appropriate manner during project
                           implementation, monitoring and evaluation to promote their meaningful participation and
                           inclusion. In addition, the inputs/information used for monitoring and evaluation (such as EM’s
                           access to the land information system established by the project, their benefits from the received
                           information, etc.) should engage relevant EM stakeholders. By enabling participation of relevant
                           EM stakeholders during project planning, implementation, monitoring and evaluation, the project
                           can ensure that EM people receive social and economic benefits that are culturally appropriate to
                           them. In doing so, the land information established by VILG can contribute to transparency and
                           efficiency efforts and development outcomes as a whole among EM groups. The results of
                           consultation will be disclosed to the related EM groups in an accessible form and a culturally
                           appropriate manner. The drafts of SA, EMPF and EMDPs have been disclosed locally at the
                           provincial, district and commune levels in the form accessible by local people, including Ethnic
                           Minority People on Jan.20, 2016. All these drafts have been sent to InfoShop for disclosure on
                           Jan.21, 2016.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Jan-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          20-Jan-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-Jan-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   21-Jan-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Vietnam                                                          20-Jan-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]    NA [    ]
                          report?


                                                                    Page 14 of 15
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Hoa Thi Mong Pham
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                Date: 21-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Jorge A. Munoz (PMGR)                            Date: 24-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 15 of 15
