                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative




                                                     Integrated Safeguards Data Sheet
                                                   Identification / Concept Stage (ISDS)
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                Concept Stage | Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Oct-2018 | Report No: ISDSC25591




                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                             Page 1 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative



                          BASIC INFORMATION

                           A. Basic Project Data

                           Project ID                            Project Name                 Environmental Category   Country
                                                                 Horn of Africa -             B - Partial Assessment
                           P169078                                                                                     Africa
                                                                 Groundwater Initiative       (B)
                           Team Leader(s)                        Estimated Date of Approval   Managing Unit            Financing Instrument
                                                                                                                       Investment Project
                           Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem                                              GWA01
                                                                                                                       Financing
Public Disclosure Copy




                          PROJECT FINANCING DATA (US$, Millions)

                           SUMMARY                    -NewFin1




                           Total Project Cost                                                                                                     2.00
                           Total Financing                                                                                                        2.00
                           Financing Gap                                                                                                          0.00

                           DETAILS      -NewFinEnh1




                           Non-World Bank Group Financing
                              Trust Funds                                                                                                        2.00
                                  Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                                                  2.00


                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           To strengthen the knowledge and analytical foundation for cooperative management and development of
                           international waters in Sub-Saharan Africa to aid sustainable climate resilient growth. This will be done by through the
                           Catalytic subprogram of the Cooperation in International Waters in Africa (CIWA) MDTF. The Catalytic subprogram will
                           generate, share, and manage knowledge that can facilitate cooperative development and management of international
                           waters; explore potential high impact collaborative investment opportunities in defined basins and regions; and create
                           shared understanding of the opportunities, risks, costs, and benefits of cooperative development and management of
                           international waters among stakeholders.

                           The specific objectives of this sub activity are to undertake a comprehensive assessment of the ground and surface
                           water potential in the IGAD member countries, strengthen the regional ground water information data availability and
                           support IGAD member countries to Strengthen and manage the sustainable development of their groundwater
                           potential.

                           Task description: This project strengthens the knowledge and analytical foundation for sustainable development of

                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                                       Page 2 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative



                           groundwater resources in the greater Horn of Africa region and supports trans boundary cooperation for its
                           management. The project will provide critical knowledge for improving the planning and design of water harvesting
                           and artificial recharge infrastructure that are key to water security in the Horn of Africa and explore opportunities to
                           mobilize deeper groundwater resources for economic development, as a basis for sustainable and climate resilient
                           growth.

                           The project will (i) increase the knowledge base on regional ground water resources by conducting a regional
                           hydrological assessment of the surface and renewable groundwater potential, considering their spatial and temporal
                           variability, as a basis for investments aiming at building resilience against climate variability (ii) Strengthen the
                           capacities of ground water development and management in IGAD member countries by undertaking a needs
                           assessment for building the capacity of ground water management at the national level (iii) Prepare three feasibility
                           studies for groundwater development opportunities in the region, including an assessment of available groundwater
                           resources and identification of infrastructure investment needs and (iv) strengthen the capacity of IGAD Water Unit to
                           support regional cooperation on groundwater management and enhance the capacity of IGADs climate center ICPAC
Public Disclosure Copy




                           in the area of groundwater data management and assessments.


                           C. Project Description
                           Approach. Ensuring the proper management of the resource and the sustainability of groundwater related
                           uses requires reliable information on the actual availability, variability and quality of it, as well as a proper
                           institutional framework and sufficient capacity to guarantee efficient use, help avoid overexploitation and
                           pollution and manage critical situations.

                           The results of the assignment “Case Study on Drought Resilience for the Horn of Africa”, funded by the WB
                           Water Partnership Program (WPP) Disaster Risk Management (DRM) Window were used as a guidance for
                           the development of this project´s objective, approach and components. Building from the main findings of
                           the assessment, and in close collaboration with the Intergovernmental Authority on Development (IGAD),
                           the focus and scheduling of the Regional Groundwater Initiative activities have been developed.

                           The proposed project will complement WB and other donors´ water resources management activities in
                           the region by strengthening knowledge and capacity, with a focus on drought resilience and transboundary
                           cooperation. The CIWA-funded activities will contribute to the sustainability of other investments because
                           they will address fundamental technical issues. For instance, in the region there are many resilience
                           programs making a valuable contribution to overall water security by investing in landscape and watershed
                           protection, building groundwater development structures, recharge devices or water harvesting structures
                           based on a mostly empirical basis, but a quantified basis for the required number, design and volume of
                           these structures is often lacking precisely because of poor knowledge and capacity, as is coordination among
                           programs and systematic evaluation and monitoring. This project will help with tools, studies and trainings
                           on new technologies, focused on the sustainable exploitation of the groundwater resources.

                           The proposed project will provide support to all the IGAD countries because, to different levels depending
                           on their capacity and awareness, water resources management in Djibouti, Ethiopia, Kenya, Somalia, South
                           Sudan, Sudan and Uganda generally neglects groundwater.


                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                                        Page 3 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative




                           A few key reasons for that were identified in the WPP assignment. First, groundwater remains an invisible
                           and unknown resource very much. It is confirmed that some of the countries, like South Sudan or Somalia,
                           share a weak knowledge of the groundwater resource, while some others have less limitations in that sense,
                           like Uganda or Kenya, but it is recognized as a subject to improve for the entire region. There are several
                           aspects for which applied knowledge is inadequate or not shared and there is still a strong disconnection
                           with water resources management. The Regional Groundwater Initiative should help to guarantee more
                           knowledge creation and dissemination, for it to be applied by governments, NGOs, local users, private sector
                           and organizations working on drought relief. For all the countries, it is constantly mentioned that
                           transboundary aspects and dynamics of groundwater need to be more considered in the ongoing
                           groundwater assessments.

                           The other challenge for sustainably mobilizing the regional groundwater resources is the inadequate
                           capacity for groundwater development, management and use in the region. In terms of policy and legal
Public Disclosure Copy




                           frameworks, these should be updated and more work to ensure proper enforcement is required.
                           Consideration should also be given to developing specific national groundwater frameworks. On the other
                           hand, the expertise needed to provide the required guidance to groundwater development and management
                           is much higher than what exists among most of the countries. Therefore, building of the technical and
                           leadership capacity of the staff dealing with groundwater development and management needs to be given
                           more attention in the IGAD region.

                           The proposed project with an estimated budget of US$ 2 mill. has been structured around four main
                           components that start addressing the abovementioned gaps. Each component includes a regional
                           dimension, with a set of activities at local, national or transboundary level in the Horn of Africa, and a global
                           dimension aiming at developing guidance for assessing and managing groundwater in dryland regions in
                           Africa and elsewhere. The Project components are :-

                           Component 1: Expand the knowledge base on regional groundwater resources (US$ 450,000). This
                           component seeks to continue taking stock of existing information and initiatives to establish a baseline of
                           knowledge on the physical and social aspects of regional groundwater resources in the region, engaging
                           external partners for some of the activities as needed.

                           The main activity under this component will be the determination of the surface water availability, water
                           variability and natural recharge of shallow groundwater over the region (with an eye on water harvesting,
                           artificial recharge and resource development) and the status and knowledge of deep groundwater
                           exploration, development and management..

                           Building on the methodology of a pilot study to understand surface water availability, spatial and temporal
                           variability and reliability in the regions of Somaliland and Puntland, volumes of water available for harvesting
                           for 7, 14, and 21 days monthly will be defined at catchment level for the entire region. The input data used
                           for the study will be extracted from a modelling exercise being carried out at the IGAD ICPAC Center in
                           Nairobi, Kenya. This sub component will be complemented by Mapping of potential groundwater recharge



                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                                Page 4 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative




                           zones in the arid lands of the IGAD region (funded by European Space Agency ESA). The deliverable will be a
                           suraface and gorund water assesment for selected parts of the region.

                           The component will also support the finalization of knowledge management gaps in South Sudan and
                           evaluate the situation in the remaining four regions of the southern part of Somalia. This was a remaining
                           activity from the March 2017 to September 2017 WB Water Partnership Program funded assignment on the
                           knowledge base. This competent also includes developing a dedicated Regional Groundwater Center aligned
                           to ICPAC and a Water Information Database for the region.

                           Component 2: Strengthen capacities in groundwater development and management in IGAD member
                           countries (US$ 300,000).

                           This component aims to support regional capacity in groundwater development and management by
Public Disclosure Copy




                           identifying institutional needs and regional cooperation opportunities. It will identify institutions with
                           responsibility and interests in groundwater management and associated capacity needs and promote
                           capacity building and regional cooperation by facilitating activities, such as pilot programs, study tours and
                           inter-institutional engagement. Some activities under this component will focus specifically on the nexus
                           groundwater & drought resilience and on transboundary cooperation. Some capacity building activities
                           proposed will be more tailored to state-level needs. The main deliverable from this activity will be a
                           comprehensive needs assessment of the capacity to develop and manage groundwater in the region. The
                           component will also include different sub activities that aim to strengthen capacity of IGAD Water Unit for
                           the overall coordination of the project.

                           Component 3: Maximize the benefits of groundwater to strengthen resilience to drought and economic
                           development in the region (US$ 1,100,000) This component focuses on sectoral water needs, vulnerable
                           groups and on assessing economically exploitable groundwater resources (as opposed to theoretically
                           available resources) and started identifying suitable solutions to build resilience to drought using
                           groundwater. The development in future demands from groundwater resources will certainly require a more
                           detailed understanding of the water availability, water quality and the potential pollution threats, since the
                           available knowledge is not enough for the aquifers in use. Some priorities include Mt. Elgon (between
                           Uganda and Kenay), Merti (between Somalia and Kenya), a ground water aquifer between Sudan-South
                           Sudan. All these are shared ground water resources and if developed, they have huge potential in promoting
                           cooperation among the shared water resources. A total of three complete feasibility studies that includes
                           the ground water assessment, the infrastructure need to develop, preliminary cost, assessment of the
                           associated Environmental and social safeguards risks and mitigation measures will the main deliverable
                           from this component.

                           Component 4: Project management, Monitoring and evaluation (US$ 150,000: IGAD is the implementing
                           agency for the project and will mobilize its in-house capacity for the work. However as the need arise IGAD
                           will use the service of consultant either firm or individual to fill some of the missing capacity gaps. This
                           component will finance IGAD staff travel related expense to supervise this project, consultant contracts and
                           travels costs, workshop and review meeting costs, report production and dissemination expenses.


                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                              Page 5 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative




                           Regional and Global dimension: The project will receive USD 2 M of CIWA financing, to mainly cover the
                           local, national, and the regional dimension. However, some of the funding and the time allocation will be
                           devoted to global activities. IGAD will support regional and national activities. Implementation of global
                           activities will involve key partners (tentatively European Space Agency, IGRAC, IDMP and others) to ensure
                           that activities are delivered in synergy with ongoing and existing international cutting-edge work. Moreover,
                           it is important to consider that a Greater Horn of Africa groundwater strategy could lay the foundations for
                           World Bank engagement in developing other regional strategies in Africa. Like the Horn of Africa, other
                           regions in Africa like the Sahel of the SADC region suffer from severe aridity challenges, and groundwater
                           likely has the potential to also support water security and human and economic development in those areas.
                           Hence, further strategies could be developed from the learning’s of the Greater Horn of Africa experience.
                           Table 1 below summarizes the potential project's activities at the local/national/regional and global levels.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Table 1: Preliminary Component summary of national, regional and global activities.

                                                                                                                 Global Activities
                                                         Local, National, Regional

                                                                                                                Potential partners: ESA,
                              Components                 Potential partners: IGAD
                                                                                                                IGRAC, IDMP
                                                                Evaluations of the level of knowledge               Development and
                                                                 available locally, nationally and regionally          promotion of
                                                                Assessments of shallow & deep, renewable              methodologies for
                              1- Increase the                    & non-renewable groundwater resources                 groundwater
                              knowledge base on                  considering variability, dynamics, cost and           assessments (water
                              regional groundwater               quality (in pilot areas and selected aquifers)        availability,
                              resources                         Arrangements for data acquisition,                    variability, cost,
                                                                 compilation in database, management,                  quality)
                                                                 processing & sharing

                              2- Strengthen capacities          Detailed diagnosis of the capacity for                Development of
                              in groundwater                     groundwater development and                            methodology and
                              development and                    management                                             questionnaire for
                              management in IGAD                Reinforcement of regional institutions                 capacity for
                              member countries                   focused on water and groundwater                       groundwater
                                                                 resources                                              development and
                                                                Support to the legal and policy frameworks             management
                                                                 on groundwater                                         diagnostics
                                                                Facilitation of the transboundary dialogue            Preparation of
                                                                Training and capacity building at national             guidelines for the
                                                                 level about several relevant gaps identified,          role of specialized

                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                                   Page 6 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative




                                                                 from groundwater surveying to hydro             centers in
                                                                 diplomacy                                       groundwater
                                                                                                                 management

                                                                                                                Development of
                                                                                                                 methodologies for
                                                                                                                 evaluating the cost
                                                                                                                 of access to secure
                                                                                                                 groundwater
                                                                                                                 sources, based on
                                                                                                                 available technology,
                                                                                                                 capacity, energy
                                                                                                                 costs, depth and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                 variability of
                                                                                                                 groundwater
                                                                                                                Preparation of a brief
                                                                                                                 knowledge note on
                                                                Assessment of the socio-economic barriers
                                                                                                                 practical examples of
                                                                 to water security for most vulnerable
                              3- Maximize the                                                                    innovative
                                                                 groups/sectors in the IGAD region
                              benefits of groundwater                                                            approaches in the
                                                                Assessment of sectoral and spatial-
                              to strengthen resilience                                                           region that have
                                                                 temporal supply/demand gaps across the
                              to drought and                                                                     increased water
                                                                 region
                              economic development                                                               security/ drought
                                                                Development of a communication strategy
                              in the region                                                                      resilience and
                                                                 on groundwater and its role for building
                                                                                                                 economic benefits
                                                                 resilience to drought
                                                                                                                 for beneficiaries
                                                                                                                 through the use of
                                                                                                                 groundwater. The
                                                                                                                 collection of
                                                                                                                 examples will be
                                                                                                                 complemented with
                                                                                                                 economic analysis,
                                                                                                                 but in any case, low
                                                                                                                 cost options that
                                                                                                                 could be
                                                                                                                 implemented at
                                                                                                                 community level will
                                                                                                                 be staged


                           Gender inclusion. The project design is gender sensitive and will assess during preparation the implications
                           for women and men of any planned action, including legislation, policies and activities on the ground at all

                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                            Page 7 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative




                           levels. In the Horn of Africa, access to water has major implications as women are generally in charge of
                           fetching water for all the uses. Often, the needed water comes from groundwater. Therefore, although over
                           extraction negatively impacts the poorest and most vulnerable groups, because they cannot afford to dig
                           deeper, women are especially affected because they need to fetch it from further away. This project will pay
                           particular attention to the gender dimension, particularly through the development of the pilots, which will
                           address any emerging issues. Indeed, gender-sensitive groundwater development and management help
                           secure and protect groundwater access. An approach to groundwater development and management that
                           puts gender at the center stage facilitates the representation and participation of women in aquifer
                           management, so that groundwater priorities of men and women for different activities are both considered
                           in planning.

                           Specific gender actions. The project design will lay emphasis on the gender dimension through ensuring
                           equality issues are addressed in the suggested activities to the extent possible. Participation of gender
Public Disclosure Copy




                           sensitive professionals who can recognize gender differentiated needs, priorities, skills and capacities will be
                           essential part of the project preparation and implementation. The project will make gender a core element
                           of all project components- including studies, capacity building activities and pilot activities- not only because
                           women are a vulnerable group that is disproportionally exposed to the impacts of droughts in the IGAD
                           region, but also because they can play a decisive role in building sustainable resource management. On the
                           one hand, gender balance will be promoted during the entire project implementation. In this regard, it will
                           focus on guaranteeing the attendance of similar number of female and male attendees in the training events,
                           meetings in legal and policy framework discussions.

                           During project preparation and implementation, this project will coordinate closely with other
                           development partners supporting enhancement of knowledge and capacity for groundwater development
                           and management in the Horn of Arica to maximize synergies and avoid duplication. These includes but not
                           limited to the IDDRSI strategy initiative, launched in 2011; A groundwater and climate change study in Africa
                           funded by DFID in 2010 and conducted by the British geological survey; The livelihoods for resilience
                           initiative in the Horn of Africa by ILRI and supported by FAO and CGIAR, The Integrated Drought management
                           Programme in the Horn of Africa (IDMP HoA) carried out by the Global Water Partnership and WMO in 2015;
                           Mapping, assessment and management of transboundary water resources in the IGAD sub-region project;
                           Forecasting Drought in East Africa by European Centre for Medium- Range Weather Forecasts (ECMWF)
                           products in forecasting droughts in East Africa; UNESCO Mapping Programme in the Horn of Africa and
                           others.

                           Also, the IGAD’s Climate Prediction & Applications Centre, ICPAC, is another initiative that is improving the
                           regional capacity for water resources management from the side of the practical tools, and it is gradually
                           performing more and more efforts on groundwater. ICPAC seeks “to become a viable regional center of
                           excellence in climate prediction and applications for climate risk management, environmental management,
                           and sustainable development”. It aims to achieve this by providing timely climate early warning information
                           and supporting specific sector applications to enable the region cope with various risks associated with
                           extreme climate variability and change for poverty alleviation, environment management and sustainable
                           development of its member countries. To date, ICPAC has (i) enhanced regional capacity for climate

                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                              Page 8 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative




                           diagnostic centres, scientists and users, (ii) produced and disseminated timely climate early warning
                           information, (iii) improved seasonal forecasting, (iv) established a continuously updated data bank for
                           development of baseline statistics and hazards maps, and (v) enhanced collaborations with sector specific
                           users (such as water resources, agriculture, etc.) through pilot application projects for development of new
                           application tools. Specific ICPAC projects currently focus on regional capacity building, monitoring and
                           resilience. ICPAC focus areas with greatest relevance to groundwater include: Water resources, Remote
                           sensing, Climate Prediction & Early Warning and Disaster Risk Reduction.

                           ICPAC draws on international frameworks and principles for application at regional and national levels.
                           Strategic components particularly relevant to groundwater include contingency planning, regional
                           collaboration of preparedness and response, vulnerability analyses, and needs assessment and resource
                           mobilization.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The regional approach is preferred to complement and extend the benefits of individual national
                           interventions, as well as reflecting the important transboundary nature of many aquifers in the Horn of
                           Africa region. All the components will benefit from regional technical assistance and cross learning activities.
                           The regional dimension of the project is critical in the implementation of this project, notably by fostering
                           exchange of experience among institutions built or strengthened in participating countries. It will help the
                           policy dialogue on groundwater governance issues among the IGAD Member States. As mentioned in the
                           components description, actual activities on those aspects will include, among others: data compilation and
                           sharing; preparation of tools and guidelines; provision of training of trainers; facilitation of exchange of
                           experience through study tours and the delivery of cross learning events; designing and carrying out
                           communication and advocacy campaigns.




                           SAFEGUARDS


                          D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                          analysis (if known)
                          This is a project that includes conducting feasibility studies on ground water potential in three places in the
                          horn of Africa. Some priorities include Mt. Elgon (between Uganda and Kenay), Merti (between Somalia and
                          Kenya), a ground water aquifer between Sudan-South Sudan. The feasibility studies will include complete
                          assessment of factors that might affect the study areas environmentally and socially and include mitigation
                          measures too. Since the specific sites for the feasibility studies are known, each feasibility study will include a
                          complete Environmental impact Assessment. a ToR for conducting the Environmental Impact assessment will
                          be prepared and reviewed before the commencement of the feasibility studies.



                          E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                                Page 9 of 11
                                  The World Bank
                                  Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative




                          IGAD has the experience in managing feasibility studies that fully address environmental and social aspects.
                          The proposed feasibility studies are planned to be outsourced to experienced consulting firms and the ToR
                          will include a dedicated section to ensure safeguards. The Bank team will review and clear the ToR for all
                          works including the ground Water Feasibility studies.



                          F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                          Tracy Hart, Environmental Specialist
                          Harub Ahmed Harub, Social Specialist


                          G. Policies that might apply
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Safeguard Policies Triggered by the Project             Triggered?             Explanation (Optional)
                                                                                               The ground water feasibility studies will
                                                                                               include Environmental assessments and
                          Environmental Assessment OP/BP 4.01               Yes                will propose mitigation measures. The
                                                                                               team will ensure the inclusion of this in the
                                                                                               ToR of the ground water feasibility studies.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04                       No
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36                                No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09                           No
                          Physical Cultural Resources OP/BP 4.11            No
                                                                                               This is in view of the ground water
                                                                                               feasibility studies and their potential to
                                                                                               affect indigenous people during future
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10                     Yes
                                                                                               implementation. The feasibility study will
                                                                                               determine that and recommend measures
                                                                                               to address.
                                                                                               This is also in view of the ground water
                                                                                               feasibility studies and their potential to
                                                                                               displace people during future
                          Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP 4.12               Yes
                                                                                               implementation. The feasibility study will
                                                                                               determine that and recommend measures
                                                                                               to address.
                          Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                         No
                          Projects on International Waterways OP/BP 7.50    No
                          Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP 7.60             No


                          H. Safeguard Preparation Plan



                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                              Page 10 of 11
                                   The World Bank
                                   Horn of Africa - Groundwater Initiative




                          Appraisal stage ISDS required? Yes
                           SafeguardAppraisalStage
                           a) Tentative target date for disclosing the appraisal stage ISDS
                           31-Oct-2018
                              b) Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific safeguards studies and their timing will be specified in the Appraisal Stage ISDS.


                              APPROVALS

                              Team Leader(s):                                  Tesfaye Bekalu Wondem

                              Approved By
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Safeguards Advisor:                             Nathalie S. Munzberg                              10-Oct-2018

                              Practice Manager/Manager:                       Catherine Signe Tovey                             12-Oct-2018


                          1Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) by the Bank and (ii) in country
                          by the Borrower/Recipient, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.




                         Oct 19, 2018                                                                                                                            Page 11 of 11
