                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSA18132
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Burundi                            Project ID:   P151835
                            Project Name:      BI-Social Safety Nets (P151835)
                            Task Team          Benedicte Leroy De La Briere
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          12-Oct-2016              Estimated     15-Dec-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GSP01                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        40.00           Total Bank Financing:     40.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                 40.00
                              Total                                                                                       40.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The objectives of the proposed Project are to provide regular cash transfers to extreme poor and
                           vulnerable households with children in selected areas while strengthening the delivery mechanisms
                           for the development of a basic social safety net system.
                            3. Project Description
                           Burundi faces a humanitarian, emergency context in some areas while still needing to deal with the
                           structural vulnerability of its poorest members and the safety nets need to address both tracks The
                           country is putting in place some key institutional elements to structure these changes. The national


                                                                       Page 1 of 13
                         objectives were set in the Cadre StratÃ©gique de Lutte contre la PauvretÃ© (PRSP) and the
                         National Social Protection Policy (2011). An inter-ministerial coordinating body, the National Social
                         Protection Commission, was established in April 2013. A secretariat (SEP-CNPS) to support the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implementation of the PNPS is operational since early 2014 and set up provincial structures in 2015
                         and thematic groups in 2016. With support from the World Bank and UNICEF, through a
                         participatory process, the SEP-CNPS has developed a Social Protection Strategy that delineates the
                         Government➢❨ s priorities to push this paradigmatic shift.
                         The proposed project seeks to support the Government in protecting the most vulnerable while
                         setting up the delivery mechanisms for a basic safety net addressing structural vulnerabilities and
                         promoting livelihoods. The project would support the foundations of a targeted cash-based safety net
                         program that could contribute to poverty alleviation in the short term and investments in human and
                         productive capital for poverty reduction in the long-run, a twin-track contribution to SDG 1. The
                         cash transfer program would also provide an anchor for an effective safety net system to help
                         strengthen the resilience of the poor in rural areas.

                         The project is therefore structured around three components: a first component supports a cash
                         transfer program, a second components supports the key delivery mechanisms of a basic social safety
                         net system, and a third component supports the project management.

                         Component 1 ➢❨ Support to the cash transfer program (US$ 26.7 million)

                         The first component will support the development and implementation of a cash transfer program to
                         be implemented in phases. This program would be the precursor for a national program, which would
                         aim eventually to reach all the poorest (first quintile) food insecure households across Burundi
                         (estimated at about 300,000 households, with 2 million members). The project will support the first
                         phase of the program in reaching the poorest rural households with children in 4 provinces of the
                         Northern and Eastern regions (these provinces host an estimated 94,000 of the first quintile
                         households in the country (Poverty map estimations, 2016)). The social safety net program would be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         built around two core elements: (1) regular cash payments, and (2) promotion of foundational human
                         capital, broadly understood as and limited to the set of information, communication and education
                         measures designed to encourage the adoption of positive behaviors towards strengthened nutrition,
                         early childhood development, and school attendance among beneficiary households and
                         communities.

                         The program will be targeted towards extreme poor and food insecure Burundian households with
                         children in selected areas. The project will support implementation of cash transfers in the four
                         poorest communes of the four selected provinces. Cash transfers will be targeted to the poorest
                         households with children under 12 years of age in the registry, based on community-based targeting
                         and a basic proxy-means test (see component 2). The final list of eligible households for the cash
                         transfer program will be shared with the community, for validation.

                         The proposed cash transfer program focuses on immediate alleviation of poverty and prevention of
                         chronic malnutrition. This seeks to mitigate the potential long-term effects of short-term crises and
                         shocks on human development and sets-up a medium-term vision for household development. A
                         beneficiary household would remain in the program for three years (2 Â½ years with cash and
                         behavior change activities and 6 months with behavior change activities only), which would cover
                         the time for the "window of opportunity" for nutrition (the first 1,000 days between conception and
                         two years of age). After this period and based on funding availability, a re-certification process will


                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         be put in place to re-assess the eligibility of beneficiary households (as well as that of new potentially
                         eligible households).
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Beneficiary households will receive BIF 20,000 per household per month (approx.US$ 145 per year).
                         The national basic needs poverty line is at BIF 41,054 per adult per month and the food poverty line
                         is at BIF 28,201 per month . The transfer corresponds is corresponds to 18 percent of the household
                         food poverty line (which is consistent with the experience of comparable African countries).

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Cash transfers (US$ 19.5 million IDA credit)

                         The objectives of the cash transfers are to provide a regular income to extreme poor and food
                         insecure households so as to enable them to increase their consumption and invest in the foundations
                         of their children➢❨ s human capital. The regular cash payments are the first core element of the
                         program, to help beneficiary households meet their basic needs. Size and regularity of the transfers
                         are also important components of potential second-round economic impacts of the transfer through
                         activation of the local economy and productive investments.

                         The proposed Project will support the payment of cash transfers to beneficiary households, and
                         associated financial fees as well as support for beneficiary households to acquire national IDs. For
                         operational reasons, the payments to beneficiaries would initially be made every three months . Once
                         systems are well established and reliable, payments could become monthly so as to enhance the
                         consumption-smoothing function of the transfers. The proposed early quarterly payment schedule
                         takes into account periods of high risk (soudure), significant expenditures (beginning of school year)
                         and operational constraints (rain) in the definition of the payment calendar.

                         Given the novelty of cash transfers in Burundi and potential logistical issues, the program may use
                         more than one payment method. The priority will be to ensure timeliness, accuracy (in terms of
                         amounts and recipients) and low costs, both for the program and for households (in terms of
                         accessibility (literacy), distance and time to reach, waiting, etc.). Potential mechanisms include
Public Disclosure Copy




                         mobile payments, possibly in combination with financial institutions such as banks and the post
                         office where the mobile ecosystem is limited (due to limited network and electricity coverage, or
                         payment correspondents).

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Behavior change for investments in human capital (US$ 7.2m IDA credit)

                         The second core element that the proposed Project will support is the promotion of household
                         foundational human capital investments, in particular in women and children. This includes
                         information, education and communication (IEC) to (1) explain program processes and goals to
                         beneficiary households (one module), (2) encourage the adoption of positive behavioral changes
                         towards maternal and child health, nutrition and early childhood development among households in
                         the program➢❨ s intervention areas (3 modules), and (3) encourage the participation and retention of
                         school age children in school and provide basic financial literacy information (2 modules). These
                         sessions will continue for six months after the cash transfers end.

                         Initially, the program would track participation of beneficiary households in behavior change
                         complementary activities (based on their composition). As administrative systems strengthen and
                         services become more available, the payments might become conditional on use of basic health,
                         nutrition and/or education services to strengthen the incentives of households to invest in the


                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         foundations of human capital.

                         This sub-component will support the elaboration of the methodology and curriculum of the IEC
Public Disclosure Copy




                         materials and the implementation and supervision of the promotion activities. Three modules of the
                         IEC package will seek to promote better health and nutrition among children and pregnant and
                         lactating women and better early childhood development outcomes for improved school
                         preparedness. As their contribution to the project, UNICEF would develop the nutrition and early
                         childhood development package (based on the Alimentation et Nutrition du Jeune Enfant and
                         Pratiques Familiales Essentielles package and the material developed in West Africa as relevant) in
                         collaboration with the Scaling-Up Nutrition secretariat in the Government➢❨ s 2nd Vice-presidency.
                         They may also develop the lesson plans over the 36 months and provide additional technical
                         assistance in implementation or quality control. Lessons from the process evaluation of the USAID-
                         supported F ood for Peace program in Cankuso and Ruyigi (IFPRI, 2014) and its on-going expansion
                         in Muyinga emphasize the importance of the design of the delivery of the behavior change
                         communication and continued training for the frontline staff and volunteers.

                         The promotion activities will be implemented by local non-governmental organizations already
                         involved in these issues. The Commune Family Development Centers (CFDC) from the Ministry of
                         Human Rights, Social Affairs and Gender will participate in the supervision of the delivery of these
                         activities, with the program commune focal point. The CFDC have a national network of community
                         outreach officers that already undertake promotion activities around child protection issues and are
                         used to work in coordination with local NGOs. The Ministries of Health and Education will provide
                         technical guidance as needed and ensure that the promotional activities encourage the use of health
                         and education services. Payments to the implementing NGOs will include incentives for reaching
                         basic service standards on the organization of the meetings, delivery of the materials and/or learning
                         outcomes.


                         Component 2: Support to the key delivery mechanisms of a basic social safety net system (US$ 7.5
Public Disclosure Copy




                         million IDA credit)

                         The second component will support the development and implementation of four key instruments for
                         the implementation of the cash transfer program and the future coordination of other social safety
                         nets targeted to the poorest households in Burundi: a targeting mechanism and potential beneficiary
                         database; core modules of a basic management information system; monitoring and evaluation
                         modules; and capacity-building for the implementation of the NSPS. The instruments will be
                         anchored around the cash transfer program described in Component 1, but with a view to eventually
                         serve a broader set of targeted programs that would contribute to the realization of the NSPS
                         objectives.

                         Sub-component 2.1: Implementation of a precursor database for the registry (US$ 2.0 million, IDA
                         credit)

                         The beneficiary database and its associated targeting mechanism are a key pillar for the coordination
                         of programs. They are also critical for ensuring transparency in the selection of beneficiaries in the
                         Burundian context of recurrent fragility and entrenched structural poverty. Initially, the database will
                         be developed to identify the extreme poor and vulnerable for the purpose of the cash transfer
                         program and its complementary activities.



                                                                      Page 4 of 13
                         The development of the database will take place in phases, according to the availability of poverty
                         information and the implementation of the cash transfer program. Initially, for the purpose of
                         identifying potential beneficiaries of the cash transfer program, four provinces were selected on the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         basis of their monetary poverty rate (ECBM 2013/14) and chronic malnutrition rates (DHS 2010) and
                         included Gitega, Karuzi, Kirundo and Ruyigi. Based on the poverty map, the registry will start in the
                         four communes with the highest estimated rural poverty rate in each province (Gitega: Bugendana,
                         Buraza, Gitega, and Itaba; Karusi: Bugenyuzi, Gihogazi, Mutumba,Nyabikere; Kirundo: Bugabira,
                         Busoni, Kirundo, Ntega; and Ruyigi:Butagwanza2, Buteri, Bweru, Gisuru). The 16 selected
                         communes are sub-divided in 2 to 5 zones and include on average 26 collines (between 11 and 43)
                         with an average of 535 households (between 130 and 1,400) per colline. Given the lack of
                         information on poverty at the colline level and the limited resources, the program will select half of
                         the collines, randomly in a public event that would include the province governor, commune
                         administrator and all colline chiefs as well as representatives from civil society (including Batwa
                         representatives).

                         The household-level selection for the registry will use community-based targeting to produce a
                         listing of the 25 percent poorest households in the colline based on nationally agreed criteria for
                         extreme poverty including access to land, a dependency index (taking into account all not able-
                         bodied members: children, elderly, persons with a disability and chronically ill members), and
                         welfare indicators including food insecurity. Twa households residing in the colline will be
                         identified through a planned provincial census and added to the listing. The composition of the
                         committee will ensure a balance between government and civil society representation and the
                         committee will receive technical assistance from an NGO to undertake the listing process. The list
                         will be validated by the community. All households in the listing will be surveyed to compute a basic
                         multi-dimensional proxy-means test (PMT) score, and rank households by their poverty status .

                         As information and resources becomes available, the process may be reviewed. At mid-term review,
                         a decision will be taken to either continue with the initial process; or to apply the questionnaire to all
                         potentially eligible households, based on the small-area estimate of extreme poverty in the commune
Public Disclosure Copy




                         (and the community validation may then occur afterwards); or to use only the community-based
                         targeting.

                         The targeting questionnaire will collect basic socio-economic information about the household, as
                         well as key information on specific vulnerabilities, access to basic social services, and livelihood
                         strategies. This information could then be used for targeting by other programs managed by the
                         Ministries that are members of the CNPS. All individuals in the registry will be uniquely identified.

                         The proposed methodology will be first implemented in the 8 selected rural communes of the Karuzi
                         and Ruyigi provinces and then to the additional 8 communes in Gitega and Kirundo provinces.
                         Lessons from the first eight communes will inform the roll-out in the next eight communes.

                         As part of the registration process, the project will assess whether potential transfer recipients in
                         beneficiary households have national ID cards . ID cards are required for mobile phone registration
                         so if transfer recipients do not have their IDs, the project will issue them temporary program cards
                         for the first payment and the initial complementary activities➢❨ sessions. The project will support
                         potential transfer recipients without national IDs to obtain one. It is expected that up to 30 percent of
                         potential beneficiaries may not have an ID. If necessary, the Project will assess the possibility to
                         coordinate with the Ministry of Interior for the provision of national identity cards. During the
                         promotion activities, the Project will encourage all household members to get birth certificates and

                                                                       Page 5 of 13
                         national ID cards so as to help ensure their access to other public services and their citizenship
                         participation.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The sub-component will support the background analysis for the implementation of the database and
                         the targeting process ➢❨ poverty and malnutrition maps, development of community-based targeting
                         criteria and processes, development of the registry questionnaire, proxy-means test analysis, the
                         organization of the different committees involved in the targeting and registration, the
                         implementation of the PMT survey, storage and analysis of the data as well as the preparation of
                         beneficiary lists for the cash transfer program. It will also support the development of the
                         corresponding database and management information systems related to the registry and the targeting
                         (hardware, software, back-up equipment). Finally, it will support potential additional activities to
                         ensure that transfer recipients are aware of the requirements and supporting documents to obtain
                         national ID cards.
                         strategies.


                         Sub-component 2.2. Core modules of the Management Information System (US$ 1.5 million IDA
                         credit)

                         This sub-component will support the development of basic core modules of the Management
                         Information System to support the delivery mechanisms of a basic social safety net system. These
                         modules will be developed for the cash transfer program. They will include key social program
                         indicators used for the monitoring and tracking system of the SEP/CNPS. The use of these modules
                         is expected to improve program design and implementation, foster future coordination between
                         programs, and the monitoring and evaluation of the cash transfer program as a template for other
                         social safety net interventions.

                         Building on the database of eligible households, these modules will include: (i) program beneficiary
                         lists, and eventually a registration of complementary activities; (ii) payment modules (limited to the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         payroll and the reconciliation from the payment provider(s)); (iii) operational tracking of programs;
                         and (iv)basic monitoring and evaluation, including beneficiary feed-back and grievance redress
                         system. The program beneficiary lists will start with the cash transfer beneficiary list and then track
                         beneficiaries➢❨ participation in the complementary activities set-up by the program. The payment
                         system will include the quarterly/monthly payroll based on beneficiary lists, the amounts transferred
                         to the payment agency(ies), the beneficiary receipts and the reconciliation of accounts. The
                         operational tracking module would provide an operational dashboard to enable program managers to
                         plan and track activities, human and material resources and other inputs at the central, provincial and
                         communal levels. The M&E system would track financial outlays, key program results (including
                         those core indicators that would become common across programs), impacts and beneficiary feed-
                         back as inputs to guide program management in the implementation of the programs. The grievance
                         redress mechanism would track grievances linked to targeting, receipt of transfers and
                         implementation of the complementary activities. The grievance redress will use several mechanisms:
                         in-person complaints to program commune focal point, SMS-based system to a third-party grievance
                         manager (conditional on finding a trusted and competent agent), boxes at the colline-level in the care
                         of a civil society organization, possibly a hotline at central-level. Complaints received through SMS,
                         phone or boxes will be logged in the MIS. A dedicated grievance redress system will be implemented
                         for Batwa beneficiaries.




                                                                       Page 6 of 13
                         Subcomponent 2.3: Monitoring and evaluation (US$ 2.8 m IDA credit)

                         Since the project is supporting new interventions and processes in Burundi and to ensure
Public Disclosure Copy




                         transparency, the third sub-component will support process evaluations of the key program processes
                         and an impact evaluation including beneficiary surveys. The process evaluations will focus on the
                         core operational processes: targeting, payment, delivery of complementary activities. The process
                         evaluation in the first phase communes will inform the expansion in the second phase but also
                         provide key input in the design of the operating processes. The process evaluations will continue in
                         the second phase to provide real-time information about scale-up and implementation in different
                         provinces. The process evaluation will be complemented by regular beneficiary surveys to help map
                         out complaints and issues and contribute to the establishment of a grievance redress mechanism. The
                         mid-term review of the project will provide a key opportunity to take stock of the first phase of
                         implementation and update the processes for potential expansion in the remaining 8 communes as
                         well as plans for further expansion.

                         The impact evaluation will focus on key poverty, welfare, and human development indicators at the
                         household and community-levels for the cash transfers. The random selection at the colline-level
                         will support a randomized control trial design based on a sample of the collines. Baseline data will
                         be collected prior to the first transfer. A mid-term data collection will take place at 24 months. To
                         evaluate the sustainability of impacts, the endline data collection will take place 6 months after the
                         end of the program activities (at 42 months).

                         Sub-component 2.4. Capacity-building and analysis for the Implementation of the National Social
                         Protection Strategy (US$ 1.2 m. IDA credit)

                         This sub-component will support capacity-building for the main actors in charge of social protection
                         in the central government and for the local implementers of the program. The capacity-building will
                         seek to bring a common understanding about social protection across government levels (center,
                         provinces, communes, and collines) and sectors. The project will support training on key issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                         about social safety nets implementation, cash transfers as safety nets, malnutrition, and early
                         childhood development. Since the project will support new operational processes, the project will
                         support capacity-building to ensure the adoption, use, and maintenance of these processes and the
                         corresponding tools at all levels of implementation.

                         At the central level, the project will seek to reinforce existing or planned coordination mechanisms,
                         focusing on the CNPS Technical Committee -- and its thematic groups, especially the one on social
                         assistance -- and on the Permanent Executive Secretariat (SEP), in their capacity of coordinators and
                         regulators for social protection. Based on the needs identified in the forthcoming functional
                         institutional assessment, training and technical support will be provided, as well as assistance with
                         coordination costs.

                         This sub-component will also support some basic analytical services to build the evidence base
                         which the Technical Committee and the SEP can use for the monitoring of the overall SP system and
                         the discussion on programs design. This will likely include analyses of basic service supply across
                         different types of providers, institutional assessments of the main agencies, background studies for
                         the policy on public works, health coverage for the poor, malnutrition dynamics and coordination
                         with the community health activities supported in the Health project, and addition al analysis as
                         requested.



                                                                      Page 7 of 13
                         Component 3: Project Management (US$ 5.8m IDA credit)

                         The third component will support an Implementation Support Unit, reporting to the SEP/CNPS and
Public Disclosure Copy




                         the Ministry of Human Rights, Social Affairs and Gender (MDPHSAG). This unit will be headed by
                         a Project Coordinator and staffed by a small management team of experienced technicians. The unit
                         will be responsible for the technical and financial implementation of project activities, including
                         procurement, financial management, M&E, mitigation of potential negative social and environmental
                         impacts, and communication about project implementation and results. The unit will liaise with the
                         SEP/CNPS and the Directorate for Social Assistance and National Solidarity in the MDPHSAG at
                         the central level. The unit will be represented at the provincial and commune-level with staff
                         dedicated to the local implementation of the project in the selected provinces and communes in
                         coordination with provincial and communal deconcentrated structures of the SEP/CNPS and the
                         MDPHSAG. In Kirundo communes, the local implementation could involve Concern building on
                         their experience with the Terintwambe pilot. The implementation arrangements will be examined at
                         the mid-term review to assess alternative arrangements, depending on the readiness of the SEP and
                         MDPHASG and other partners.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will operate in half of the collines of the 16 poorest communes in the Gietega, Karuzi,
                         Kirundo and Ruyigi provinces in the North and East regions.
                         The Gitega, Karuzi, Kirundo and Ruyigi provinces were selected on the basis of their monetary
                         poverty rate (ECBM 2013/14) and chronic malnutrition rates (DHS 2010)). The four communes are
                         those with the highest estimated rural poverty rate in each province (Gitega: Bugendana, Buraza,
                         Gitega, and Itaba; Karusi: Bugenyuzi, Gihogazi, Mutumba,Nyabikere; Kirundo: Bugabira, Busoni,
                         Kirundo, Ntega; and Ruyigi:Butagwanza2, Buteri, Bweru, Gisuru). Given the lack of information on
                         poverty at the colline level and the limited resources, the program will select half of the collines,
                         randomly in a public event that would include the province governor, commune administrator and all
                         colline chiefs as well as representatives from civil society (including Batwa representatives).
Public Disclosure Copy




                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Ishanlosen Odiaua (GEN05)
                         Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              No
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No

                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                          Physical Cultural          No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/     Yes            The Batwa are among the most vulnerable households in
                          BP 4.10                                   Burundi. This small ethnic minority, comprising about 1%



                                                                     Page 8 of 13
                                                                      of the population according to a 2006-8 survey
                                                                      (UNIPROBA & IWGIA, 2008), lives in a state of extreme
                                                                      vulnerability, with limited access to land, social exclusion
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      and unequal access to social services. The Batwa have
                                                                      traditionally lived from hunting and gathering in a
                                                                      migratory forest-based economy, but the reduction of
                                                                      forest cover in the past few decades have undermined
                                                                      their livelihood and they have become sedentary, settling
                                                                      on the margins of Hutu and Tutsi communities. While
                                                                      85% of Batwa households owned some land (according to
                                                                      the latest data gathered from 2006-2008), their
                                                                      landholdings are extremely small, compared even with the
                                                                      small amounts of land owned by non-Batwa households.
                                                                      TTheir housing is also precarious and they often don➢❨ t
                                                                      participate in local comittees. Many still lack access to
                                                                      birth and marriage certificates as well as national IDs,
                                                                      which hamper further their access to basic services.
                                                                      Batwa women have little awareness of their rights and
                                                                      face high risks of early marriage and pregnancy and
                                                                      gender-based violence.
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              In part because of their past nomadic hunting-gathering livelihoods, Batwas have restricted access
                              to land in the communities where they settle. Their specific needs are seldom taken into account
                              in local development plans both through lack of capacity and interest from sectoral service
                              providers and lack of Batwa participation in local development councils. Batwa face severe
                              human endowment gaps (access to reproductive health services, nutrition, and schools), and very
                              limited access to economic opportunities and productive assets. As a result, they mostly live in
                              extreme poverty and face high levels of discrimination. These gaps are particularly stark for Batwa
                              women with high levels of gender-based violence and early marriages, little awareness of their
                              rights, and limited political representation: 13 Batwa women are members of communal councils
                              (out of 68 Batwa councillors). These gaps are large compared to Batwa men but also to other
                              Burundian women.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:


                                                                       Page 9 of 13
                           The project➢❨ s expected impacts on the Batwa are mostly positive, if they actually participate in
                           the project. Through fair access to the cash transfers and their accompanying activities, the
                           impacts on Batwa beneficiaries include: an improvement in the nutrition of beneficiary children
Public Disclosure Copy




                           and pregnant and lactating women; a general improvement in health; strengthened cohesion and
                           social inclusion through increased engagement in the community; increased school attendance and
                           decreased drop-out of Batwa children; increase in the participation of Batwa women in the
                           management of their household goods; and, eventually, increased in income through own income-
                           generation.
                           Potential risks include: lack of transparency in beneficiary selection resulting in the exclusion of
                           eligible Batwa households; low quality of service delivery by service providers across the different
                           steps of the program; cash transfer payment mechanisms not adapted to the particular context of
                           the Batwa; possible siphoning out of funds by payment agencies taking advantage of Batwa low
                           capacity (use and maintenance of cell phones); and, intra-household tensions due to gender norms,
                           as women will be recipients of the transfers.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           Measures to avoid or mitigate adverse impacts linked to the realization of the risks mentioned
                           above include:
                           - Participation of Batwa in all the committees set-up for project implementation as well as in the
                           general assemblies for the selection of collines and validation of beneficiary households,
                           - Support for the acquisition of birth certificates and ID cards,
                           - Consultation with Batwa beneficiaries to identify the most appropriate cash transfer mechanism
                           in specific contexts, and potential partnerships with savings and credit cooperatives to encourage
                           financial inclusion
                           - Specific monitoring of payment processes to Batwa beneficiaries as well as cell phone handling,
                           - Capacity-building for Batwa beneficiary households (use of cell phones, citizenship, literacy) as
                           well as service providers (adult learning with a participatory, inclusive approach, respect for
                           diversity),
Public Disclosure Copy




                           - Consultations with women and youth to identify the specific risks they would face in handling
                           and using cash,
                           - Information about the specific grievance redress mechanism set-up as part of the IPPF
                           implementation.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Based on the experiences in addressing the specific vulnerabilities and discrimination facing the
                           Batwa, the Project will take specific measures to ensure the participation of eligible Batwa
                           households. Batwa households living in the targeted collines will be included in the first list of
                           eligible households (based on planned Batwa census in the four provinces) and surveyed in the
                           PMT survey. The final list of beneficiaries will be publicly validated. The program will also
                           ensure they can participate in the accompanying measures by partnering with NGOs that are
                           experienced in taking into account their specific challenges, especially with cooking and kitchen
                           instruments. Extra behavior change communication may be necessary, in particular for the
                           potential use of cell phones as well as chargers and incentives to open accounts in micro-finance
                           cooperatives to safeguard the transfer monies, given increased risks of thefts. Services providers
                           will ensure that Batwa households can participate in regular IEC/BCC sessions with the rest of the
                           community to foster social inclusion. However, specific sessions on sensitive topics such as
                           reproductive health and gender-based violence may be conducted separately for the Batwa.


                                                                    Page 10 of 13
                           Once the province-level IPPs have been validated by the Batwa beneficiaries, the latter will
                           nominate a provincial representative who will be working closely with the program provincial and
                           communal focal points and coordinate activities targeted to the Batwa.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The Ministry of Human Rights, Social Affairs and Gender raises funds and implement activities
                           targeted to vulnerable groups, including the Batwa. Specific interventions targeting the Batwa
                           include distribution of roofing materials and food transfers. The MDPHASG also advocates for
                           the inclusion of Batwa households in "Peace Villages". At the local level, some associations also
                           conduct activities to support Batwas, specifically or as part of target groups. The Ministry of
                           Public Health and Fight against AIDS has a network of Batwa community health agents that could
                           intervene in the specific sessions mentioned above. Specific capacity-building to ensure quality
                           service delivery by local service providers and to ensure respect of diversity in the local
                           committees will help mitigate some of the risks mentioned above.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The key stakeholders include:
                           - Government: Ministry for Human Rights, Social Affairs and Gender and Permanent Executive
                           Secretary of the National Social Protection and their provincial and commune (in the case of
                           MDPHASG) representations, Ministry of Public Health and Fight against AIDS, Ministry of
                           Education
                           - Donors and international NGOs: World Bank, Concern International, Care, Norwegian Church
                           Aid, World Vision
                           - Civil society: At national level, UNIPROBA (Unis pour le Progres des Batwa) with its provincial
                           and communal representation and some colline antennas. Other representative organizations
                           include Action Batwa and Association Duhaguruke Dukore (ADD); at the local level, associations
                           with specific focus, in need of capacity-strengthening to improve their effectiveness,
                           - Batwa households in the participating collines.

                           Consultations were held in Bujumbura with UNIPROBA, Action Batwa and ADD during the first
Public Disclosure Copy




                           half of 2016. Consultations on the IPPF were held at the provincial level in September 2016 with
                           focus groups including 40 participants (10 from each of the project communes) as well as
                           interviews with key service providers at the provincial level such as medical doctors, and
                           representatives of local governments such as governors or their advisers and provincial
                           representatives of the SEP-CNPS. The participants in focus groups included 4 members of
                           UNIPROBA, 3 women, 2 youth, 1 representative of a local association for each commune. 53
                           women participated out of a total of 156 participants.
                           The IPPF was disclosed in the Renouveau newspaper on November 8 and is available at the SEP-
                           CNPS between November 8 and 30, 2016. A Kirundi translation of the executive summary was
                           disclosed on November 9 and is available at the provincial offices of the SEP-CNPS in Gitega,
                           Karuzi, Kirundo, and Ruyigi for public access.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                          Date of receipt by the Bank                                       19-Oct-2016
                          Date of submission to InfoShop                                    08-Nov-2016




                                                                   Page 11 of 13
                            "In country" Disclosure
                              Burundi                                                          09-Nov-2016
                              Comments: "Le Renouveau" newspaper, November 8, 2016.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                             The translated executive summary was disclosed to provinces, November 9, 2016.
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                             Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                             Indigenous Peoples?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
Public Disclosure Copy




                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Benedicte Leroy De La Briere
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                         Date: 09-Nov-2016



                                                                       Page 12 of 13
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Dena Ringold (PMGR)    Date: 09-Nov-2016
                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                          Page 13 of 13
