                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR17667
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 25-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-Jan-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            China                                        Project ID:           P120234
                            Project Name:       Shandong Confucius and Mencius Cultural Heritage Conservation Project
                                                (P120234)
                            Task Team           Ahmed A. R. Eiweida,Guangming Yan
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       22-Nov-2010                                      Estimated   24-May-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                                                  Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GSU08                                             Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                             Instrument:
                            Sector:             Other social services (64%), General water, sanitation and flood protection
                                                sector (19%), Primary education (15%), Public administra tion- Other social
                                                services (2%)
                            Theme:              Cultural Heritage (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                                         No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        86.56           Total Bank Financing:                                        50.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                                Financing Source                                                                                   Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                              36.56
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                                 50.00
                              Total                                                                                                 86.56
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           The project development objective is to assist Shandong Province to enhance cultural heritage


                                                                                  Page 1 of 8
                         conservation and tourism management and development in Qufu and Zoucheng.
                         Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project Development Objective is to assist Shandong Province to enhance cultural heritage
                         conservation and tourism services in Project areas in Qufu and Zoucheng.
                         3. Project Description
                         Part A. Cultural Heritage Conservation and Presentation

                         1.       Conservation of cultural heritage assets in Qufu Confucius Complex and the Nishan
                         mountain including, inter alia, conservation of the Confucius temple, mansion and cemetery
                         buildings, traditional pavements, stone tablets and inscriptions, modification works for adaptive reuse
                         of heritage buildings; conservation of the Nishan mountain buildings, and slope protection for
                         ancient trees.

                         2.      Conservation of cultural heritage assets in the Ming Old City in Qufu including, inter alia,
                         selected historic mansions and buildings.

                         3.      Conservation, management and display of cultural heritage assets in the Lu Old City in Qufu
                         including, inter alia, conservation of stone inscriptions and walkways; protection and display of
                         ancient city moat and wall; and construction of rest areas and sanitation facilities.

                         4.        Conservation of cultural heritage assets in the Zoucheng Old City including, inter alia,
                         conservation of the Mencius temple, mansion and cemetery buildings, traditional pavements, and
                         ancient trees; restoration of the cemetery boundary wall; modification works for adaptive reuse of
                         heritage buildings; construction of a visitor center and parking lot; installation of safety and
                         surveillance systems; rehabilitation of Xishantou village river and infrastructure including roads and
                         street lighting; and exhibition and display at Mencius Museum.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5.       (a)     Provision of signage, interpretation and digital displays in Qufu and Zoucheng
                         including inter alia, sound guiding systems, roads and street signs, descriptions and explanations of
                         significance of cultural heritage assets, directions to other heritage sites and resting areas, production
                         and distribution of brochures and promotional materials, interactive digital display systems.

                         (b)    Development of a digital display system in Confucius Academy to depict and disseminate
                         Confucius' teachings.

                         Part B. Old City Infrastructure Upgrading

                         1.     Carrying out of urban improvements in the Ming Old City in Qufu, including, inter alia,
                         renewal of trunk infrastructure, and construction of firefighting facilities in the eastern zone of the
                         Ming Old City.

                         2.      Rehabilitation of the city moat in the Ming Old City in Qufu, including diversion of water
                         from the Si River, and landscaping and river course rehabilitation.

                         3.     Carrying out of urban improvements in the Zoucheng Old City, including infrastructure
                         upgrading of three (3) street blocks.



                                                                        Page 2 of 8
                         4.      Rehabilitation of the Yinli River in Zoucheng, including river dredging and regulation, river
                         bank rehabilitation including footpaths, roads, wastewater interceptors, lighting, bridge, water
                         retention weirs, public sanitation facilities, and landscaping.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         5.    Cultural heritage conservation and tourism development in Qufu and Zoucheng, using a
                         community participation approach, through:

                         (a)     Training and technical assistance support for heritage-related small business development,
                         including improving quality of services for selected residents of Qufu and Zoucheng; and

                         (b)     Training in sustainable tourism development, marketing, and tourism management.

                         Part C. Manuals, Guidelines and other Assistance to Project Implementation:

                         Development of:

                         1.      conservation techniques for wood, color paintings, stone tablets, and stone inscriptions;

                         2.      infrastructure networks for the Ming Old City in Qufu;

                         3.      guidelines for old city regeneration, planning, and development control;

                         4.      a manual on community participation and sustainable tourism management;

                         5.      a detailed development plan for the Ming Old City in Qufu; and

                         6.      an update of the Qufu Ming Old City conservation plan.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Part D. Capacity Building and Assistance to Project Implementation

                         Carrying out:

                         1.      assistance for design reviews, Project management and monitoring;

                         2.      assistance for preparation of a management plan for the World Heritage Site;

                         3.      training and study tours for Project related capacity building, including training and
                         exchange program on cultural heritage conservation for staff of cultural heritage conservation
                         agencies in Qufu and Zoucheng;

                         4.      provision of institutional support for the Project through acquisition of office equipment; and

                         5.      provision of consultants' services to assist in external monitoring of resettlement in Qufu.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project location has no change in Project restructuring. All Project activities remain to be located in
                         Qufu and Zoucheng Cities of Jining Municipality, Shandong Province. .


                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Aimin Hao (GSU02)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Chongwu Sun (GEN02)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               Yes          No new EA or EMP is required at this restructuring stage.
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01                    The original documents will apply.
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
                            Pest Management OP 4.09     No
                            Physical Cultural           Yes          One of the key objectives of the project is to conserve
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                     cultural heritage; therefore, OP4.11 is triggered. An
                                                                     analysis of physical cultural resources and their protection
                                                                     measures was conducted as part of the original EA. The
                                                                     EA and the EMP included a special chapter to present
                                                                     relevant information. The physical cultural resource
                                                                     management plan is part of the EA and the EMP.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No           Newly proposed activities as a result of this restructuring
                            BP 4.10                                  are within the same communities as the originally
                                                                     appraised project activities. No ethnic minorities
                                                                     identified based on the four criteria stated in the OP4.10
                                                                     policy.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes             Restructured project entails cancellation of a few
                            OP/BP 4.12                               activities, which will lead to reduced livelihoods impact to
                                                                     local people. The newly added activity is conservation
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     and display of northwestern part of the Lu Old City wall.
                                                                     This will require renting of 93mu collective land,
                                                                     affecting 28 people from 8 households, and removal of
                                                                     two enterprises affecting 13 people. An Abbreviated
                                                                     Resettlement Action Plan has been prepared and
                                                                     disclosed.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:




                                                                       Page 4 of 8
                            The restructure mainly entails cancellation of planned activities which will reduce resettlement
                          impacts both in terms of house demolition and land acquisition. The only newly added activity that
                          will cause livelihoods impact to local people is the conservation and display of northwestern part
Public Disclosure Copy




                          of the Lu Old City wall, which will require renting of 93mu collective land affecting 28 people
                          from 8 households, and removal of two enterprises affecting 13 people. An abbreviated RAP
                          entitled 'Brief Resettlement Action Plan on Conservation, Display and Environmental Renovation
                          for West Section of North Wall of Lu Old City' dated July 20, 2015, was prepared by Shandong
                          Province. The abbreviated RAP was locally disclosed on July 9, 2015, and disclosed at InfoShop
                          on December 31, 2015.

                          Environmental safeguards: The proposed restructuring mainly involves cancellation of originally
                          proposed project components with minor adjustment of project activities, e.g., for the conservation
                          of cultural heritage assets in Zoucheng Old City, rehabilitation of Xishantou Village infrastructure
                          and exhibition and display of Mencius Museum to be added. Since the scale of the new activity is
                          small, the environmental impacts are similar to the original project's component on road and river
                          component, namely, dust, noise, traffic and business interruption, etc. Therefore, it was agreed
                          with the PMO that the original Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared will still apply
                          to the new activity. Relevant mitigation measures should be included in the bidding documents
                          and contracts. In addition, implementation arrangement, monitoring and training needs were
                          identified and included in the EMP and be reported in the project progress report.

                           The environmental performance for the parent project was moderately satisfactory. Environmental
                           management in construction was carried out, according to the EMP. The EMP implementation and
                           environmental monitoring has been included in the semi-annual project progress report and
                           submitted to the Bank as requested.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                            No indirect and long term negative impacts are expected from the proposed project.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           The impacts caused by the application of OP 4.01 will be localized to the respective project
                           locations and for are expected to be positive from long term perspective. No long term negative
                           impacts to local people's livelihoods are expected as described in OP4.12.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                            No alternative considered for restructuring.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                            Resettlement:

                          Resettlement performance and capacity. The PIUs were new to Bank projects at the start of the
                          project, but after training, assistance and instructions from Bank's Social Specialist, there has been
                          marked improvement. The external monitoring team hired by the borrower has strong expertise in
                          city construction and resettlement, and has provided timely support to PIUs in compliance with
                          OP4.12 and local resettlement policy. All necessary RAPs have been prepared to guide
                          resettlement work.

                          Restructure. The restructure will reduce anticipated livelihoods impacts due to cancellation of a
                          series of construction activities. The only newly added activity that will cause livelihoods impact


                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           is the conservation and display of northwestern part of city wall of Lu Old City in Qufu. This
                           activity will require renting of 93mu collective land affecting 28 people from 8 households, and
                           the removal of two enterprises temporarily occupied the land near the city wall. The collective
Public Disclosure Copy




                           land to be rented has been left unattended with only a few households planting vegetables from
                           time to time. And the removal of two enterprises do not entail residential housing. An abbreviated
                           resettlement action plan has been prepared to guide the land renting and enterprise removal. Rate
                           for land renting will be based on local land average production value, and compensation will be
                           paid to the two enterprises based on local standards, which will fully recover their losses.

                           An abbreviated RAP entitled 'Brief Resettlement Action Plan on Conservation, Display and
                           Environmental Renovation for West Section of North Wall of Lu Old City' dated July 20, 2015,
                           was prepared by Shandong Province. It sets out the principles and procedures governing the
                           acquisition of land and related assets, and the compensation, resettlement and rehabilitation of
                           Displaced Persons on account of the execution of the Project, as well as monitoring and reporting
                           arrangements to ensure compliance with said plan, as the same may be revised from time to time
                           with the prior written agreement of the Bank, and such term includes all schedules and
                           supplements to said plan. The abbreviated RAP was locally disclosed on July 9, 2015, and
                           disclosed at InfoShop on December 31, 2015.

                           Environmental safeguards: The original Environmental Management Plan (EMP) prepared will
                           still apply to the new activity and the mitigation measures will be the same or very similar. The
                           adverse impacts during the construction of the proposed new activity include airborne dust, noise,
                           traffic disruption and disposal of spoiled materials. These impacts are short-term and manageable.
                           Contractors will manage the construction site properly through watering construction sites during
                           dry and windy seasons, take measures to mitigate noisy construction activities and avoid/ban night
                           time construction, maintain equipment in good operating conditions, proper handle and dispose
                           dredged materials, and develop temporary traffic plans to detour traffic around construction sites.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             The affected households where land will be rented has been consulted during preparation of the
                           resettlement action plan. The two enterprises were also consulted. An abbreviated RAP entitled
                           'Brief Resettlement Action Plan on Conservation, Display and Environmental Renovation for West
                           Section of North Wall of Lu Old City' dated July 20, 2015, was prepared by Shandong Province.
                           The abbreviated RAP was locally disclosed on July 9, 2015, and disclosed at InfoShop on
                           December 31, 2015.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                       31-Oct-2010
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                    20-Jan-2011
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure

                          Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process



                                                                     Page 6 of 8
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      26-Dec-2015
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   31-Dec-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure
Public Disclosure Copy




                           China                                                            09-Jul-2015
                           Comments: NA
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)

                          41 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the   Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [        ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?



                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Ahmed A. R. Eiweida,Guangming Yan
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Abhas Kumar Jha (PMGR)            Date: 25-Mar-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
