                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                    CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                            Report No.: ISDSC18148

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 02-May-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 26-May-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                           Project ID:      P124296
                            Project Name:      UG - FCPF REDD READINESS (P124296)
                            Task Team          Nigel Ross Hughes
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated
                            Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GEN01

                            Sector(s):        Forestry (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Climate change (100%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:          4.23                 Total Bank Financing:          0.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Financing Source                                                           Amount
                              Borrower                                                                     0.43
                              Readiness Fund of the Forest Carbon Partnership Facility                     3.80
                              Total                                                                        4.23
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           The Project Development Objective is to design a socially and environmentally viable national
                           strategy for reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation as compared to a reference
                           level.
                           C. Project Description
                           The grant will provide Additional Funding to the ongoing REDD+ Readiness Preparation Support in
                           an amount of US$0.25 million from the Strategic Climate Funds (SCF) in support of Uganda➢❨ s
                           preparation of its Forest Investment Program (FIP) Investment Plan (IP).

                           On March 3rd 2015, Uganda submitted an Expression of Interest to participate in the FIP to the FIP
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Sub-Committee. The FIP Sub-Committee selected Uganda as one of the nine new pilot countries
                           that may benefit from FIP at its Meeting in May 2015. A grant of US$250,000 was approved for
                           Uganda to prepare its FIP IP, which Uganda intends to submit to the FIP Sub-Committee meeting in
                           November 2016. The Ministry of Water and Environment (MWE) hosts the National Focal Point
                           (NFP) for FIP, anchored in the Policy and Planning Department (NFP) and in the Forestry Sector
                           Support Department (Alternate NFP). The MWE is the Implementing Agency for this grant.

                           The AF grant will finance a set of activities aimed at preparing a FIP Investment Plan (IP) detailing
                           strategies and actions that help to reduce and avoid deforestation and forest degradation ➢❨ for
                           example by supporting the sustainable forest management of protected forests, tackling drivers of
                           deforestation and forest degradation and for increasing opportunities and incentives for private sector
                           (and private land owners) investment in forestry management. The FIP IP preparation will be closely
                           coordinated with the ongoing preparation of Uganda➢❨ s REDD+ Strategy and seek synergies with
                           this process, especially in terms of consultations.

                           The Investment Plan shall be elaborated through a process led by Uganda➢❨ s MWE. The MWE will
                           establish a multi-disciplinary FIP Planning Team to lead the design of Uganda➢❨ s FIP in a
                           participatory and consultative manner. Uganda➢❨ s FIP will be endorsed/approved by relevant
                           decision making processes and bodies within the Water and Environment Sector and Government of
                           Uganda. Specific activities will include:

                           -        Organization of meetings and workshops with key stakeholders in support of FIP IP
                           preparation.
                           -        Support to the NCCAC and the multi-disciplinary and multi stakeholder FIP Planning Team
                           for effective supervision and technical and policy level leadership during the development of FIP IP
Public Disclosure Copy




                           -        Support to MWE➢❨ s Supervisory and coordination role.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The grant financed activities are limited to analytical studies and consultation processes at the
                           national and sub-national levels and do not include investment activities.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Adequate capacity exists for safeguard issues - the project is implemented by an experienced team in
                           the Ministry of Water and Environment that deals with the national environmental issues in their
                           daily work
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Brenda Joanne Basalwa (GENDR)
                           Constance Nekessa-Ouma (GSU07)
                           Herbert Oule (GEN01)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment      Yes   The FIP investment plan will incorporate specific
                         OP/BP 4.01                          sections on social and environmental safeguards as
                                                             per the FIP guidelines. Through these, social and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             environmental impacts will be transparently and
                                                             inclusively assessed and addressed. The FIP
                                                             Investment plan will set out
                                                             how it will catalyze, support and measure and
                                                             monitor the delivery of, inter alia, the following (as
                                                             appropriate):
                                                             i. Demonstrable improvement in social and economic
                                                             well-being of forest dependent communities,
                                                             including poverty reduction, equitable benefit
                                                             sharing, and acknowledgement
                                                             of the rights and role of indigenous peoples and local
                                                             communities.
                                                             ii. Protection and enhancement of biodiversity.
                                                             iii. Strengthened resilience of ecosystems, with
                                                             associated ecosystem services.
                                                             iv. Economic viability.

                                                             FIP uses safeguard principles and guidelines from
                                                             the Strategic Climate Fund, FIP Design documents
                                                             and FIP Investment Criteria and Financing
                                                             Modalities during the selection process. Proposed
                                                             country programs must demonstrate clear strategies
                                                             and a viable roadmap on achieving greenhouse gas
                                                             mitigation and sustainable development while also
                                                             implementing safeguards. The future investments
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             and carbon finance transactions will require specific
                                                             environmental and social assessments.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   The application of this policy seeks to ensure that all
                                                             options proposed in the FIP IP take into account the
                                                             conservation of biodiversity, as well as the numerous
                                                             environmental services and products that natural
                                                             habitats provide to human society. Overall, REDD+
                                                             activities, including those proposed under FIP, are
                                                             expected to have significant positive impacts on
                                                             natural habitats, as the country puts in place an
                                                             effective strategy to reduce loss of natural forests.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   Overall, REDD+ activities, including those proposed
                                                             under FIP, are expected to have significant positive
                                                             impacts on forests, in that the main goal of the
                                                             program is to reduce deforestation and forest
                                                             degradation, while contributing to the well-being of
                                                             forest-dependent communities. The FIP IP will
                                                             reflect the requirements of the Bank➢❨ s Operational
                                                             Policy regarding forest management.
                                                              The R-PP and the FIP/IP will be elaborated largely
                                                              on the basis of existing and recent experience of
                                                              forest conservation and Sustainable Forest
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              Management. During this preparation phase, ongoing
                                                              initiatives will be evaluated in order to ensure lessons
                                                              are incorporated early in the design and key social
                                                              and environmental risks and potential impacts
                                                              associated with FIP IP and R-PP are considered in
                                                              they safeguard sections.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09        TBD   This policy could be triggered depending on the final
                                                              scope of the FIP IP. Reforestation activities, for
                                                              instance, could trigger this policy, depending on the
                                                              methods employed by concrete activities on the
                                                              ground to manage pests.
                         Physical Cultural Resources    TBD   Some of the future project activities may affect
                         OP/BP 4.11                           physical cultural resources. Further investigation is
                                                              needed to determine if this policy would be triggered
                                                              or not.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP       TBD   REDD+ activities might trigger the Indigenous
                         4.10                                 People Policy in situations involving the issue of IPs
                                                              living in protected areas, loss of livelihood pertaining
                                                              to FIP Investment Plan implementation, access and
                                                              rights to land, user rights, land tenure to include
                                                              customary land disputes, carbon rights, benefit
                                                              sharing.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/   TBD   REDD+ activities, including those proposed under
                         BP 4.12                              FIP, might trigger Involuntary Resettlement in
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              situations involving involuntary restrictions of access
                                                              to resources within legally designated protected
                                                              areas, land acquisition or forest management /
                                                              reforestation areas. The FIP IP will avoid involuntary
                                                              resettlement wherever possible and to the extent
                                                              feasible. In the event where the FIP IP identifies
                                                              investments that could conceivably and indirectly
                                                              lead to involuntary resettlement, the IP will identify
                                                              measures that would minimize and mitigate potential
                                                              adverse social and economic impacts in the event
                                                              that detailed investment planning subsequently takes
                                                              place.
                         Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37      No    The REDD+ activities do not involve the
                                                              construction of new or use of existing dams.
                         Projects on International      No    The REDD+ activities do not involve international
                         Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterways
                         Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No    Not triggered
                         BP 7.60
                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Jun-2017
Public Disclosure Copy




                               B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                                  The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
                                      It is envisioned that the safeguards policies mentioned below may be triggered in the REDD+
                                      Readiness process. The Additional Funding grant activities do not trigger any new safeguards
                                      policies; all safeguards treatment remains the same as under original financing.

                                      The grant will not finance at this stage any concrete investment activities on the ground and is thus
                                      not expected to have any direct environmental and social impact on the ground. However, grant
                                      financed activities might have indirect impacts since the findings from analytical work carried out
                                      under the grant may influence the design of the national REDD+ Strategy. The final FIP IP will
                                      propose a pipeline of investments, each of which will go through necessary Environmental and
                                      Social Safeguards due diligence if the Bank (or another development partner) finances them.

                                      Safeguards considerations of the overall REDD+ Readiness as financed by the main FCPF grant
                                      continue to be covered as part of the Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA). The
                                      FCPF is using a Strategic Environmental and Social Assessment (SESA) to integrate key
                                      environmental and social considerations into REDD+ Readiness by combining analytical and
                                      participatory approaches. The SESA ensures (i) integration of social and environmental
                                      considerations into the REDD+ Readiness process, in particular into the REDD+ strategy; (ii)
                                      stakeholder participation in identifying and prioritizing key issues; (iii) assessment of policy,
                                      institutional and capacity gaps to manage these priorities and recommendations; and (iv)
                                      disclosure of findings in the REDD Country➢❨ s progress reports on Readiness preparation.

                                      The SESA preparation is financed with the original grant. The SESA process has been delayed;
                                      however, it is expected to commence in May 2016, once the procurement process is completed.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                      The SESA work will run in parallel to preparation of the REDD+ Strategy and is expected to
                                      result in a SESA report and an Environmental and Social Management Framework by the end of
                                      2016.

                                      The design and elaboration of the FIP IP will include a wide stakeholder consultation process
                                      (including local communities and private actors and taking into account gender considerations)
                                      which address the need of the key safeguards triggered, at the level of the investment plan.
                         IV. APPROVALS
                                 Task Team Leader(s): Name: Nigel Ross Hughes
                                 Approved By:
                                 Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                                                                                               Date: 21-May-2016
                                 Practice Manager/    Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                                                                                                     Date: 26-May-2016
                                 Manager:




                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
