                                               INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                           Report No.: ISDSA13924
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 07-Sep-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Sep-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          China                              Project ID:   P153892
                            Project Name:     Guangxi Rural Poverty Alleviation Pilot Project (P153892)
                            Task Team         Paavo Eliste
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated         22-Jun-2016               Estimated     21-Dec-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GFA02                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       177.00           Total Bank Financing:    100.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                        Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Borrower                                                                                  77.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                    100.00
                              Total                                                                                    177.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to increase income generation opportunities through
                           demonstration of value chain development models in selected poverty counties of Guangxi.
                            3. Project Description
                           The project comprises four components, which are summarized below. A detailed project
                           description is provided in Annex 2. The project would be implemented over a period of six years.

                           Component 1: Improvement of Pro-Poor Value Chains. This component aims to address market


                                                                      Page 1 of 13
                         failures in the development of agricultural and non-agricultural rural value chains and key industries
                         with a particular focus on increasing the value of economic activities of targeted farmer cooperatives.
                         Component 1 comprises the following two sub-components:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a)        Cooperative Development Fund (CDF) would provide grant financing to new or existing
                         cooperatives (about 10 per county and 120 over the project implementation). The CDF would be
                         managed by the selected farmer and non-farmer cooperatives who will implement their investment
                         plans for value chain development. These investment plans would be initiated by cooperatives and
                         formulated jointly with the help of technical experts, agro-enterprises, and county governments.
                         Cooperatives would need to provide a beneficiary contribution at levels reflecting the financial
                         capacity of the individual cooperatives. Investment proposals would be subject to appraisal and
                         approval by the county and Regional PMOs. Funds could be used by the cooperatives to invest
                         primarily in the fixed value adding production and processing equipment and facilities, nurseries,
                         advanced breeding stations, equipment for improved seed production, storage facilities for
                         agricultural produce, and other small-scale cooperative level infrastructure, goods, and related
                         capacity building and technical assistance services. Depending on the actual needs of cooperatives,
                         these investments may be associated with agricultural production (such as herbs, dragon fruit, kiwi,
                         oil tea, etc), livestock (goats, pigs, chicken, etc), rural tourism, and related processing and marketing
                         equipment and equipment, infrastructure and services. The component would also pay significant
                         attention on strengthening of the institutional and management structures of the cooperatives. The
                         project will allocate a proportion of the CDF fund for capacity building and training of cooperatives
                         which would be mandatory before investments to economic activities will be made available. The
                         cooperative training activities supported through the project would cover management and technical
                         topics, and quality of the training activities delivered would be a special area of focus in the training
                         plans. Specific measures would be taken to ensure participation of women in cooperatives both as
                         individual members and in management boards. Furthermore, the governance structures of the
                         beneficiary cooperatives must be aligned with the provisions of the cooperative law, and the CDF
                         review and approval process will pay close attention to the proposed ownership structures to ensure
                         equitable sharing of benefits. The project will monitor the institutional development aspects of
Public Disclosure Copy




                         farmer cooperatives by using the Management Effectiveness Tracking Tool (METT).

                         b)       Matching Grant for Enterprises (MG) would provide matching grants to finance enterprise
                         investments, which demonstrate linkages and benefit sharing arrangements with targeted
                         cooperatives of poor farmers. It is expected that some 20-30 grants could be awarded to eligible
                         enterprises individually or in partnership with farmer cooperatives. These grants will be identified
                         during the project implementation. Numbers of poor farmers participating in value adding income
                         generation activities and fair benefit sharing arrangements would be key selection criteria for such
                         matching grants. The grants would be provided based on the application process which includes
                         transparent evaluation and competitive selection process (the details will be defined in the
                         Operational Manual). To ensure ownership and to demonstrate commitment, the selected enterprises
                         would need to match the grant amount with their own funds at negotiated level of cost-sharing
                         requirement which would need to come from the enterprises own resources and/or from commercial
                         lending. The project will provide matching grants up to 30 percent from total investment cost. The
                         matching grants aim to leverage private investments with strong public good characteristics, such as
                         income-generating activities for poor farmers, and would focus on investment in the following key
                         areas: storage and logistics systems; processing; marketing (branding, certification, etc.) and product
                         quality (including food safety improvement). The management and implementation of this
                         subcomponent would be done at the Regional level.



                                                                       Page 2 of 13
                         Component 2: Improving Public Infrastructure and Services. This component would support the
                         establishment and strengthening of public infrastructure and service systems in support of value
                         chain/key industry development under Component 1 and would include two subcomponents:
Public Disclosure Copy




                         a)       Rural Infrastructure, which would be identified, to the extent possible, to complement the
                         CDF investments under the Component 1. The component would support: (i) rehabilitation and
                         construction of production road infrastructure, such as off-grade access roads to village/cooperative
                         production areas or processing and marketing facilities, and rehabilitation and construction of tractor
                         roads, field tracks, and foot paths; (ii) rehabilitation and construction of small-scale irrigation and
                         drainage infrastructure and construction of small water storage facilities; (iii) establishment of IT and
                         telecommunication infrastructure and procurement of information infrastructure and equipment; and
                         (iv) rehabilitation or construction of public market facilities, electricity supply and other
                         infrastructure and procurement of related equipment.

                         b)       Risk management, which would support the development of value chain or industry-level
                         comprehensive risk assessment and risk mitigation plans for a clusters of counties. The plans would
                         consider: (i) production risks (e.g. natural disaster, outbreaks of diseases, etc.), (ii) marketing risks
                         including potential risk of food safety and food quality violation and the impact on consumer trust by
                         the project beneficiaries or outside fellow producers/suppliers, and (iii) financial risk such as cash
                         flow constraints and working capital requirements. The risk management and mitigation plans would
                         identify responsibilities of public and private stakeholders (and main audience of these plans), such
                         as producers, processors, food safety testing and quality institutions, insurance companies, etc. and
                         identify gaps and bottlenecks, which will be addressed under the project. The project investment
                         would follow priorities identified in the risk mitigation plans and could include, inter alia,
                         investments in food safety testing and control (tests according to a testing regime or if necessary
                         additional training and equipment for the related public sector testing/controlling institutions, such as
                         FDA offices), initial subsidies for crop and livestock insurance schemes etc. as part of the risk
                         management plan implementation. Marketing risks mitigation support could include developing and
                         registration and protection of local/regional brands, geographical indication as well as strategic
Public Disclosure Copy




                         product marketing and promotion. The component would finance mainly TA and consultant services,
                         equipment and crop and livestock insurance subsidies.

                         Component 3: Enhancing Investments in Poor Areas. This component would improve and facilitate
                         investments in poor area s by existing and new micro-entrepreneurs and business entities, such as
                         Small and Medium Enterprises (SMEs), migrant returnees, or cooperatives and would include two
                         activities:

                         a)       Business Incubation, which would support the setting up and operation of Business
                         Incubation Centers (BICs) in each county, which will provide support for existing and start-up
                         businesses. The BICs would support development of marketing skills and enable market linkages by
                         reducÂ¬ing information asymmetries, building trust, and creating shared value between value chain
                         actors. They would also provide training for financial management skills and help enterprises with
                         access to appropriate financing products by facilitating linkages with partnering financial institutions.
                         In addition, BICs will offer business development services such as training (business management,
                         business planning), and provide assistance with navigating regulatory reÂ¬quirements, standards,
                         and compliance. Other services could include promotion of business networks and fairs and media
                         events to promote the products of participating enterprises. Finally, the BICs would offer to their
                         clients office facilities and meeting rooms with reliable internet connection to enable sales,
                         procurement, and management functions to operate in a proÂ¬fessional environment. The

                                                                       Page 3 of 13
                         component would provide seed funding in the form of grant but the BICs are expected to become
                         financially sustainable over time through generation of its own revenue to reach a point where it can
                         cover its on-going operating expenses through earned revenues. The component will finance
Public Disclosure Copy




                         equipment, TA and related consultancy services, necessary office equipment and operating costs
                         associated with running of business incubation centers (e.g. 100% during year 1-2 and 50% from
                         year 3 onward).

                         b)       Improved Access to Financing will support, in cooperation with local finance institutions, the
                         scaling-up of the government program of a comprehensive household credit rating piloted in
                         Tiandong county and the validation or rural assets, which would help individual households and
                         cooperatives accessing loans from local finance institutions. Credit rating will be done on a biannual
                         basis (twice under the project) for all households in the project villages. The validation of assets,
                         which can be used as collateral, will help cooperatives to access loans including loans for working
                         capital. The project support of the credit rating would be output based with a prior agreed payment
                         per each rated household for the rating teams. For the rural asset validation the project would engage
                         and support professional service providers such as asset validation firms or accounting companies.

                         Component 4: Project Management, M&E and Learning. This component would aim to strengthen
                         and develop the administrative and technical capacity of staff of the Project Management Offices at
                         the county, prefecture and regional level to manage the project effectively. The component would in
                         particular aim to establish a monitoring and evaluation and impact evaluation system in order to
                         enable the learning from the pilot nature of the project with an external professional monitoring
                         agency to be engaged under the project. The component would also support regular supervision,
                         progress monitoring, acceptance checks, and safeguards implementation supervision and monitoring.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The proposed project areas are rural areas located in the northwestern Guangxi. The project area
                         extends from the edge of Yunnan-Guangxi-Guizhou karst region to earth hilly region (northwest to
Public Disclosure Copy




                         southeast). Within this area more than 100 administrative villages in 10 project counties under the
                         two prefecture-level cities of Baise and Hechi are proposed. These include: Tiandong, Tianlin, Leye,
                         Donglan, Bama, Fengshan, Dahua, Du-an, and Pingguo County, and Yizhou City (a county-level
                         city). About 30% of the potential project villages presents mild to severe level of rock desertification,
                         namely, the result of soil erosion in karstic area. All of the selected counties/city are characterized by
                         a high level of poverty combined with poor natural resource conditions, difficulties in water
                         management, limited availability of farm land, and a majority population ethnic minorities.

                         The proposed project area is subject to tropical or sub-tropical weather. Hechi City has an area of
                         33,508 km2 and a population of 4.5 million (2014). Annual average temperature is 16.9~21.5 degrees
                         Celsius. Annual average precipitation is 1,200~1,600mm. Baise City has an area of 32,652 km2 and
                         a population of 3.8 million. Annual average temperature is 19~22.1 degrees Celsius. Annual average
                         precipitation is 1,113~1,713mm. These preliminary natural and social data indicate that, a) light, heat
                         and rainfall conditions are favorable for vegetation growth; b) rainfall is relatively abundant, but due
                         to the porous rocky geology in karstic area, surface water easily goes underground that brings
                         difficulty to household and farmland water uses; 3) in karstic area, soil coverage is thin and
                         vulnerable to natural or human activity induced erosion; while the landscape is beautiful; and 4) the
                         large population in the project area poses heavy pressure on natural resources, notably farmland.

                         Project activities will be implemented in rural communities with very small investment in rural


                                                                       Page 4 of 13
                         facilities such as storage, processing and a few rural markets. No large scale land acquisition nor
                         resettlement is foreseen. A high proportion of farmers will use their land as production resource
                         when joining cooperatives.. The Ecological Resettlement is one of the government poverty reduction
Public Disclosure Copy




                         programs in Guangxi. However, the selection of project villages followed poverty criteria and
                         economic development potential for agricultural and non-agricultural activities. The villages which
                         were included under the project would need to have a long-term development perspective (eg stable
                         communities by having availability of labor and access to natural resources) and be not subject to on-
                         going or future resettlement under the government ecological resettlement programs.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Aimin Hao (GSU02)
                         Ning Yang (GEN2A)

                         6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental               Yes            The project is assigned Category B based on screening of
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      environmental and social issues. An Environmental and
                                                                    Social Management Framework (ESMF), including a
                                                                    generic environmental management plan and pest
                                                                    management plan were prepared. Public consultation and
                                                                    information disclosure was conducted following OP4.01.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes            The policy is triggered because of the location and nature
                         4.04                                       of the proposed project activities. Agricultural production
                                                                    and small scale infrastructure related activities are likely
                                                                    to have limited impacts on natural habitats. Sub-project
                                                                    screening criteria includes the requirement on avoidance
                                                                    of critical natural habitats or potential significant impacts
                                                                    on natural habitats. The EMP includes measures to
                                                                    mitigate impacts on natural habitats. The project will not
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                    involve significant degradation or conversion of any
                                                                    critical natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             The agricultural products involved in the project will be
                                                                    diverse (12 plants are proposed so far). Only several are
                                                                    trees (such as mango and orange); others include shrubs
                                                                    (e.g. tee) and veins (e.g. dragon fruit and grape). These
                                                                    are all counted as woodland in the client➢❨ s project
                                                                    proposals. There will be no large scale plantation
                                                                    supported under the project. The project interventions are
                                                                    to mainly improve the productivity and quality of existing
                                                                    plants, though some limited new plantation is expected to
                                                                    take place. The EMP included measures to manage the
                                                                    general environmental and natural habitat issues.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes                While the project does not finance directly pesticides and
                                                                    agrochemicals, increased level of agricultural production
                                                                    activities may lead for farmers to use pesticides using
                                                                    their own funds.

                                                                    The pesticides uses for this project would be limited given



                                                                     Page 5 of 13
                                                        the following considerations: 1) a significant share of
                                                        agriculture products supported in the project are all
                                                        perennial plants that are diverse and are adapted to local
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        ecological environment and do not thus require significant
                                                        use of agrochemicals. Compared to annual crop
                                                        production, pesticide uses are thus anticipated limited; 2)
                                                        the main thrust of the project is to support production of
                                                        safe and pollution free food products from mountain areas
                                                        (organic and green food) for which there is currently a
                                                        strong demand among increasingly quality conscious
                                                        urban consumers. Overuse of agrochemicals would thus
                                                        go against this core principle of the project. The PMP
                                                        includes a set of physical, mechanical and biological pest
                                                        control measures that are specific to each type of plants
                                                        and a concrete plan to promote IPM to reduce chemical
                                                        pesticides.
                         Physical Cultural        No    The project doesn➢❨ t involve any physical cultural
                         Resources OP/BP 4.11           resources. Sub-project screening criteria includes the
                                                        requirement on avoidance or potential significant impacts
                                                        on PCRs. Chance-finds procedures are included in the
                                                        EMP.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/   Yes   The World Bank➢❨ s safeguard policy on ethnic
                         BP 4.10                        minorities (Indigenous Peoples OP/BP4.10) is triggered.
                                                        Ethnic minority people account for more than 87 percent
                                                        of total population in the 10 project counties. Different
                                                        minority ethnic groups are present in project areas,
                                                        including the Yao, Dong, Gelao, Maonan, and Zhuang.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                        The latter make up nearly 90 percent of all ethnic
                                                        minorities in the project villages. To ensure that smaller
                                                        ethnic minority groups equally benefit from the project
                                                        investments where feasible, an Ethnic Minority
                                                        Development Framework (EMDF) has been prepared.
                                                        Based on this EMDF, project activities benefiting smaller
                                                        ethnic groups will be given preference when selecting
                                                        investment proposals from cooperatives, and special
                                                        attention will be paid to avoid any impact on ethnic
                                                        cultures in project supported tourism development
                                                        proposals. Information on equal participation of ethnic
                                                        minority groups was disclosed locally on May 13, 2016,
                                                        and at InfoShop on July 22.
                         Involuntary Resettlement Yes   No involuntary resettlement is foreseen and only very
                         OP/BP 4.12                     small-scale land acquisition is expected to take place
                                                        under the project for small civil works such as
                                                        construction of storage and agricultural processing
                                                        facilities. In order to ensure that any land acquisition is
                                                        minimized and fully compensated, the World Bank➢❨ s
                                                        involuntary resettlement/land acquisition safeguard policy


                                                         Page 6 of 13
                                                                      (Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP4.12) is triggered.
                                                                      Because detailed project activities will be decided during
                                                                      implementation through participatory decision making
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      within individual cooperatives, a Resettlement Policy
                                                                      Framework (RPF) has been prepared to guide the proper
                                                                      implementation of OP4.12.
                                                                      Some farmers will use their land as input when joining
                                                                      cooperatives. Proper cooperative management procedures
                                                                      will ensure that farmers understand risks associated with
                                                                      investment, and no farmer households should feel obliged
                                                                      to join against their free will.
                                                                      Small scale ecological resettlement as a means to poverty
                                                                      alleviation has been planned in some project counties. The
                                                                      vast majority of proposed project activities do not overlap
                                                                      with local ecological resettlement. It has been agreed with
                                                                      Guangxi Regional PMO and all 10 project counties that
                                                                      villages planned for ecological resettlement will NOT be
                                                                      included in project activities. This is a key focus of
                                                                      attention for project monitoring and supervision. The RPF
                                                                      has been disclosed locally on May 13, 2016 and at
                                                                      InfoShop on July 22.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project will not involve any dams. Water tanks to be
                            4.37                                      supported by the project are small storage facilities with a
                                                                      capacity range from several to dozens of cubic meters that
                                                                      will store rain water. Channels will be built to direct the
                                                                      water for household and/or irrigation uses. It also should
                                                                      be noted that in the karstic part of the project area,
                                                                      precipitation is adequate but due to porous karstic geology
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      it is difficult to keep surface water, hence these kind of
                                                                      water tanks are useful.
                            Projects on International   No            The project does not involve in any international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways. The policy is not triggered.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            The project is not located in any disputed areas. The
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          policy is not triggered.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              Environment

                             OP 4.01 Environmental Assessment. Three environmental policies triggered for the project, i.e.
                             OP4.01 Environmental Assessment, OP4.04 Natural Habitats and OP4.09 Pest Management As
                             per OP4.01, the project is assigned Category B for environmental purpose given the nature of the
                             project and the limited scale of its activities, and associated environmental and social impacts. As
                             designed the project will adopt a framework approach because the specific location of investments


                                                                       Page 7 of 13
                         under Components 1 and 2 will be identified during the implementation through a participatory
                         approach. Therefore, an Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF), including a
                         generic Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Pest Management Plan (PMP) was
Public Disclosure Copy




                         developed during the project preparation. Several WBG Environmental, Health and Safety
                         Guidelines relevant to agriculture sector were incorporated into the EMP where applicable.

                         Component 1a Cooperative Development Fund (CDF) and 2a Rural Infrastructure will involve
                         physical activities. Under the CDF, the project will support the establishment and capacity
                         building of over one hundred new or existing village level cooperatives. The project will finance
                         their production and market related equipment and facilities, nurseries, breeding and seed
                         production, and cooperative level infrastructure. These cooperatives may engage in agricultural
                         production of over ten types of plants (such as dragon fruit, kiwi and oil tea) and four types of
                         livestock (such as pig, chicken) and rural tourism. These plants are all perennial and existing local
                         species. The project doesn➢❨ t involve massive plantation or large scale livestock farm, but am to
                         help organize farmers better and help them to improve product yield and quality and remove the
                         bottlenecks in production or marketing.

                         Component 2a will support rehabilitation or construction of public infrastructure in rural areas,
                         including off-grade access roads, small-scale irrigation and drainage facilities, small water storage
                         tanks, market facilities and household power supply and information facilities. These
                         infrastructure will be managed by local governments.

                         The project will bring about environmental and social benefits in terms of improved agricultural
                         practices and increased income generation opportunities for poor communities in the project area.
                         The agricultural production and infrastructure construction activities, if not well managed, may
                         bring negative environmental and social impacts, including: (1) impacts on natural habitats such as
                         soil erosion, vegetation clearance and water pollution, particularly in the karst area; (2)
                         construction impacts and social disturbance such as noise and dust associated with small civil
                         works; (3) waste management in rural tourism facilities and livestock farms during operation; (4)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         pesticides management associated with growing a number of agricultural products.

                         These environmental and social impacts are found to be limited, localized and temporary. The
                         project ESMF included baseline survey, impact assessment, environmental management plans
                         specific to each type of activities and procedures to address environmental and social issues, which
                         are expected to avoid and mitigate these impacts adequately. The ESMF has been reviewed by the
                         Bank team and considered satisfactory to Bank safeguards policy and domestic requirements.

                         OP 4.04 Natural Habitats. During the development of the ESMF, surveys on ecological and social
                         baselines were carried out through desk review, consultation and field visits. A number of
                         ecologically sensitive areas, including nature reserves, scenery areas, geological parks, and
                         drinking water source protection areas were identified in the project region. Given the location of
                         the candidate project villages and these sensitive areas, the project activities is unlikely to affect
                         these sensitive areas. The project design and the ESMF have incorporated procedures and
                         measures to avoid involving the identified sensitive areas and to mitigate effectively the potential
                         impacts to the common natural habitats in the project area.

                         The agricultural products involved in the project are local featured perennial plants. These plants
                         are diverse; several are fruit trees (e.g. mango and orange); others include shrubs (e.g. oil tee) and
                         veins (e.g. dragon fruit, kiwi and grape). The project will not support large scale plantation, but

                                                                    Page 8 of 13
                         rather to improve the production yield and quality through promoting advanced agricultural
                         technologies and organic food. There may be limited vegetation clearance and soil erosion
                         associated with the growing activities, which have been assessed and mitigation measures included
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the EMP.

                         Particular attention was given to the karstic part of the project area the karst topography are prone
                         to soil erosion due to thin soil coverage. A set of measures and good practices in the karstic area
                         were incorporated into the EMP.


                         OP 4.09 Pest Management. The project does not finance directly pesticides and agrochemicals,
                         increased level of agricultural production activities supported the by the project Component 1a
                         may led for farmers to use pesticides using their own funds to control agricultural pests. Survey on
                         the pest management practices in the project area was conducted; plant specific pesticide practices
                         were studied. The pesticides uses for this project would be limited given the following
                         considerations: 1) a significant share of agriculture products supported in the project are all
                         perennial plants that are diverse and are adapted to local ecological environment and do not thus
                         require significant use of agrochemicals. Compared to annual crop production, pesticide uses are
                         thus anticipated limited; 2) the main thrust of the project is to support production of safe and
                         pollution free food products from mountain areas (organic and green food) for which there is
                         currently a strong demand among increasingly quality conscious urban consumers. To this end, the
                         PMP includes a set of physical, mechanical and biological pest control measures that are specific
                         to each type of plants and a concrete plan to promote IPM to reduce chemical pesticides. Capacity
                         building, monitoring and reporting requirements are included as well. Further, during
                         implementation farmer cooperatives to be selected will include in their proposals supplemental
                         requirements, as necessary. on pest management measures (including training aspect) specific to
                         plant types.

                         Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                         OP 4.10 Indigenous Peoples. More than 87% of population in the ten project counties are ethnic
                         minority groups, with the Zhuang ethnic minority as the predominant group accounting for 74.5%
                         of total population and nearly 90% of ethnic minority population, and the second largest is Han
                         accouting for 12.7%. Other smaller ethnic minority groups in the project area are Yao (11.5%),
                         Dong, Gelao, Shui, and Maonan. The Zhuang people have development features similar to those
                         of the Han, the main Chinese population. It is the smaller ethnic minority groups, which are Yao,
                         Miao, Dong, and Maonan, that need attention from the project to ensure equitable access to project
                         benefits. An Ethnic Minority Development Framework (EMDF) has been prepared to promote
                         active participation in project activities by smaller ethnic minority groups wherever feasible.
                         Based on this EMDF, special attention will be paid to avoid any impact on ethnic cultures in
                         project-supported tourism development proposals.

                         OP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement. No resettlement is expected to take place due to project
                         activities. However, small scale civil works are expected in order to construct necessary rural
                         facilities such as storage, agricultural product processing facilities, and market places. The detailed
                         activities will be decided through the management of individual cooperatives using participatory
                         decision making process. When farmers use their land as input to join cooperatives, they should be
                         fully informed of risks associated with investment. No farmer households should be obliged to join
                         a cooperative against their free will. Ecological resettlement was planned as means of poverty

                                                                    Page 9 of 13
                           alleviation by local government. No overlap has been identified with proposed project activities. It
                           has been agreed with Guangxi Regional PMO and the 10 project counties that villages involved in
                           ecological resettlement will NOT be included in project activities, and this will be a focus of
Public Disclosure Copy




                           attention for monitoring and supervision.

                           A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared and disclosed to guide proper
                           compliance with OP4.12. The project management offices at various levels will be responsible for
                           monitoring of compliance with OP4.12 and include updates in the project progress report. Project
                           supervision by the Bank team will pay close attention to safeguards compliance.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Through the promotion of improved agricultural production practices and improvement of rural
                           infrastructure, the project are expected to help local poor communities to better carry out
                           agricultural production and to reduce reliance on the natural resources, this will in long term bring
                           environmental and social benefits in terms of protection of farmland, conservation of natural
                           habitats and the control of soil erosion in karst area (i.e. the process of ➢❨ rocky
                           desertification➢❨ ). The negative impacts associated with the project activities are expected to be
                           limited, localized and temporary. Cumulative impacts are minimal because the project activities
                           will be of small scale and scattered. The EMP included project intervention-specific mitigation
                           measures with particular attention to the karstic area.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           At project design level, considering that the project area➢❨ s poverty is the result of limited
                           availability of natural resource and farmland, difficulties in water management (particularly in the
                           karstic area), and long standing backward livelihood practices, the project aims to build
                           farmer➢❨ s capacity through improve efficiency and value-added in the agricultural production.
                           To this end the project do not support large-scale plantation or livestock farms, but rather to
Public Disclosure Copy




                           promote green local features species and organic or green food. In addition, during the
                           development of the project design and ESMF, several alternatives were considered, including
                           selection of plant species and growing practices that are in favor of the control of soil erosion and
                           water pollution in karst area and the use of pesticides.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The RPMO engaged an accredited EIA consultant to prepare the ESMF, which addresses the
                           project related environmental and social issues, and sets out principles and procedures to address
                           the environment and social impacts of sub-projects. The RPMO will take overall responsibility of
                           the implementation of the ESMF and EMP.

                           The ESMF includes a study of environmental and social baselines which include specific
                           description of each project counties, an inventory of potential project villages and their key
                           environmental issues which will help screen and assess subproject impacts during the project
                           implementation. The ESMF included an assessment of potential environmental and social impacts,
                           for which the karstic part of the project area was given particular attention. The ESMF also
                           included procedures for sub-project screening, environmental document preparation, information
                           disclosure and public consultation, review and approval, which follow the Bank safeguard policy
                           and domestic environmental regulatory requirements.



                                                                     Page 10 of 13
                           The ESMF includes a grievance redress mechanism and PMO/PIU capacity building plan, a
                           generic Environmental Management Plan (EMP) and Pest Management Plan (PMP). The EMP
                           includes activity-specific mitigation plans for agriculture related growing activities, rural
Public Disclosure Copy




                           infrastructure rehabilitation and construction, and storage and market facilities. In addition to
                           general mitigation measures, the EMP includes mitigation measures specific to subproject
                           activities in karst areas. The PMP addresses the selection and use of pesticides building on the
                           integrated pest management approach. A set of physical, mechanical and biological pest control
                           measures that are specific to each type of plants and a concrete plan to promote IPM to reduce
                           chemical pesticides. Monitoring and budget requirements are included in the ESMF as well.

                           The RPMO commissioned a social research team to conduct a thorough social assessment, based
                           on which a Resettlement Policy Framework and an Ethnic Minority Development Framework was
                           prepared to address OP 4.12 and OP 4.10. The RPMO designated staff to be responsible for
                           safeguards compliance, and is committed to include monitoring of safeguards compliance into
                           project progress reports.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           Public consultation and information disclosure was carried out during the project preparation. The
                           project environmental and social consultants carried out consultation through questionnaire
                           survey, focused group meeting and interviews. Public opinions have been incorporated into the
                           project design and the ESMF/EMP. The draft full ESMF, including PMP, was disclosed locally
                           and on the website of Guangxi Poverty Reduction on May 12, 2016, with newspaper
                           announcement of the disclosure on Guangxi Daily on May 13, 2016. The RPF and IPDF was
                           disclosed locally on May 12, 2016 as well.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-May-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     02-Jun-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              12-May-2016
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        30-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     02-Jun-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                              12-May-2016
                           Comments:
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                        20-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                     02-Jun-2016




                                                                     Page 11 of 13
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            12-May-2016
                           Comments:
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Pest Management Plan
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      20-May-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   02-Jun-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           China                                                            12-May-2016
                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of critical natural habitats?
                          If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
                          project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
                         OP 4.09 - Pest Management
                          Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
                          in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
                          Management Specialist?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?


                                                                     Page 12 of 13
                             If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                            OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                             Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                             If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Practice Manager review the plan?
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
Public Disclosure Copy




                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Paavo Eliste
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Peter Leonard (SA)                                Date: 07-Sep-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                          Date: 08-Sep-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                        Page 13 of 13
