                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                               Report No.: ISDSC20746

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 22-Dec-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:        Vietnam                             Project ID:       P162792
                            Project Name:
                            Team Leader(s): Thu Thi Le Nguyen
                            Estimated Date 30-Jun-2017
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:                                      Lending           IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 3.27                           Total Bank Financing: 0.27
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              GLOBAL ENVIRONMENT - Associated IBRD Fund                                                   0.27
                              Global Environment Facility - IBRD as Implementing
                                                                                                                                  3
                              Agency
                            Environment       C - Not Required
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Category:

                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The proposed project development objective is to strengthen the policy and regulatory framework,
                           and the related implementation capacity for endangered wildlife protection in Vietnam.
                           C. Project Description
                           The project activities fall under four different components, which include: (i) Strengthen legal and
                           regulatory frameworks; (ii) Enhance capacity to implement and enforce more effectively Vietnam's
                           wildlife protection related policies and regulations; (iii) Improve knowledge and support behavior
                           change; and (iv) Project management. These components are detailed below.

                           Component 1: Strengthen legal and regulatory framework (US$1m). This component would aim to
                           harmonize legal instruments provided under national wildlife conservation related laws and
                           regulations to make clarity on responsibilities of agencies engaging in endangered wildlife
                           protection. The component would provide support to assess the implementation status of the 2008
                           Law on Biodiversity in relation to the protection of endangered wildlife and identify gaps. Informed
                           by this assessment, guidance to improve the application of the Law towards more effectively
                           protecting endangered wildlife in Vietnam would be provided. The assessment, along with other
                           recommendations (e.g. ICCWC toolkit) would form the basis for prioritized activities for
                           implementation under MONRE➢❨ s mandate. In close coordination with GoV and development
                           partners, this component would also provide other technical assistance and advisory support and
Public Disclosure Copy




                           would support for the development of key tools and materials. This component will involve mainly
                           MONRE, MARD and MOJ.

                           Component 2: Enhance capacity to implement and enforce more effectively Vietnam➢❨ s wildlife
                           protection related policies and regulations (US$1m). This component would aim to increase inter-
                           agency coordination and capacity of key enforcement and law implementation agencies at central,
                           provincial and district levels to more effectively protect endangered species. In addition to
                           strengthening the coordination of the Biodiversity Steering Committee, the implementation capacity
                           of agencies would be enhanced through selected training on key competencies, knowledge sharing,
                           development of manuals and tools, and the integration of illegal wildlife trade into other aspects of
                           the national crime prevention strategy. This component would involve mainly MONRE, MARD,
                           MOJ and enforcement agencies including MSP, MOF (Customs), Supreme People➢❨ s Procuracy,
                           and the Supreme Court.

                           Component 3: Improve knowledge and support behavior change (US$0.72m). This component
                           would aim to support knowledge development and sharing, and support behavior change to reduce
                           demand for wildlife consumption. The component would focus on expanding the wildlife partnership
                           platform as a networking and coordination platform to prioritize demand reduction activities; and
                           designing and deploying initiatives for priority target groups to change wildlife consumption
                           behavior based on recent market surveys. This component would involve MONRE, communication
                           agencies and NGOs.

                           Component 4: Project Management (US$0.28m). This component supports project management and
                           capacity building for MONRE to implement the project. This component is expected to support
                           project operations, financial management, procurement, and monitoring and evaluation. This
Public Disclosure Copy




                           component would mainly support MONRE in project management.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The project consists solely of technical assistance activities and does not finance any physical
                           activity on the ground.
                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           The Ministry of Natural Resources and Environment (MONRE) will be the implementing agency.
                           MONRE has implemented the Bank-financed projects in the past and is familiar with the World
                           Bank safeguard policies and their requirements.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Anjali Acharya (GEN2B)
                           Khang Van Pham (GEN2B)
                           Thong Trung Le (GSU02)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                   Triggered?       Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental Assessment OP/   Yes   The project will provide technical assistance
                         BP 4.01                              and capacity building to Vietnam in its efforts to
                                                              protect the globally significant endangered
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              species. It is anticipated that the project will
                                                              have positive environmental effects.

                                                              The project will not support any infrastructure
                                                              investments. The project activities are technical
                                                              assistance (TA) activities which aims at
                                                              strengthening of endangered species protection
                                                              policies, national enforcement capacity and
                                                              partnership through training, small equipment
                                                              purchase, piloting a model of multi-stakeholder
                                                              anti-poaching patrol teams, and communication
                                                              campaigns for behavior change and awareness
                                                              raising on biodiversity conservation.
                                                              Accordingly, the project is envisaged to not
                                                              cause any adverse environmental effect.

                                                              However, there is possibility that studies and
                                                              recommendations for enhancing policy and
                                                              institution for improved protection of the
                                                              globally significant endangered species may
                                                              lead to the policy development or revision of
                                                              certain provisions of existing policies.
                                                              Therefore, the TORs for these studies will
                                                              embed the directions and principles of the
                                                              safeguard policies. An analysis of potential
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                              environmental and social issues will be included
                                                              in the TORs for policy and institutional studies
                                                              which will need to describe how the identified
                                                              issues will be addressed either through existing
                                                              safeguard instruments or provisions in proposed
                                                              policies and institutional set up. TORs will be
                                                              reviewed by and have inputs from the
                                                              Team➢❨ s Environment and Social
                                                              Development Specialists.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04    No    No negative impacts to the natural habitats are
                                                              anticipated as the project does not finance any
                                                              physical investments. The project TA activities
                                                              aim at protecting globally significant
                                                              endangered species will surely not cause any
                                                              significant conversion or degradation of natural
                                                              habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36             No    The project is not expected to have any impact
                                                              on forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09           No   The project does not involve pest management.
                         Physical Cultural Resources OP/   No   Given the nature of the project TA activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                         BP 4.11                                the project is envisaged not to have any impact
                                                                on physical cultural resources.
                         Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10     No   The project supports will be solely on provision
                                                                of TA to relevant agencies in Vietnam to
                                                                enhance the protection of the globally
                                                                significant endangered species. Thus, there is no
                                                                adverse impacts anticipated on indigenous
                                                                people. However, there is possibility that the
                                                                policy and institutional studies and
                                                                recommendations may lead to development or
                                                                revision of certain provisions of existing
                                                                policies that may involve indigenous peoples.
                                                                Therefore, the TORs for these studies will
                                                                embed the directions and principles of the
                                                                safeguard policy of OP/BP 4.10 on Indigenous
                                                                People. An analysis of potential issues related to
                                                                indigenous people will be included in the TORs
                                                                for these studies which will need to describe
                                                                how the identified issues will be addressed
                                                                either through existing safeguard instruments or
                                                                provisions in proposed policies and institutional
                                                                set up. To ensure a more systematic approach
                                                                that analysis of safeguard implications is well-
                                                                integrated into each study and TA activity, any
                                                                TOR should be reviewed by and have inputs
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                from the Team➢❨ s Social Development
                                                                Specialist.
                         Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP    No   The project activities will not involve in land
                         4.12                                   acquisition, relocation or restrictions of access
                                                                to natural resources. However, considering that
                                                                the policy and institutional support may have
                                                                implications for provisions under OP/BP 4.12
                                                                on Involuntary Resettlement in regards to access
                                                                restrictions, The TORs for these studies will
                                                                embed the directions and principles of the
                                                                safeguard policy of OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary
                                                                Resettlement. An analysis of potential issues
                                                                related to restriction of access to natural
                                                                resources will be included in the TORs for these
                                                                studies to describe how the identified issues will
                                                                be addressed either through existing safeguard
                                                                instruments or provisions in proposed policies
                                                                and institutional set up. Team➢❨ s Social
                                                                Development Specialist will be involved in
                                                                                             reviewing and providing with inputs to the
                                                                                             TORs to ensure the analysis of safeguard
                                                                                             implications is well-integrated into each study
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                             and TA activities
                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                    No                   The project does not involve activities related to
                                                                                             new construction of dams and/or rehabilitation
                                                                                             of existing dams nor rely on the performance of
                                                                                             an existing dam or dam under construction.
                           Projects on International        No                               The project activities will not take place on any
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                              International Waterways.
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP No                               The project activities will not take place in any
                           7.60                                                              disputed areas.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                               Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):                  Name: Thu Thi Le Nguyen
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:              Name: Josefo Tuyor (SA)                                            Date: 04-Jan-2017
                           Practice Manager/                Name: Christophe Crepin (PMGR)                                     Date: 04-Jan-2017
                           Manager:



                           1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                           affected persons.
