INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA15907
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 13-Jan-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 21-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Madagascar                  Project ID:  P151469
Project Name: Madagascar Agriculture Rural Growth and Land Management Project (P151469)
Task Team Jan Joost Nijhoff,Andre Teyssier
Leader(s):
Estimated       05-Jan-2016                 Estimated    22-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFA07                        Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (70%), Agro-industry, marketing,
and trade (30%)
Theme(s):       Rural services and infrastructure (40%), Land administration and management
(30%), Rural policies and institutions (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      53.00             Total Bank Financing:    53.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                          Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                            0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                  53.00
Total                                                                        53.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The proposed development objective is "to improve rural land tenure security and access to markets
of targeted farming households in selected agricultural value chains in project areas, and to provide
immediate and effective response to an eligible crisis or emergency".
Page 1 of 11


﻿3. Project Description
The proposed Project has been designed to support the Government of Madagascar (GOM) in the
implementation of its new national and sector development strategies, particularly the National
Development Plan (NDP) (2015-2019) and the Agricultural Sector Policy and Program, i.e.Lettre de
Politique Sectorielle Agriculture, Elevage et P6che (LPAEP) 2015 and Programme Sectoriel
Agriculture Elevage P6che (PSAEP) 2016-2020) which have been developed within the framework
of the Comprehensive Africa Agriculture Development Program (CAADP) process. The proposed
a        project has three main components: (1) Agribusiness value chain development; (2) Land policy and
land rights registration; and (3) Marketing infrastructure development. It also includes two additional
components: (4) Project Coordination and Management, and a (5) Contingency Emergency
Response.
Component 1 will address the constraints that currently prevent value chains from further developing
and expanding. This will include support for:
(i)     improving the enabling environment for agribusiness value chain development;
(ii) knowledge and efficiency enhancing technology transfer to increase production, and enhance
productivity, quality, and profitability among private value chain participants; and
(iii) enhancing access to agriculture finance: Madagascar has a country-wide network of
microfinance institutions that may have the potential to stimulate value chain development.
Component 2 will support the current Malagasy land policy reform process to promote a land
management system conducive to inclusive agricultural investment. This will include support to:
(i) strengthen capacities of existing institutions in charge of land management to improve the current
land information system, in particular the information exchange between the State land services and
the municipal land offices; and establish or improve Local Land Tenure Status Mapping (PLOF);
(ii) roll out field activities for smallholder farmers' land rights registration and administration to
ensure transparency, socially inclusive land use, and improved land tenure security, with particular
emphasis on support for registration of land rights for women; and
(iii) facilitate access to land for investors in a responsible and socially inclusive manner.
Component 3 will support the development of key marketing infrastructure that has the potential to
boost the development of local agribusiness opportunities in the country. This would include:
(i)    Rehabilitation of commercial feeder roads;
(ii)   Maintenance of feeder roads; and
(iii)  Storage infrastructure development, i.e. construction/rehabilitation of professional
warehousing.
Component 4 will support all aspects of project management, including fiduciary management,
M&E, knowledge generation and management, communication, and monitoring mitigation measures
related to safeguards.
Component 5 will establish a disaster response contingency funding mechanism that could be
triggered in the event of an eligible crisis or emergency, such as a natural disaster involving a formal
declaration of a national or regional state of emergency, or a formal request from the Government of
Madagascar in the wake of a disaster. In that case, funds from other project components could be
reallocated to Component 5 to facilitate rapid financing of a positive list of goods and services that
Page 2 of 11


﻿would still be relevant to the achievement of the PDO. Eligible activities could include clearing and
rehabilitating road and irrigation infrastructure, purchasing construction materials, agricultural
inputs, or contribute to pest/plague control (e.g. locust control).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project has a country-wide perspective however, it will primarily be initially implemented in
selected areas in the following important agribusiness hubs and priority commodities: (a)
Antananarivo (poultry, maize and soya for feed production, rice seed); (b) Antsirabe (dairy, potato,
onion, barley, maize and soya for feed production); (c) Toamasina (clove, vanilla, other spices,
lychee). In addition, the project will support the beef export value chain around Fort Dauphin. Other
agribusiness hubs with rural catchment areas exist and may be assessed during the course of the
project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Demba Balde (GSUO1)
Paul-Jean Feno (GENO7)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          The proposed project activities in components 1, 2, and 3
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                may lead to some social and environmental impacts that
would require the establishment of appropriate mitigation
measures. Given the low scale size of the potential social
and environmental risks and impacts, and the site specific
nature of the foreseen project activities, the environmental
and social category of the project will be B. Since the
exact locations of these infrastructure investments and
activities have not yet been determined, the Borrower has
prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) that includes an Environmental and
Social Management Plan (ESMP). The ESMF/ESMP
outlines an environmental and social screening process for
future sub-projects to ensure that they are environmentally
and socially sound and sustainably implementable. The
ESMF report will be publicly disclosed both in - country
and at the World Bank Infoshop prior to project appraisal.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           Potential sub-projects which could affect the conservation
4.04                                 of critical natural habitats will not be eligible for project
financing.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes          There are numerous forests and forest areas in the project
areas. Project-related activities have the potential to affect
the health and quality of these forests, and the rights and
welfare of local residents dependent on forest resources.
The project could propose reforestation activities. The
screening form and E&S guidelines developed as part of
the ESMF seek to avoid impacts to critical forest areas
and provide mitigation measures to identify and offset
impacts to other non-critical forest areas.
Page 3 of 11


﻿Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes          The extension of agribusiness services may lead to the
extensive use of pesticides to boost agriculture
productivity. To ensure safe pest management, the Project
Q)                                             has prepared an Integrated Pest and Pesticide
Management Plan which includes: (i) a survey on the
local bio- pesticides and agronomic technical practices to
reduce the impacts of pests on the some agriculture value
chains in the project areas; (ii) appropriate actions to
reduce the exposure of farmer groups to pesticides used in
agricultural production systems; and (iii) guidelines to be
adopted on the possibility of agrochemical application and
disposal; (iv) training sessions to strengthen the capacity
of different actors (farmers, local vendors, regional
agricultural agents, etc.) on the use, storage and disposal
of agrochemical products; and (v) a coherent budget
available in the project financing.
Physical Cultural       Yes          Components 1, 2, and 3 may lead to the discovery of new
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 physical cultural resources that would require adequate
mitigation measures. Given the physical feature of
expected project areas and nature of the proposed physical
construction activities and the project areas, the
possibility of finding evidence of physical cultural
resources during construction is very low. In addition, the
project would not involve significant physical work,
excavations and demolitions. However, the ESMF
includes procedures for dealing with cases of chance
finds.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           There are no Indigenous Peoples in the project area.
U         BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         Project activities in components 2 and 3 may lead to the
OP/BP 4.12                           acquisition of land, loss of assets and/or means of
livelihood that could result in the involuntary resettlement
of people. The Borrower has prepared a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) that sets forth the basic
principles and procedures that both the Borrower and the
World Bank must follow to mitigate any potential adverse
social impacts once the physical locations of the proposed
activities are known.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The Project will not finance any construction of new dams
4.37                                 or activities downstream of large dams or reservoirs.
Projects on International  No        The project does not involve international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           N/A
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
Page 4 of 11


﻿A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
O
The Project is classified as category B in the World Bank's Environmental Assessment
classification due to the low size and site specific nature of its foreseen social and environmental
risks and impacts. The environmental and social Safeguard Policies triggered by this operation are:
OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP 4.36 Forests; Physical
Cultural Resources OP 4.11; and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).
There are no potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts expected to arise from
this project. The ESMF indicates, the proposed Project could potentially induce adverse
environmental and social impacts, including the risk of disruption of agricultural parcels, accident
risks, land acquisition and involuntary resettlement; health and safety risks; use of potentially
harmful pesticides and other biocide products; harm to potential chance finds of physical cultural
resources; and the extension of agriculture parcels into the forests areas or Zahamena Natural
Parks. These impacts are, however, expected to be site specific with no large scale impacts.
Potential investments that might induce the above adverse impacts include: rehabilitation/
construction/maintenance of feeder roads and storage infrastructures, and promotion of
agribusinesses. However, the environmental and social impacts of anticipated activities are
expected to be moderate, site-specific, and manageable to an acceptable level, and the proposed
project requires no exceptions to the World Bank's policies on environmental and social
safeguards.
Selection criteria for investors including the above mentioned issues will be established. These
planning activities will need to take into account the environmental, social, and gender aspects and
mitigate health and safety impacts. Part of the project capacity building efforts will focus on
environmental, social, health and safety management capacity building, including gender aspects.
All of these activities will have low local environmental and social impacts in areas which are easy
O
to mitigate and should be conducted outside of sensitive natural habitats or forest areas.
The proposed project could potentially also cause directly or indirectly impacts by activities at the
main work sites, including the camps and quarries for the rehabilitation/construction/maintenance
of feeder roads and storage infrastructures - and agriculture activities under the agribusiness
component. The project's impacts on the environment are generally modest, with the most
significant relating to land use. In fact, the potential feeder road sections are within the existing
right-of-ways of the local population activities and could be affected during the civil works.
Moreover, civil works and agribusiness activities may expose populations living in the project
areas to significant risks to HIV/AIDS and damage to social environments due to the migration
resulting from poorly-controlled land development.
The Government of Madagascar has prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF), an Integrated Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (IPPMP), and a
Resettlement Policy Framework as instruments for mitigating or minimizing potential adverse
impacts which could arise as a result of implementing the proposed project.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No long term risks or impacts are anticipated as a result of potential future project activities.
Page 5 of 11


﻿Overall project impacts are considered modest and will be site specific. Potential impacts are
related to the civil works such as setting up camps, exploiting quarries for the rehabilitation of
feeder roads - and agriculture activities under the agribusiness component with the increasing of
pesticide usages. There is a potential risk of agriculture parcel extension into the Zahamena
Natural Park and forest areas in the absence of specific dispositions /measures in the project.
Expected impacts could include: soil erosion, air pollution, health risks, land acquisition along
roads and water supply to be rehabilitated, land use conflicts and involuntary resettlement. In
regards to infrastructure subprojects (mainly feeder roads and storage), no archaeological vestiges
will be impacted. Therefore, the project's impacts on the environment are generally modest, with
the most significant related to land use during the feeder roads during civil works. A census has
been conducted in the area on the potential impacts of the projects. These could include:
*      Negative impacts on human health and the environment with potential increase of using of
pesticides and fertilizers by the farmers;
*      Involuntary resettlement of the populations directly affected by the rural feeder roads to be
rehabilitated/constructed/maintained;
*      Increase in social conflicts and increased STD/AIDS transmission risks; and
*      Improved livelihood of local populations, farmers, opening of new markets and improving
the quality of the agricultural products and creating new jobs.
The Project also has the potential to positively impact the people in the project target areas,
especially women, their children and youth who rely disproportionately on agriculture as a leading
livelihood source. The project is expected to: (i) increase access to land tenure services, training
services and/or marketing opportunities for an estimated 228,000 farming households; (ii) improve
access to competitive agricultural products for formal agribusinesses and their upstream and
downstream networks of MSME and entrepreneurs and provide skilled human resources,
additional investment opportunities and land rights; (iii) create jobs and access to affordable food
products for urban consumers; and (iv) provide avenues for incremental tax revenues, import
substitution options, export revenues and social peace / conflict prevention for the government and
its decentralized institutions.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
There are no alternatives to the present project design.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The client has been actively responsive in addressing safeguards issues. At the national level,
Madagascar has a legislative and regulatory framework which is conducive to good environmental
management. In addition, Madagascar has signed a number of international treaties and
conventions to ensure sound environmental management.
In the agriculture sector, implementation of ongoing World Bank financed projects (BVPI,
PURSAP) has laid a sound institutional foundation for preparing, managing and monitoring
potential adverse environmental and social impacts of Bank funded projects. The Ministry of
Agriculture has the ultimate responsibility for the project's compliance with World Bank
safeguards guidelines. This sector has long standing experience in implementing Bank funded
investments. The Malagasy Environmental law mentions that Environmental assessment for both
private and public development is regulated under D6cret No2004-167 (MECIE). This is fairly
effective but institutional capacity needs to be developed to ensure more widespread application
Page 6 of 11


﻿and improved monitoring. The national environmental law will be reinforced by the World Bank
safeguard policies for this proposed project. Safeguards instruments being prepared by the client.
The Ministry of Agriculture through its Project National Coordination Unit has engaged the
O
services of a consultant to prepare three separate safeguards instruments. These instruments have
assessed the potential impacts of all activities to be supported by the proposed operation, the
expected adverse environmental and social impacts, and identified mitigation measures, including
the principles, procedures to be followed for the safeguards policies triggered: OP/BP 4.01
(Environmental Assessment), OP 4.09 (Pest Management), OP 4.36 Forests; Physical Cultural
Resources OP 4.11 and OP/BP 4.12 (Involuntary Resettlement).
An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) has been prepared to be used to
screen sub-project proposals for environmental, social, gender, and health and safety impacts by
using the ESMF screening form and checklist. The ESMF includes an Environmental and Social
Management Plan (ESMP), has taken into account Eco regional environmental and social review
and described the environmental and social profiles in the project areas on the potential activities
to be supported by the project. The ESMF/ESMP outlines an environmental and social screening
process for future sub-projects to ensure that they are environmentally and socially sound and
sustainably implementable, in line with GOM and World Bank policies and guidelines on
environmental and social impact management. The screening outcomes will determine if sub-
projects will need to prepare an Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA), a
freestanding Environmental and Social Management Plan (ESMP), a Resettlement Action Plan
(RAP), implement a Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (PPMP) or if no action will be needed.
The screening of the sub-projects will be done by the safeguard specialist, who will be part of the
Project Implementation Unit. In case safeguard instruments need to be prepared the PIU, the
safeguard specialist will prepare the Terms of Reference for these safeguard instruments, be
responsible for the procurement of consultants to prepare them, supervise the consultants and they
will be responsible for the monitoring of the implementation of the ESMPs, PMPs and RAPs in
the project areas. The ESMF contains sample TORs for Environmental and Social Impacts
Assessments (ESIA) that may be needed for Project-supported activities, as well as screening
guidelines to be used to implement Project-supported works (e.g., rehabilitation/construction of
feeder roads, infrastructure storages). The safeguard specialist also will ensure that all contractor
contracts include environmental and social clauses, which are attached as an annex to the ESMF,
0           in order to ensure adequate environmental and social management practices during construction
and operation. In addition, mitigation measures to avoid any pressures to Zahamena Natural Parc
with the extension of agriculture zones by the smallholders have been included.
All activities which could affect natural habitats will be ineligible for project financing. A measure
has been identified to avoid and reduce impacts on critical forests to develop the agricultural
extension to noncritical forest zones and the adoption of reforestation in compliance with OP 4.36
on Forests. Based on the outcomes of the screening process, ESIAs will be carried out as
necessary and ESMPs will be prepared as needed. To date, no project activity triggers this policy.
Concerning infrastructure subprojects (mainly feeder roads), no archaeological vestiges will be
impacted because the project will work under the existing right-of-ways. For more assurance, the
ESMF has made provisions for cultural resources management in the event the Physical Cultural
Resources OP 4.11 is triggered during the implementation phase and includes "chance finds"
procedures for inclusion in the contractors' contract. Funds to prepare and implement these
potential ESIAs, ESMPs, PMPs and RAPs have been included in the project costs (US$
1,000,000).
Page 7 of 11


﻿Project funds will not be used to purchase and distribute agrochemicals, however agribusinesses
may encourage farmer groups to use more inorganic fertilizers and pesticides. To ensure safe pest
management, the Project has prepared an Integrated Pest and Pesticide Management Plan (IPPMP)
O
which includes: (i) a survey on the local bio pesticides and agronomic technical practice to reduce
the impacts of pests on the some agriculture value chains in project zones: (ii) actions to reduce
the exposure of farmer groups to pesticides used in agricultural production systems; and (iii)
guidelines to be adopted on the possibility of agrochemical application and disposal; training
sessions to strengthen capacity of different actors (farmers, local vendors, regional agricultural
agents, etc.) on the use, storage and disposal of agrochemical products with a coherent budget
available in the project financing. Finally, it recommends the application of an integrated pest
management approach coupled with the promotion of agro-ecological practices by the farmers'
groups.
Since the physical locations of the proposed activities are unknown at this stage and the Project
activities in components 2 and 3 may lead to the acquisition of land, loss of assets and/or means of
livelihood that could result in the involuntary resettlement of people, the Borrower has prepared a
detailed Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) that sets forth the basic principles and procedures
that both the Borrower and the World Bank must follow to mitigate any potential adverse social
impacts. Because some project activities may lead to the acquisition of land, loss of assets and/or
means of livelihood that could result in the involuntary resettlement of people. The RPF includes
details information on legal and institutional framework, eligibility criteria, assets evaluating
methods, implementation arrangements, grievances redress mechanism, resettlement budget totally
covered by the Government and monitoring and evaluation. The RPF contains the basic principles
and procedures/directives to be followed by the Borrower for the preparation of the Resettlement
Action Plan (RAP) once the physical locations of the proposed activities are known. The result of
socio- economic studies have characterized different forms of compensation. The Malagasy
government has proposed to finance the costs of resettlement (land acquisition costs;
compensation on crops, trees, shelter, habitat, structures, etc.) for around 501 ha and 505
households or about 2575 persons with a provision of approximately 330 500 USD on the
potential RAPs.
O
Monitoring of Environmental and Social Management Framework: At the National Coordination
a          Unit, an environmental and social specialist will be a key and integral part of the team. The
environment specialist will carry out ESMP/RAP monitoring to ensure that the mitigation plans
are being effectively implemented, and will conduct field visits on a regular basis. Monitoring
checklists will be prepared on the basis of the mitigation plans for this purpose. Progress Reports
(PR) shall document the progress of ESMF implementation. Finally, the project will engage
specialists/firms to conduct detailed environmental and social studies (ESIA/ESMP; RAP). In
addition, the project should also monitor inclusiveness in targeted zones and the appropriation of
the IPPMP by the beneficiaries.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key project stakeholders primarily include: (i) farming households; (ii) formal agribusinesses
and their upstream and downstream networks of Medium to Small entrepreneurs; (iii) urban
consumers; (iv) the government and its decentralized institutions; (v) Civil Society Organizations
CSOs; and (vi) Non-governmental Organizations (NGOs) in the targeted project areas.
Page 8 of 11


﻿With respect to the applicable safeguards policies and instruments, the project preparation process
sought to identify and analyze the interests, concerns, and effects of project activities on major
stakeholders and vice-versa. During project preparation, the GoM with the concerned
Municipalities and a Consultant conducted public consultations and meetings on the project in the
O
)           regions of Analajirofo, Atsinanana, Itasy and Vakinan'Ankaratra. Extensive public consultations
were also conducted during the preparation of ESMF, RPF and IPMP to take into account the local
populations and communities views on the project design and impacts. Likewise, during project
implementation, the PIU is expected to consult project-affected groups, and local governmental
and nongovernmental organizations on all environmental and social aspects of the project and take
their views into account accordingly. Public consultations will be carried out as early as possible
and provide, in a timely manner prior to consultation, all the relevant materials in the form and
language(s) needed to be understandable and accessible to the groups being consulted. Preparation
of stand-alone environmental and social safeguards instruments of potential sub-projects if and
when needed will also be prepared through a consultative and participatory process involving all
stakeholders at the regional and national levels, as well as within local communities and among
beneficiaries of the sub-projects.
All the environmental and social safeguards instruments have been approved by the Bank and
were disclosed in-country on January 13, 2016 and at the Infoshop on January 14, 2016 in
compliance with the relevant World Bank safeguards and national policies and Disclosure Policies.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Jan-2016
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Madagascar                                               13-Jan-2016
Comments:
0
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Jan-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Madagascar                                               13-Jan-2016
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?           Yes
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-Nov-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-Jan-2016
"In country" Disclosure
Madagascar                                               13-Jan-2016
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 9 of 11


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                              Yes [ X ] No [   ]  NA [    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a      Yes [ X ] No [   ]  NA [    ]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
O
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/  Yes[X]  No[      NA
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes[X]  No[  NA
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?            Yes [  ]  No [X]    TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ]  No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
overcome these constraints?
Page 10 of 1I


﻿Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so,  Yes[  ] No[X]    NA[     ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Jan Joost Nijhoff,Andre Teyssier
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)             Date: 21-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/      Name: Dina Umali-Deininger (PMGR)          Date: 21-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 11 of 11


