                                           INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                              IDENTIFICATION / CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSC19422

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 26-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:             Kyrgyz Republic                Project ID:      P160933
                            Project Name:        Implementing Open Data Action Plan for the Kyrgyz Republic
                            Team Leader(s):      Christopher David Miller,Dinara Akmatbekova,Oleg V. Petrov
                            Estimated Date       07-Oct-2016
                            of Approval:
                            Managing Unit:       GTI09                          Lending          IPF
                                                                                Instrument:
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost: 0.45                          Total Bank Financing: 0
                            Financing Gap:      0
                              Financing Source                                                                         Amount
                              Trust Fund for Statistical Capacity Building                                               0.45
                            Environment         C - Not Required
                            Category:
Public Disclosure Copy




                           B. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Development Objective is to enhance modern statistical and data management and sharing
                           capabilities in the Kyrgyz Republic in alignment with the tenets of the "Data Revolution" described
                           by the United Nations. This will strengthen the Government of the Kyrgyz Republic's national data
                           analytics, statistics, and public sector innovation agendas.
                           C. Project Description
                           The proposed project will build foundational elements of the Open Data ecosystem in four areas: (i)
                           the core legal, institutional, and technological framework; (ii) the supply of open data; (iii) the
                           demand for and use of open data; (iv) the capacity of government to manage complex ICT projects.
                           The project follows on the recommendations of the Open Data Readiness Assessment (ODRA) and
                           action plan that was developed in 2014-2015. The proposed project will also support a number of
                           pilot innovation initiatives in the most promising sectors identified during the ODRA, which will
                           include support for both supply and demand aspects of Open Data. Project activities are as follows:
                           1.       Foundation for Open Data: Development of Shared Open Data Technology Platform and
                           Enabling Environment
                           1.a. Technology Platform
                           1.a.i. Support upgrade and improvement of the national Open Data portal, to include database
                           improvements, new sustainable hosting, integration of geospatial data and dashboards, feedback
                         mechanisms, user analytics, and support for multiple languages (Russian, Kyrgyz, English)
                         1.b.    Enabling Environment
                         1.b.i. In-depth analysis of Open Data-related laws and regulations, including sectoral laws and by-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         laws, and proposing amendments and policy actions to be taken in order to create an enabling
                         environment for open data in the country;
                         1.b.ii. Development of guidelines and procedures for opening data and facilitation of their adoption
                         by government agencies on the national level and in the city of Bishkek.

                         2.       Supply of Open Data: Support for Agency-Level Open Data Action Plans:
                         2.a.     Capacity Building and Planning
                         2.a.i. Development of national plan for moving to open data at agency level in consultation with
                         internal and external stakeholders.
                         2.a.ii. Integration of data management, analytics, and open data training (using open source
                         software) into the curriculum of Kyrgyz educational institutions with a mandate for civil servants
                         training.
                         2.a.iii. Capacity building for decision-makers and IT personnel in selected agencies to ensure that
                         data are disclosed properly and updated regularly, including introduction of necessary coordination
                         and institutional mechanisms, and that data are used to improve citizen engagement with agencies.
                         2.b.     Data Fellows
                         2.b.i. The project will support the Data Fellows program that will train current and recent
                         graduates of technical disciplines and place them in government agencies to help solve real-life
                         challenges that arise in the process of opening and reusing data, and to help them make better
                         analytical and other uses of data in the development of policy and the management of operations.
                         2.c.     Open Data Pilot Program
                         2.c.i. Deep dive into the datasets owned by selected government agencies, including the National
                         Statistics Committee, identification of challenges to opening these data (in terms of data
                         management, human and financial resources, and others), analysis of best international practices for
                         comparable sectors, and recommendations for opening the data and providing modern analytics
                         capabilities.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         2.c.ii. Creation of open data sets in a minimum of 3 agencies
                         2.c.iii. Knowledge management and collection of lessons learned to improve and update guidelines
                         developed as part of the first activity and scale up the initiative beyond the pilot agencies;

                         3.      Demand for Open Data: Support for the development of applications using open data
                         3.a.    Awareness and capacity of private sector, civil society, and media to use open data
                         3.a.i. Awareness raising events to such groups of stakeholders as CSOs, journalists, and private
                         sector organizations to strengthen their capacity in data reuse and to build a steady pipeline of data-
                         based ideas and solutions.
                         3.a.ii. Conduct OD4B assessment (open data for business) developed by the T&I GP
                         3.b.    Support for Pilot application development
                         3.b.i. Catalyzing creation of citizen- and business-facing solutions and applications based on open
                         data through hackathons and apps challenges organized in collaboration with civil society.
                         3.b.ii. Business plan competition and start-up support for SMEs to commercialize open data
                         through aps or other services

                         4.    Program Management, Monitoring and evaluation:
                         4.i.  Development of indicators to measure and evaluate the impact of open data initiative;
                         4.ii. Guidance, skills training and project management assistance for leadership and staff of the
                         implementing body on program management, planning, monit       oring and evaluation, and
                           budgeting.
                           4.iii. Results of the overall program will be disseminated during knowledge-sharing and learning
                           events, with summaries published online.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)


                           E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies


                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                 Triggered?     Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment OP/       No
                           BP 4.01
                           Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04        No
                           Forests OP/BP 4.36                 No
                           Pest Management OP 4.09            No
                           Physical Cultural Resources OP/    No
                           BP 4.11
                           Indigenous Peoples OP/BP 4.10      No
                           Involuntary Resettlement OP/BP     No
                           4.12
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37          No
                           Projects on International          No
                           Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                           Projects in Disputed Areas OP/BP   No
                           7.60

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
                              Appraisal stage ISDS required?: No
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Team Leader(s):          Name: Christopher David Miller,Dinara Akmatbekova,Oleg V. Petrov
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor:      Name: Nina Chee (SA)                               Date: 27-Jul-2016
                           Practice Manager/        Name: Jane Lesley Treadwell (PMGR)                 Date: 02-Aug-2016
                           Manager:
                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
Public Disclosure Copy




                         InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially
                         affected persons.
Public Disclosure Copy
