                                                 INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                       RESTRUCTURING STAGE
                                          Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSR19512
                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 21-Jul-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jul-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:            Burkina Faso                                 Project ID:           P124648
                            Project Name:       Mineral Development Support Project (P124648)
                            Task Team           Boubacar Bocoum
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated           09-Mar-2011             Estimated     21-Jun-2011
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GEEX2                     Lending       Technical Assistance Loan
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
                            Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                      No
                            Emergencies)?
                            Financing (in USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        33.00           Total Bank Financing:     33.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                                Financing Source                                                 Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                                     0.00
                              IDA Grant                                                                                             33.00
                              Total                                                                                                 33.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a           No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Current Project Development Objectives
                           To strengthen the capacity of key institutions to manage the industrial mineral sector
                           Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
                           To strengthen the capacity of key institutions to manage the industrial mineral sector
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project is supporting the Government of Burkina Faso in addressing gaps and challenges along


                                                                                  Page 1 of 5
                         selected links of the EITI++ value-chain. It has three components:

                          Component A: Fostering Beneficial Mineral Resources Development (US$15.0M). The objectives
Public Disclosure Copy




                         of this component are to secure increased private sector investment in mining, and increase value
                         derived by government from these investments through: (i) updating of the legal and regulatory
                         framework, (ii) improvement in the availability of geo-scientific information and in sector
                         promotion, and (iii) improved efficiencies and transparency of the Cadastre and Geology Office.

                          Component B: Strengthening Institutional Sector Management, Coordination, and Accountability
                         (US$15.7M). The objective of this component is to strengthen the institutional capacity of the
                         government and other stakeholders for efficient and transparent mineral sector management through:
                         (i) improved sector management capacities at the ministries of Mines, Finance and Environment; (ii)
                         increased availability of tertiary education to address the public and private mining needs, (iii)
                         fostering transparency and accountability, and (iv) analytic underpinning
                         s and assistance to the government in developing a strategy to enable improved social and economic
                         benefits from mining.

                          Component C: Project Management (US$2.3). This component will provide support to a compliant
                         project implementation in the Ministry of Mines, Quarrying, and Energy (MMQE).
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         This Project is Technical Assistance to the Government and does not involve any land acquisition, or
                         construction. Project activities will mainly take place in Ouagadougou (key ministries and agencies)
                         and will involved geoscientific works on various parts of Burkina. Training and sensitization of
                         communities, CBOs, artisanal miners, and local government will take place around mining
                         operations and advanced projects in Burkina.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Abdoulaye Gadiere (GEN07)

                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental              Yes            The SESA has been completed and the implementation of
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     some of its priority activities is underway or have been
                                                                    completed. The additional activities to cover as part of the
                                                                    action plan of the SESA has been identified with TORs
                                                                    ready for action under the financing of the project should
                                                                    it be extended.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No
                          4.04
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
                          Pest Management OP 4.09    No
                          Physical Cultural          No
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/     No
                          BP 4.10
                                                     No



                                                                     Page 2 of 5
                            Involuntary Resettlement
                            OP/BPof
                            Safety  4.12
                                      Dams OP/BP      No
                            4.37
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Projects on International No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed      No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
                              Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                               The proposed project is technical assistance aimed at strengthening the legal, regulatory, and
                              institutional framework, as well as at improving capacity, governance, and planning of the mining
                              sector. The project does not involve mining construction or works or land acquisition.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
                               Future mining developments are expected to build on the Technical Assistance activities and will
                              have environmental and social impacts that would be regulated and monitored under the
                              strengthened legal and institutional framework.
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                               N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
Public Disclosure Copy




                               A sectoral environmental and social assessment (SESA) have been developed and disclosed in
                              country and at InfoShop.

                             Various units of the ministry in charge of environment have selected their priority
                             recommendations from the SESA for implementation. They include (using the same numbering as
                             in the SESA report):

                             1) For those that have been implemented or are under way: A1-a) the development of a guide for
                             environmental controls, the development of a guide for audits, the establishment of standards for
                             selected pollutants; A1-c) the development of an information system; A1-d) the development of a
                             document management system; A1-e) the development of an environmental and Social Impact
                             Assessment guide for mining; A4-a) training on mine closure and financial surety for closure; A4-
                             b) updating of the regulation on mine closure; B4-a) sensitization on environmental management
                             of artisanal mines; E2-b) sensitization on mercury, cyanide, and HIV/AID; E3) optimization of
                             radiation protection around mines.

                             2) those that have yet to be initiated and which will be supported with an extended project closure
                             time:

                             A1-a) audit of three mines (although all the mines are now controlled annually); A4-a) a study trip


                                                                       Page 3 of 5
                           on mine closure; B1-a) the mapping of artisanal mines sites in Burkina; B1-b) the development of
                           a guide for an Environmental Notice for artisanal mining; C) the establishment of a guide for
                           exploration in sensitives and forestry areas.
Public Disclosure Copy




                           With the above all the selected priorities will be met.

                           The SESA also recommended the strengthening of the Environmental Impact Assessment Office
                           (BNUEE). The new Government in Burkina is in a process to restructure BNUEE into an
                           autonomous agency which strengthen it functioning and its working conditions. The project will
                           support this process and intend to mobilise a professional consulting firm to assist BNUEE and
                           other environmental units works for a full year and over the spectrum of mining related activities.

                           After the SESA training, sensitization and equipment were provided to various stakeholders
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                             There ample consultation and involvement of stakeholders in the conduct of the SESA through
                           multiple meetings and workshops. Stakeholders involved included government agencies (mines,
                           environment, health, labor, civil security, local authorities), civil society (including the association
                           of women in mining, and those for artisanal miners), private mining companies and local
                           communities, and artisanal miners. The SESA surveys were completed in 3 industrial mines
                           (Kalsaka, Taparko and Perkoa), and 4 artisanal mines .

                           The SESA report was published locally and on Infoshop.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                      Yes
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         27-Mar-2014
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      29-Feb-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Burkina Faso                                                        04-Mar-2016
                           Comments: Tow publications on local newspapers (le Pays#6052 and Sidwaya#8114) on March
                                         4 and 6, 2016 provided a list of nine people and organisations where stakeholders
                                         may get access to the SESA report.
                         Technical Assistance Project
                         For a TA project which will finance the preparation of a specific safeguards instrument, please
                         indicate type of document disclosed, if any.

                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:




                                                                       Page 4 of 5
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             report?
                             If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                             Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the credit/loan?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Boubacar Bocoum
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maman-Sani Issa (SA)                            Date: 28-Jul-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Christopher Gilbert Sheldon (PMGR)             Date: 29-Jul-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                       Page 5 of 5
