                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA15795
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Dec-2015
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Dec-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Kazakhstan                         Project ID:   P153496
                            Project Name:      Education Modernization Project (P153496)
                            Task Team          Dingyong Hou
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          15-Dec-2015                        Estimated   30-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GED03                              Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Primary education (50%), Secondary education (50%)
                            Theme(s):         Education for all (95%), Gender (5%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       100.00                Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                     0.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                      100.00
                              Total                                                                                      100.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective (PDO) is to support the GoK's program to improve the quality
                           and equity in primary and secondary education, in particular in underperforming and disadvantaged
                           schools
                            3. Project Description
                           The project will contribute to the higher-level, national goal of producing a modern productive

                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         workforce and skilled human capital for a diversifying economy that is innovative and competitive.
                         The project supports system-wide reforms, targeted assistance to underperforming schools, enhanced
                         monitoring and evaluation of reforms, and civic engagement and participation. The project will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                         implemented over five years through a phased approach with sequencing to allow the piloting,
                         evaluation, refinement, and scaling up of select key reforms.

                         The project will have three components:

                         Component One: Supporting system-wide reform

                         The objective of this component is to improve curricular standards, policies, and programs. The
                         subcomponents include a set of related initiatives necessary to introduce the new curriculum that will
                         be piloted and evaluated and subsequently scaled up using existing national systems and resources.

                         Subcomponent 1.1: Curriculum modernization
                         This subcomponent will support the modernization of the curricular standards, plans, and programs
                         for primary and secondary education, including the year before grade 1. The project will support the
                         National Academy of Education to adapt, pilot, and finalize the curriculum for use in all mainstream
                         public schools. Project support will include technical assistance to adapt the curriculum, design and
                         deliver the pilot, and incorporate pilot findings; development and supply of training and pedagogical
                         materials to support piloting teachers; and creation of a network to facilitate support to and
                         monitoring of schools introducing the revised curriculum. The project will also provide technical
                         assistance to strengthen the quality assurance mechanism for textbooks’ approval.

                         Subcomponent 1.2: Aligning assessment systems with the new curriculum
                         This subcomponent will support the alignment of the various student assessments with the new
                         curriculum. The project will finance technical assistance to build the capacities of National Testing
                         Center staff and specialists to design tests that measure new curricular content and skills and to
                         ensure that the revised instruments are in line with curriculum revisions. It will finance technical
Public Disclosure Copy




                         assistance to help design new standards in test administration and build capacities in their
                         implementation. It will also support the design and testing of a new technological platform for the
                         External Assessment of Learning Achievements that will improve administration efficiency and
                         integrity. Finally, technical assistance will be provided to Orleu to design and integrate a module on
                         formative assessment into the in-service training for teachers being delivered as part of the
                         curriculum roll out.

                         Subcomponent 1.3: Enabling teachers to deliver the new curriculum
                         This subcomponent will support the teacher training system to better enable teachers to deliver the
                         new curriculum. At the pre-service level, the project will finance technical assistance to design a ‘3
                         +1’ teacher training model and facilitate its trial at one pedagogical institute. At the in-service level,
                         the project will finance technical assistance to develop/adapt training modules and build capacities
                         for their delivery to all primary and secondary teachers and school directors, who cover new
                         curriculum content and cognitive skills; teach in a multi-grade environment; teach science at grades
                         10 and 11 in English; or are pedagogical leaders.

                         Subcomponent 1.4: Enhanced accountability for education system management and financing
                         This sub-component would support the development of reforms to make education financing more
                         efficient and equitable, and to improve education system management. The project would finance
                         technical assistance to refine and pilot the per-capita financing formula; and to analyze options for

                                                                        Page 2 of 6
                         reforming the financing of small, rural schools. It would finance technical assistance to review and
                         revise the legal-regulatory framework pertaining to school management, and to build the capacities
                         of Akimat officials and Schools Boards of Trustees. The project would also support community
Public Disclosure Copy




                         awareness-raising on the benefits of education; the rights, roles and responsibilities of parents and
                         students in enabling quality education services; and the national strategy and targets to improve
                         education. Further, the project would build capacities to create participatory school development
                         plans linked to the budgeting process, and to foster local debate on school performance relative to
                         other schools and national targets. Technical assistance would be provided to develop a concept and
                         roadmap for an Educational Management Information System.

                         Component Two: Raising results in underperforming schools

                         The objective of this component will be to improve student learning outcomes in selected poor-
                         performing schools, as measured by improved access to learning materials, enhanced teacher
                         capacity and incremental student learning results.

                         Subcomponent 2.1: Resources for learning
                         This subcomponent will finance the supply of a package of essential teaching-learning resources for
                         poor-performing schools. The package will support the delivery of the revised curriculum, fill
                         priority gaps in the availability of essential resources, enable access to digital learning resources, and
                         provide more practice to master new content and skills.

                         Subcomponent 2.2: Enhanced teacher capacities
                         This subcomponent will finance the design and delivery of an enhanced package of in-service teacher
                         training and pedagogical support. The package will increase the number of hours of in-service
                         training teachers receive to deliver the revised curriculum, provide teachers with an opportunity to
                         receive tailored instructions based on their classroom experience, and target issues particularly
                         affecting poor-performing schools. It will also strengthen pedagogical support networks, including
                         through the capacity building of methodologists, providing teachers with self-learning opportunities,
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and the strengthening of pilot resource centers including for multi-grade schools.

                         Component Three: Supporting citizen engagement, monitoring and evaluation, and implementation

                         The objective of this component will be to engage and support stakeholder and citizen participation,
                         monitor and evaluate project implementation and results, and support project implementation.

                         Subcomponent 3.1: This subcomponent will support stakeholder participation and awareness raising
                         through consultation and communications, including the establishment of a grievance redress system
                         and a third-party evaluation of project results. The project will support annual public forums
                         designed to create transparency on the intent and progress of the reform, and encourage feedback
                         from interested members of civil society.

                         Subcomponent 3.2: Monitoring and evaluation of reform initiatives
                         This subcomponent will finance the design and execution of the monitoring and evaluation of reform
                         initiatives supported by the project. This will include the design and conduct of the observation of
                         teaching-learning practices to measure the effectiveness of in-service trainings and pedagogical
                         support; and the evaluations of the new quality assurance mechanism for textbooks, the ‘3+1’ model
                         of pre-service teacher training, using English as the language of instruction in one science subject,
                         the PCF pilot, the multi-grade School resource centers, the learning impacts achieved in poor-

                                                                        Page 3 of 6
                           performing schools as a result of project support, and the rollout of the new curriculum. The project
                           will also finance the technical assistance to support the MOES to draft new standards based on
                           lessons learned from the evaluations. The project will finance periodic international advisory support
Public Disclosure Copy




                           to promote the maintenance of satisfactory standards as the curriculum is adapted for and rolled out
                           to mainstream schools

                           Subcomponent 3.3: Project implementation
                           This subcomponent will finance project operating costs, including translation, interpretation,
                           equipment, supervision costs, Project Implementation Unit (PIU) staff salaries, and incremental
                           operating costs at the MOES.
                            4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           N/A

                            5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                           Ekaterina Romanova (GSURR)

                            6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                            Environmental               No
                            Assessment OP/BP 4.01
                            Natural Habitats OP/BP      No
                            4.04
                            Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

                            Pest Management OP 4.09 No

                            Physical Cultural           No
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Resources OP/BP 4.11
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No
                            BP 4.10
                            Involuntary Resettlement    No
                            OP/BP 4.12
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
                            4.37
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project will not finance any works or rehabilitation of school buildings and thus will not have
                              any environmental impact or require resettlement or land acquisition. The scope of activities will

                                                                        Page 4 of 6
                              not have any impact on disputed land or waterways, physical cultural resources or indigenous
                              people. Therefore none of the safeguards policies are triggered.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
Public Disclosure Copy




                              in the project area:
                              N/A
                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.
                              N/A
                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                              N/A
                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                              N/A
                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                            N/A
                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Dingyong Hou


                                                                      Page 5 of 6
                         Approved By
                         Practice Manager/   Name: Andrea C. Guedes (PMGR)   Date: 09-Dec-2015
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                           Page 6 of 6
The original had problem with text extraction. pdftotext Unable to extract text.
