                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                CONCEPT STAGE

Report No.:


Date ISDS Prepared/Updated:

I. BASIC INFORMATION

A. Basic Project Data

Country: Afghanistan                         Project ID: P0152870
                                             Additional Project ID (if any):
Project Name: On-Farm Water Management (OFWM)
Task Team Leader: Tumurdavaa Bayarsaihan GPADR and Toru Konishi, GPWDR
Estimated Appraisal Date: July 15, 2015      Estimated Board Date: September 30, 2015
Managing Unit: GPWDR                         Lending Instrument: IPF
Sector: Irrigation and Drainage (50%), Agriculture (30%)
Theme: Other Rural Development (100%)
IBRD Amount (US$m.):
IDA Amount (US$m.):
GEF Amount (US$m.):
PCF Amount (US$m.):
Other financing amounts by source: ARTF US$45 million
Environmental Category: B Partial Assessment
Simplified Processing               Simple [X ]                Repeater [ ]
Is this a transferred project        Yes [ ]                 No [ ]


B. Project Objectives [Current PDO]:
1.      The Project Development Objective (PDO) of the original OFWMP is to improve
agricultural productivity in project areas by enhancing the efficiency of water used. The project
comprises the following three main components: (a) Component A: On-Farm Water
Management (rehabilitation of irrigation canals, institutional strengthening, and technical
demonstration activities); (b) Component B: Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of
the Ministry of Agriculture, Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL); and (c) Component C: Project
Management, Coordination, and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E). The OFWMP became
effective on March 16, 2011, originally aiming to complete the project by December 2013 with
an implementation period of three years.
2.      The key project indicators (KPIs) of the project include: (a) Land Productivity (yield of
wheat (ton/hectare)), (b) Water productivity (yield of wheat per cu. meter water used), and (c)
Increased in irrigated area (percentage).
3.      Project Financing, Restructuring and Extension of the Closing Date. The project was
originally financed through an Afghanistan Reconstruction Trust Fund (ARTF) of US$41
million, which was approved on May 21, 2010. However, in response to the significantly
delayed implementation during the first two years, the project was restructured in early 2013 and
the ARTF financing was reduced from US$41.0 million to US$25.0 million. Since then,
implementation has been accelerated through the dedication and commitment of the new project
management team, and in May 2014, an 18-month extension of the closing date (from June 2014
to December 2015) was granted considering the time needed to complete the civil works and
provide continued technical assistance to the newly established irrigation associations (IAs).

C. PROPOSED CHANGES TO THE PROJECT.

4.      In principle, the proposed AF will be built on original projects’ gains, aiming at
consolidating impacts while learning from the original project and therefore do not alter the
project component structure, or the PDO. As the proposed AF would finance the costs
associated with scaled-up activities to enhance impacts, there will be minor revisions to
indicators and targets in the Result Framework, and include an extension of the current closing
date.
5.      However, as summarized in the previous section, the proposed AF shall also help the
MAIL to strengthen the policy and legal framework and support its effort for moving towards the
sector-wide approach. In this context, while the majority of the resources would be allocated for
the physical rehabilitation works, the proposed AF will also emphasize the importance “soft?
interventions, including policy development, institutional strengthening, and technical training of
the project beneficiaries farmers. The summary of the activities planned under the proposed AF
Project is summarized below, following the same component structure of the original project;

D. Project Description [Additional Financing]:

   Component 1. Irrigation Rehabitation and Management in the five region . This
   component would have the following three components.
   Component 1.A. Establlishing and Strengthening of IAs. This subcomponent would have
   the following three activities;
   • Establishment and Strengthening of the Irrigation Associations (IAs). The proposed AF
      project would support: (a) continued technical assistance for the already established 175
      IAs under the original project, (b) the establishment of new IAs for irrigation schemes
      rehabilitated under the proposed AF, and other donor-financed projects, including the
      IRDP.
   • Developing a Single Procedure for Establishing IAs, supporting the Irrigation Directorate
      (ID) of the MAIL to make inventory of the existing training materials and guidelines
      prepared by various ministries (the Ministry of Energy and Water and the Ministry of
      Rural Rehabilitation and Development in particular) and various donors and consolidate
      them into a single standard document. The consolidated document shall then be used for
      all donors project uniformly and will be updated on regular basis.
   • Performance Monitoring, supporting the ID to develop a database monitoring the
      performance of the IAs once the rehabilitated irrigation schemes are transferred. The
      database will contain basic information such as command area, irrigation area, irrigation
      fee collected, crop patterns, infrastructure inventory, etc. and will be used for technical
      and financial inspection by the IDand its provincial offices.
Component 1.B. Improvement of physical irrigation infrastructure. This component would
rehabilitate the deteriorated irrigation infrastructure on additional 30,000 hectares. This
component would be implemented in two phases as follows:
• Phase 1 (September 2015 – March 2017). The rehabilitation of approximately 100
   irrigation schemes covering about 8,000 hectares, which had been planned to be financed
   by the cancelled US$16 million. Upon approval of the proposed AF, the procurement for
   rehabilitating these schemes would immediately start to maintain the momentum. The
   schemes to be selected will be those, which were supported by the IRDP for the secondary
   and primary canals. Preparatory works for establishing IAs would start during preparation
   for the proposed AF. During the first phase, technical assistance would also be provided
   to the ID to develop a three-year national plan for irrigation rehabilitation based on:
   technical, economic and social factors as well as agriculture potentials and commitment of
   beneficiaries. In order to mitigate the environmental impacts, under this component, the
   following support would be carried out: (a) demonstration on the pest management, and
   (b) periodical water quality monitoring.

• Phase 2 (April 2017 - March 2019). Second phase of this component would mainly
  support the implementation of the part of the national program developed during Phase 1.

Component 2. Support for Enhancing Productivity. Under the proposed AF project, this
component would scale up the pilot activities initiated under the original project (25
Irrigation Demonstration Sites (IDS) and provide additional new technical assistance.
This component will promote modern water saving technologies and other agricultural
interventions aimed at enhancing the productivity of irrigated land. The specific activities
under this component would include: (i) laser land levelling and high efficiency irrigation
systems; (ii) research, extension, and training to farmers and FOs in various agronomic
practices, farm management techniques and integrated pest management; (iv) demonstration
centers to disseminate full range of improved water management and agronomic practices;
and (v) establishment of farmers’ information service centers linked with internet and mobile
phone services. The Directorate for Extension and Agriculture Development of the MAIL
will be the implementing agency of the component and will work closely with the Irrigation
Directorate.

Component 3. Institutional Strengthening and Capacity Building of the MAIL. This
component would support the improvement of the technical skills of staff of the MAIL,
particularly, that of the ID. The ID has been recently established, and will be responsible for
the overall policy and investments in the irrigation sector. This component would support
the following key activities;

•   Development of a draft Irrigation and Drainage Law. As stated above, this component
    would help the MAIL to prepare the draft law in collaboration with other concerned
    ministries and under the auspices of the Supreme Council for Water Resources.

•   Institutional Strengthening of the ID. This component would also provide technical
    assistance and training for the ID in areas such as: (a) investment planning, (b) technical
    standards, (c) oversight on construction works, (d) research and extension, (e) support
          for IAs, (d) monitoring and evaluation, (e) financial management, and (f) safeguards and
          social development (including gender).

    •     Support to contractors and private design firms. This component would also provide the
          contractors and emerging private design firms with training and technical assistance.
          The technical assistance to the contractors will aim at improving the quality of works
          and sensitizing the contract management, whereas the support for emerging private
          design firms is needed to train on topographic surveys, design standards and
          responsibilities for supervision. Under the current project institutional arrangement,
          detailed design and supervision are being carried out exclusively by the government
          staff, and this process is becoming the major bottleneck for accelerating rehabilitation
          works.

        Component 4. Project Management, Coordination and Monitoring and Evaluation.
        This component would continue support the incremental operating cost, project staff cost,
        logistics (vehicles), and critical office equipment so as to ensure sound management of the
        project; however, the emphasizes would be more on strengthening of the capacity of the
        Irrigation Directorate, which are managing various irrigation projects supported by major
        donors including JICA, FAO, ADB, and USAID. In particular, the component would
        support the Irrigation Directorate’s plan to establish a program management unit within the
        directorate to manage multiple projects funded by various donors, notably JICA and ADB
        as well as this proposed project. The technical assistance on social development aspects,
        including the gender, would also be provided to the Irrigation Directorate so as to assist in
        developing a dedicated social development and gender unit in the Directorate.

D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard analysis
(if known):

The proposed AF project will continue to support the following five regions, which have been
covered by the original project;

•   Kabul Region include Kabul, Parwan, Kapisa and Panjshir provinces which are located to
    the north and north east of Kabul. This region is part of Kabul River Basin located on the
    upper Kabul, upper and lower Panjshir and Ghorband Charikar Sub-Basins. There are one
    wetland (Qule Hasmatkhan) and two Dam (Band e Qargha and Naghlo dam) situated in
    Kabul. Total population of these 4 provinces are about 5.3 million people. There are Tajik,
    Pashun, Pashaie and some other minority ethnic group living in these provinces.

•   NangarHar Region include Nangarhar, Kunar and Laghman provinces which are three
    eastern provinces. There is one dam (Band e Daronta) which provide power and irrigation for
    Nangarhar. This region is part of Kabul River Basin located on the middle and lower Kabul ,
    Laghman and Kunar Sub-Basins. Total population of these 3 provinces are about 2.5 million
    people. There are Tajik, Pashun, Pashaie and some other minority ethnic group living in
    these provinces.
•   Balkh Region include Balkh, Samangan, Saripul, Faryab and Jawzjan provinces . This
    region is part of Northern closed River Basin located on the Balkhab, Khulm, ShirinTagab,
    Saripul and Lower Saripul Sub-Basins. Total population of these 5 Northern provinces are
    about 3.4 million people. There are Tajik, Uzbak , Turkman, Aimaq, Pashun and some other
    minority ethnic group living in these provinces.

•   Baghlan Region include Baghlan and Bamyan provinces. There is one National Park (Bande
    Amir) located in Bamyan province. This region is part of Amu River Basin located on upper
    and lower Kundoz Sub-Basins. Total population of these 2 provinces are about 1.3 million
    people. There are Tajik, Pashun, Uzbak and some other minority ethnic group living in these
    provinces.

•   Herat Region include Herat and Ghor provinces. This region is part of Harirud Murghab
    located upper and lower Harirud Murghab Sub-Basins. Total population of these 2 western
    provinces are about 2.0 million people. There are Tajik, Pashtun and some other minority
    ethnic group living in these provinces.

The proposed AF Project will carry out rehabilitation works for the target irrigation schemes
(subprojects) and demonstration activities in order to support farmers to utilize the benefits of
resumed irrigation services and ensure sound operation and maintenance. Under the proposed
AF project, subprojects would be selected in three phases according to the following criteria: (a)
demand from local communities and their willingness to share costs; (b) existing state of water
losses; (c) accessibility in terms of security and physical access; (d) synergy with other projects
such as IRDP, HLP and other non-Bank funded projects; and representativeness in terms of agro-
ecological zones and cropping systems. The first phase subprojects will be selected by appraisal.

The investments to be carried out under the project will focus on the rehabilitation of the existing
canals and water courses including related structures; construction of any new canals or
watercourses is therefore not anticipated, and no major land acquisition is expected in the
project; in case of any, all land transaction will be based on willing buyer-willing seller. In
exceptional cases, minor voluntary land donation may occur in certain sub-projects, but only
provided that there are no structures or assets on the land, the livelihood impact of the donation
on the land owner will be insignificant (less than 10 percent) and the voluntary nature of the
donation is fully documented and independently verified. Selection of sub-projects will also be
screened for land and water disputes in order to avoid the situation where investments in
irrigation would fuel such disputes.

The social and environmental impacts of the project are expected to be small and overall
positive. The project will build social capital by organizing and training IAs which will
contribute to improved irrigation efficiency and reduced water losses. The nature of the projects’
activities is such that they will not lead to significant deforestation; however, in case there would
be a need for some tree felling, new trees would be planted in a nearby location. The project will
ensure uninterrupted traffic of humans and animals by building bridge structures (culverts) where
appropriate. The project will also respect the use of watercourses as laundry basins, water
collection and ablution places by the local populations through the construction of small
diversions. Insofar improved water efficiency would lead to changes in cropping patterns and/or
crop management methods, the agronomic training provided by the project will include judicious
use of chemical fertilizer and pesticides using an IPM approach consistent with the requirements
of the Bank’s OP on Pest Management.

The current ESMF will be reviewed and updated based on the experience during the
implementation of the original project, so as to ensure full mitigation of negative impacts of the
project. The current measures in the ESMF covers the following elements: (i) safe disposal or
recycling of silt for agricultural purposes and construction of washing bays and cattle baths to
avoid polluting water; (ii) setting specifications for the quality of borrow earth to avoid
deterioration in the quality of existing soil; (iii) implementing a pest management plan; (iv)
avoiding cutting of trees as far as possible, and where essential, planting at least double the
number of cut trees as replacement; (v) enhancing the skills and abilities of farmers, through
trainings in appropriate technologies, improved water management practices, (vi) empowering
communities, including women, through improved participation opportunities, (vii)
incorporating mechanisms that recognize and pay for labor contributed by sharecroppers; (viii)
strengthening the institutional capacity of IAs, (ix) reducing conflict and improving social
relationship between farmers at the head and tail-ends of canals and watercourses; and (x)
improving networking among IAs, government local irrigation department, PIU, CDCs, River
Basin Organizations (RBOs) and supporting NGOs/FPs; (xi) guidelines for management of land
issues in terms of documentation of consultations, voluntary nature of donations, estimated
livelihood impact, and land transfer documentation.

As the use of pesticides in the project area could increase as project interventions improve
availability of water with corresponding increase in cropping intensity. A Pest Management Plan
(PMP) will therefore be included in the ESMF to rationalize the use of pesticides in the project
area. The main activities under the PMP would be training of farmers in IPM practices, and
introduction a system of monitoring of pesticide residues in selected areas. Adequate budget will
be included for implementation of the PMO. Updated ESMF will be re-disclosed prior to the
appraisal.

Some irrigated areas in the country are characterized by flat lands with inadequate land
drainage features. Irrigation returns and drainage effluent are drained either through man-made
surface drains or collected in naturally occurring depressions. Due to limited drainage,
secondary salinization is one of the reasons for land degradation in some parts of the country.
Extensive irrigation network with inadequate drainage also creates localized waterlogging,
another important reason for land degradation. In this context, the drainage aspects will be
reviewed and drainage facilities shall be included to ensure proper drainage, if deemed to be
necessary.


E. Borrower’s Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies:

Ministry of Agriculture Irrigation and Livestock (MAIL) and its Irrigation Department (ID) will
mainly be responsible for the implementation of the project. This ID department is currently
implementing Bank-funded Afghanistan OFWM project and successfully implemented project
ESMP. ID has appointed environmental and social focal staff who through support of different
Regional OFMWM Project offices as well as Provincial DAIL offices are responsible to
provide oversight for the implementation of ESMF and the site specific ESMPs for each
subproject. ID's office had also hired consultants, which also includes support to implement
ESMP. An acceptable capacity for the preparation and implementation of Bank’s safeguards
policies and country’s Environmental regulatory requirements therefore exist, however it will
further be strengthened during the implementation of proposed project.

Overall safeguards performance of the current project for the safeguards is moderately
satisfactory. The project Grievance Redressing Mechanism (GRM) also is functioning and
effective to resolve any concerns of the affected households. There are no major issues on the
environment or land acquisition as the project exclusively focuses on the rehabilitation of the
existing small irrigation schemes. Moving forward, the PMU intends to further improve
communications and safeguards compliance including the social and environmental focus on the
project in order to ensure the fair benefit sharing among the stakeholders, and minimize
environmental impacts, if any. Such support measures include: (a) including pre-
construction consultation with the stakeholders and contractors presenting the content of the
ECOP and respective construction plans, (b) in-depth monitoring upon resumption of the
irrigation services to confirm fair share of the irrigation water particular among vulnerable
households (small holders, women headed families, and landless), (c) adoption of the pest
management plan, and (e) monitoring water quality at the beginning of the rehabilitation to
confirm safe sources of water.

On the social side, the amendment to the Law on Land Expropriation, which is to address the
major gaps to protect the right of the affected people, is under process. In the meantime, the
Bank has assisted in developing a specific Resettlement Policy Framework, which has been
customized for various line ministries to ensure the compliance with the Bank policy. On the
environmental side, a new EIA regulation has been passed and effective to strengthen the
monitoring and reporting responsibilities during implementation. The current instruments
(ESMF and ESMP) will be updated accordingly.

During project preparation, a consultation will be carried out in the area already covered by the
original project to draw lessons and feedback into the project design for further refinement,
particularly training on safeguards aspects. While the Project has overall responsibility to
ensure it complies with national and international social safeguards standards, it shall work
closely with implementing agencies at district and provincial levels through the CDCs and
water user associations.


F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team:

   Mr Mohammad Arif Rasuli (GPENDR)
   Ms Marzia Meena (GPSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY

Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                   Yes         No         TBD
Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)                                X
An environmental assessment will be carried out to record the baseline of the current
environmental situation for the first phase subprojects and identify any environmental issues, if
any, which need attention during implementation. In addition, social assessment will also be
carried out to confirm broader support of the concerned communities and identify key social
issues which need close monitoring during implementation.

Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)                                                    X

Forests (OP/BP 4.36)                                                             X

Pest Management (OP 4.09)                                       X
A pest management plan will be prepared as part of the ESMF, and will be applied in the ESMP.
The training on the Pest Management will be included in Component 2.

Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)                                         X
It is expected that no known physical cultural resources will be impacted, but the ESMF includes
Chance Find Procedures.
Indigenous Peoples (OP/BP 4.10)                                                  X

Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)                                X
No major land acquisition is expected in the project since it comprises rehabilitation of existing
structures. However, in case requirement for additional land is unavoidable, all land transactions
will be based on willing buyer-willing seller or on minor voluntary land donation provided that
there are no structures or assets on the land and livelihood impact is insignificant. The ESMF
provides guidelines consultation and documentation requirements in such case and a site specific
ESMP would be prepared for the investments (subprojects) at the appraisal. For other
subprojects to be identified during implementation, preparation of satisfactory ESMP shall be a
condition for the Bank financing.
Safety of Dams (OP/BP 4.37)                                                       X

Projects on International Waterways (OP/BP 7.50)                      X
Similar to the original project, the proposed AF project will exclusively support rehabilitation of
the existing irrigation schemes without changing the original scope. Therefore, the proposed AF
project will fall into the category specified under OP. 7.50 para. 7 (a) for which riparian
notification is exempted, which was the case for the original project. A memo for the proposed
AF project will be prepared to update the original memo obtaining the concurrence from the
RVP and confirm similar concurrence from the RVP in compliance with the OP/BP 7.50.
Projects in Disputed Areas (OP/BP 7.60)                                           X

Piloting the Use of Borrower Systems to Address                              X
Environmental and Social Safeguard Issues in Bank-
Safeguard Policies Triggered (please explain why)                                         Yes              No             TBD
Supported Projects (OP/BP 4.00)


III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN

A. Target date for the Quality Enhancement Review (QER), at which time the PAD-stage ISDS
   would be prepared: N/A

B. For simple projects that will not require a QER, the target date for preparing the PAD-stage
   ISDS: June 30, 2015

C. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
   The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:

       The studies would include: (a) updated ESMF, including Social Assessment and PMP, and
       (b) ESMP for the first phase sub-project. June 30, 2015

IV. APPROVALS

    Signed and submitted by:
    Task Team Leader:                              Name : Tumurdavaa Bayarsaihan                                     Date
                                                   GPADR and Toru Konishi, GPWDR
    Approved by:
    Regional Safeguards                            Name: Francis V. Fragano                                          Date
    Coordinator:
      Comments:
    Sector Manager:                                Name William Kingdom                                              Date
      Comments:




1   Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the
InfoShop and (ii) in-country, at publicly accessible locations and in a form and language that are accessible to potentially affected
persons.
(Template Version November 2007)
