INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
SDate ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jul-2015
9 Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Philippines                Project ID:   P153153
Project Name:    PEACE Financing Facility (P153153)
Task Team        Harideep Singh,Nataliya Mylenko
Leader(s):
Estimated        01-Sep-2015                Estimated     22-Dec-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GFAO2                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General agriculture, fishing and forestry sector (50%), Agro-industry,
marketing, and trade (50%)
Theme(s):        Rural services and infrastructure (80%), Rural non-farm income generation
(20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     332.00             Total Bank Financing:   136.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
O
Borrower                                                         60.00
a         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            136.00
Bilateral Agencies (unidentified)                               136.00
Total                                                           332.00
Environmental F - Financial Intermediary Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The PDO will be to generate investment in agriculture and agri-business related activities to create
sustainable jobs and income generation opportunities in Bangsamoro.
C. Project Description


﻿A. Lending Instrument
The proposed lending instrument is the Investment Project Financing (IPF). The IBRD loan would be
made to the Land Bank of Philippines (LBP) with the Government of Philippines providing the
sovereign guarantee. LBP would also be the on-lending agency, and would offer financing in
accordance with the on-lending terms to end-borrowers for sub-projects that meet the eligibility
criteria.
The total project cost is estimated at US$332 million. The tentative financing requirement for the
proposed project is estimated at US$272 million, with the Bank and JICA share at US$136 million
each. JICA had originally committed to provide 50% of the financing requirement. This will be
confirmed during preparation. The project period is expected to be five years (expected
implementation commencement in October 2015 and completion in December 2020), with project
closing in June 2021.
B. Project Components
B 1. Tentative Description of Component 1: Investment Development Fund (US$265 million)
The proposed project will provide a line of credit to LBP at a concessional rate to on-lend to eligible
sub-borrowers, directly or through accredited conduits.
LBP Investment Development Fund Line of Credit Cost. This is highly tentative, and based on three
main aspects: (a) the choice of the loan - variable spread loan; currency pool loan; or single currency
pool loan; (b) the grace period; and (c) the final maturity. For a IBRD flexible loan with a variable
spread, with a 5.5 years grace period, and with a 30 year maturity, the average maturity would be
between 15-18 years window. For this block, the variable spread at this time is 70 basis points. The
reference rate is the 6-month LIBOR which, for the past several months, has been hovering at about
35 basis points. The Bank loan will carry a fixed, one-time Front-end Fee (25 basis points), and a
O
Q)      Commitment Charge of 25 basis points for any loan signed after September 30, 2014. The total cost
of the loan effectively is therefore expected to be around 100 basis points + one time FEF of 25 basis
points + Commitment Charge of 25 basis points on undisbursed balance in the loan account. The
repayment guarantee fee of 1% and the foreign exchange risk fee of 3% (usually charged by the
Department of Finance) would need to be waived or subsidized to maintain the concessionality in the
cost associated with the line of credit to LBP for local currency denominated sub-loans.
Sub-loans Eligibility Criteria. Sub-loans would be demand-driven and made to end-borrowers
meeting a set of eligibility criteria. These could tentatively be as follows (but would be more
elaborately defined during preparation):
(a)    Project area to be the designated Bangsamoro region, although sub-loans could be for sub-
projects outside of Bangsamoro so long as more than an agreed proportion of its production (perhaps
not lower than 60%) is accessed from Bangsamoro.
(b)    Sub-projects should be economically and financially viable, as well as technically and
environmentally sound.
(c)    Sub-loans should be for capital investments in productive assets and associated working
capital needs.
(d)    Sub-projects financed will be subject to Environmental Safeguards compliance and the


﻿funding will be aimed at sustainable investments that do not produce negative environmental
impacts.
(e)    Sub-projects financed will be subject to compliance with requirements under the Bank's
social safeguard policies, particularly those relating to Involuntary Resettlement and Indigenous
Peoples.
Sub-loan On-lending Rate and Terms to End-borrowers. The facility is intended to create incentives
and a demonstration effect, and thus not considered to be a permanent mechanism. As such, while
the project will not dictate or prescribe any lending rate, the actual lending rates may have to be
lower than market rates to attract private sector investment and these would be determined by LBP
considering the credit-worthiness of the end-borrower. LBP and its accredited conduits would price
the loans according to the risk profile of sub-borrowers and sub-projects and make enough profits to
absorb potential future losses.
The credit risk would be bome by LBP, such sub-loans would be fully secured, and the foreign
exchange risk would be bome by the Government for Peso-denominated local currency sub-loans
while that for US$ and Japanese Yen-denominated sub-loans, such risk would be bome by the end-
borrowers.
The total on-lending rate to an end-borrower could be between 2.5%-3.5% per annum, consisting of
the following: the LBP line of credit cost (about 1%) + LBP cost of administration of the loan (about
1%), and the credit default risk (this could be between 0.5%- 1.5% depending on client
creditworthiness). The Commitment Charge may also be factored into the on-lending rate (to be
discussed during preparation).
Prudential regulations and internal LBP credit policy would guide the threshold on the size of the
sub-loans. The appraisal of the sub-loans would be subject to the policies and procedures of the
Codified Approving and Signing Authorities (CASA) of the LBP, and the depth of the appraisal
process would be commensurate with the size of the sub-loans. The loan duration could be up to 15
years , including a grace period to be determined on the basis of the tree-crop immaturity period.
LBP offers outlier loans for 15 years but these are more of an exception rather than the rule, and the
period is based on the projected cash flows from the investment. Under the project, LBP will have
flexibility to set sub-loan tenor (where required, exceeding 15 years) in accordance with the sub-
a       project cash flow, as one of the benefits of financing from JICA and WBG is to allow LBP to provide
longer term loans that would not be possible under the regulations.
Loan Intermediation. It is likely that loans to private sector corporate sub-borrowers may be
intermediated directly by LBP, whereas loans to cooperatives and farmers organizations/associations,
MSMEs could possibly be intermediated directly by LBP or through its accredited conduits such as
financial cooperatives, thrift banks, or micro-financial institutions. This is the model that LBP is
presently using for its own programs.
Eligible End-borrower Categories. Three main potential categories of sub-borrowers have been
identified at this stage:
(a)    Large Private Corporations: This essentially covers nucleus estate type sub-projects - private
entities leasing in land from local owners for an extended period (15-20 years under some present
arrangements), carrying out land preparation and planting activity, deploying local community
members as labor as per local labor and wage laws. This would also include in-estate infrastructure


﻿development such as access roads, captive power generation, etc. for new or expansion investment.
To accommodate sub-borrowers' specific needs, sub-loans could either be Peso-denominated, US$-
denominated, or Yen-denominated (depending on whether the sub-borrower plans to produce
O
exportables). If the sub-loan is in US$ or Japanese Yen-denominated, the foreign exchange risk will
be borne by the end-borrower.
The loan will be at the concessional rate, for a maximum of 15 years, including grace period based
on the immaturity period of the specific commodity being produced, reflecting sub-project cash flow
generation potential (to be determined during preparation).
Where feasible, the project would support private sector operations which embrace the out-grower or
contract farming approaches which would mitigate risks and issues emanating from the long-term
lease of lands at near rock-bottom rates from the population.
Based on the discussions with private sector during the round-tables, about 15 sub-projects are
expected, each with an average sub-loan of about US$15 million (actual sub-loan amount for
individual sub-projects could be higher or lower than the average), totaling to a lending of US$225
million. With an expected end-borrower contribution of about 20%, the 15 sub-projects would
produce an investment of US$280 million.
(b)    Cooperatives (Producers' Organizations) and private anchor firms: Financing of organized
smallholders is required for inclusiveness, reaching a larger proportion of the population, and
widening the basis for economic growth. Sourcing directly from smallholders will increase the
likelihood of attracting large private firms willing to support contract farming or out-grower schemes.
The sub-loan to cooperatives (producers' organizations) would be for direct investment or for on-
lending to member farmers for existing or newly formed cooperatives. The sub-loans would also
cover private firms which propose to source produce through contract farming or out-grower
schemes.
The loan will be at the concessional rate, for a maximum of 15 years, including grace period based
on the immaturity period of the specific commodity being produced, reflecting sub-project cash flow
a       generation potential (to be determined during preparation).
Two options would be explored during preparation: Due to asset poverty of this group: (i) Adopt the
standard on-lending terms but with 10% end-borrower contribution; or (ii) Adopt the standard on-
lending terms with the standard 20% end-borrower contribution.
About 100 sub-projects are projected to be financed, each with an average sub-loan size of about US
$350,000 (actual sub-loan amount for individual sub-projects could be higher or lower than the
average), totaling to a lending of US$35 million. With an expected end-borrower contribution of
about 10%, the 80 sub-projects would generate an investment of US$39 million.
(c)    Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises: This category will offer income generation
opportunities to those who have no access to land or do not propose to engage in agriculture. This
would support agriculture or agri-business by providing ancillary or tertiary services along the value
chain (cold storage, post-harvest facilities, farm inputs and supplies, repairs and maintenance,
connectivity to markets, among other interventions).


﻿The loan will be at the concessional rate, for a maximum of 7 years, including grace period reflecting
sub-project cash flow generation potential (to be determined during preparation)
O
U       About 1,000 sub-projects are projected to be financed, each with an average sub-loan size of about
US$5,000 (actual loan amount could be higher), totaling to a lending of US$5 million. With an
expected end-borrower contribution of about 20%, the 1,000 sub-projects cost would generate an
investment of about US$6 million.
B2. Tentative Description of Component 2: Capacity Building, Institutional Development, M&E
This component would be financed out of grant funding from JICA (US$7-10 million) and would
consist of the following activities:
(a)    Capacity building of Cooperatives (producers' associations/organizations). This would be
done through promotion, training and technical assistance to: (i) promote partnerships between
smallholders and private sector buyers; (ii) help associations and purchasers enter into fair and
feasible marketing agreements; and (iii) ensure producer a ssociations deliver on commitments under
marketing agreements (by organizing investments and TA in production systems, and by facilitating
operations). This would be based on deepening and operationalizing the knowledge that LBP already
has (Food Supply Chain Program, Grassroots Development Program, and others) in the context of
the project-supported cooperatives and anchor firms.
(b)    Deepening outreach and access to financial services. This would be done through capacity
building of lending centers to market the project line of credit, and through dissemination programs
by Cooperative Development Authority, Local Government Units, Department of SMEs, Commodity
Boards, etc. to publicize the concessional loans offered under the project. This sub-component will
also support coordination with other local partners in the Bangsamoro region, such as the Regional
Board of Investment (RBOI), Department of Trade and Industry (DTI), and Department of
Agriculture and Fisheries (DAF) in the Autonomous Region in Muslim Mindanao (ARMM).
(c)    Monitoring and Evaluation. This would support mid-term and final project completion
assessments. In addition, it would also support two external audits of a sample of the sub-projects to
a      ascertain compliance with environmental and social safeguard requirements under the project, and a
third external audit related to procurement contracts at the sub-borrower level.
(d)    Strengthening LBP safeguards department capacity, particularly social safeguards.
TA under (a) and (b) would be provided by a wide range of actors, depending on existing capacities
and future needs. It could be farmed out by LBP either through consulting contracts with private
service providers or NGOs, or through MOUs with some existing coordinating agencies such as
Department of Agriculture, Department of Agrarian Reform, Department of Science and
Technology, among others, with demonstrated capacity in these activities. Activities under (c) would
be carried out by contracted consulting firms. Activities under (d) would be carried out partly
through training and partly through retainership services of a consulting firm with social skills and
expertise.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)


﻿Physical Context
The Bangsamoro region is located in the southwestern part of the Philippines with a total land area of
1,488,353 hectares. The proposed core territory is composed of the following:
(a) Autonomous region of Muslim Mindanao (ARMM) consisting of five provinces and one city;
(b) The municipalities of Baloi, Munai, Nunungan, Pantar, Tagoloan, and Tangkal in the province of
Lanao del Norte;
(c) The thirty nine (39) barangays in the municipalities of Kabacan, Carmen, Aleosan, Pigkawayan,
Pikit, and Midsayap in the province of North Cotabato who voted for inclusion in the ARMM in
2001 plebiscite;
(d) The cities of Lamitan and Isabela in the province of Basilan; and
(e) Other contiguous areas that may opt to be included in the Bangsamoro region during the 2015
plebiscite.
An important geographic feature of the Bangsamoro region is the river basins that encompass the
area. The river basins are composed of watersheds that collect and provide water to streams and
rivers eventually draining to receiving bodies like lakes, marshes or the sea. The mainland provinces
of the Bangsamoro region are located within the Mindanao River Basin, the second largest river
basin in the country, and spans across four regions in Central and Southern Mindanao including the
Bangsamoro region. Major rivers within the region include the Ambal-Simuay River System
originating from Lanao del Sur and the Buluan-Malungon River, originating from the far
southeastern portion of Mindanao.
A characteristic feature and associated with the Mindanao river basin in the Bangsamoro region is
the Ligawasan Marsh. This wetland is composed of three marshlands: Ligawasan, Libungan and
Ebpanan Marshes which together with other minor swamps and marshes, have a combined area of
approximately 285,000 hectares. These marshes serve as the receptacle of the Mindanao river basin
such that with persistently heavy rainfall, the marshes merge, breach their banks and swell to about
O
Q)      350,000 hectares. There are also lakes located in the Bangsamoro region. The largest of these are
Lake Lanao and Lake Buluan with areas of 34,000 and 6,134 hectares respectively. These bodies of
water are considered to be major lakes in the Philippines and are the third and sixth largest lakes in
the country.
Approximately half of the total land area of the Bangsamoro region is considered forestland. As a
proxy indicator of forestland, The Forestry Statistics for 2012 from the Forest Management Bureau
estimates that of the 1,293,552 hectares in the ARMM, 51% or 665,151 hectares are classified as
forestland. The overall forest cover (as percentage of the forestland) of the region has increased
between the period of 2003 and 2010 by approximately 21%.
There are ten (10) protected areas in the region with specific legal declarations and totaling
approximately 184,000 hectares. The biggest of these are the Lake Lanao Watershed Reservation
with a total area of 180,460 hectares and the South Upi Watershed Forest Reserve with 1,894
hectares. There are also other proclaimed watershed reservations that are not part of the protected
areas system such as the Kabulnan Watershed and the Dimapatoy Watershed in Maguidanao. The
Bangsamaro region has approximately 3,232 km of coastline and around 18,420 hectares of ocean
waters. The Sulu Sea belonging to the Sulu-Sulawesi (Celebes) marine ecoregion is the most
prominent marine ecosystem in the Bangsamoro region. This large marine ecosystem is one of the


﻿most diverse and productive in the world and was recently recognized as a marine biodiversity
hotspot for the variety of habitats it supports, from reefs to the mangroves
Tri-People Context
o
In 2010 ARMM registered a total population of 3,248,787. The people have been generally described
to include the: (i) Moros or Muslims, (ii) Lumads, and (iii) settlers who are mostly Christians from
Luzon and the Visayas. The Muslims comprise the overwhelming majority in the five provinces and
one city of ARMM. Based on the combined databases of the Office of Southern Cultural
Communities (OSCC) in ARMM and the National Commission on Indigenous People (NCIP) in
Basilan, the total population of indigenous people in ARMM in 2010 was 606,452 or 18.6% of the
total population in the same year.
Poverty Context
In 2012 the region posted the highest poverty incidence among families across all regions in the
country. As of first semester of 2012, poverty incidence is at 46.9 and subsistence incidence is at
20.4, which means that about 46.9% of every 100 families are poor, with their income incapable of
providing the basic food requirements. Among the five provinces, Lanao del Sur had the highest
poverty incidence of 68.9, followed by Maguindanao at 57.8. Three of the five provinces of ARMM
had the lowest Human Development Index (HDI) across provinces in the whole country in 2009.
Conflict Context
Due to its protracted nature, the conflict in the Bangsamoro area has mutated in various forms.
Vertical conflict (state versus rebel groups) is primarily between the government and the MILF, but
other armed groups such as the remnants of the MNLF, the BIFF (under Ombra Kato), and elements
of the Abu Sayyaf groups pose challenges to state authority. Horizontal conflicts abound such as
political elites competing for key electoral positions in the government or control over scarce
resource in the area, inter-ethnic competition (IPs versus Moros, Maranaos versus Maguindanaoans),
or inter-communal conflict (Christians versus Moros, MILF versus MNLF). Many of these
horizontal conflicts are lumped together under the phenomenon of "rido" (clan wars). International
Alert and WB (2014) noted that the incidences of horizontal conflicts outnumber those of vertical
a      conflicts particularly when the peace negotiations occurred between GPH and the MILF and after the
signing of the FAB in October 2012. However, they admonished that the decline in the incidence of
vertical conflict and a rise in horizontal conflict should similarly be a cause of concern because the
latter can easily transform into vertical conflicts given the interwoven nature of personal
relationships in the Bangsamoro. The "feudalistic nature" of its society enables a prominent clan
member who holds political power to use state resources against his enemy who will conveniently
form an alliance with rebel groups to counter the overwhelming force of his rival.
Political-Economy Context
In most of the proposed Bangsamoro territory there is an intimate relationship between those who
exercise political control and the local business leaders. In many LGUs the most prominent
businesses are those owned or controlled by the families that are also the elected LGU leaders. This
intertwining of politics and business presents multiple risks for investors. Some existing investors
have adapted to this marriage by entering into arrangements that further consolidate local control of
political and security controls together with their business investments - for example inviting local


﻿LGU leaders to become partners in a new business can be a form of insurance. However there are
risks associated with this strategy, including the political, security and business implications when
elections bring about a change in local leadership. There is also a risk that strengthening local
political and business control of one family may impact on transparency and accountability at the
O
)       local level, and may ultimate curb democratic principles.
Aligning with one political grouping or another at a local level is a threat to other groups, given that
sources of income are limited at the local level, and any successful business that produces a return
has the potential to shift the balance of power at election time in favor of one group over another.
Some investors have managed to remain removed from local politics, by maintaining relationships
with all political groups. Businesses that require access to large tracts of land find this more difficult
to achieve than those that don't, given that local political leaders exert control over large areas and
tend to veto powers over new investments in their area. There tends to be less risk for investments
that focus on processing rather than production.
That the clan is a mechanism within the Bangsamoro society of dispensing opportunities, providing
social protection and bestowing privileges to family and community members has been well
documented in the literature (Lara 2007; and Abinales 2000). Important economic and political
matters that affect the life of the community will have to pass the approval of the dominant clan
before their introduction and implementation in the community. While the system affords an
unconventional social protection mechanism particularly for the very poor members of the
community, it also has its negative aspect in the form of elite capture of most of the benefits of
development assistance (refer to Adriano and Parks). Because of their monopoly control of both
economic and political powers in their respective communities, these clans have b ecome virtual
gatekeepers in their respective communities. Violence often occurs when the control over a territory
by a dominant clan is challenged by another rival clan in the area.
During the field visits two perspectives on the dominance of datus and clan leaders in administering
land rights and land use among members of the communities or clans. In one perspective, the
dominance of datus is viewed to facilitate the entry of economic development opportunities and the
mobilization of the support of the whole community. In another perspective, the dominance of datus
is viewed to have caused the displacement and further disempowerment of many small farmers,
including indigenous people. A cited example is the amassing of large tracts of land by Datu Andal
o       Ampatuan and his children in Maguindanao where even the judicial courts could not intervene.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The Land Bank of the Philippines (LBP), as a government financial intermediary, implements an
environmental due diligence (EDD) process for all projects that it finances, including the collateral
offered as security. The EDD system of LBP is based significantly on the Philippine EIS System
(PEISS) particularly on project classification, coverage, and compliance requirements. The
Environmental Clearance Certificate (ECC) is a pre-release condition of the loans and non-
compliance with identified applicable environmental laws and regulations is considered as a
condition for default.
The environmental due diligence is carried out by the Environmental Program and Management
Department (EPMD) of LBP with nine personnel. The EPMD undertakes environmental
assessments, performance monitoring and audits as well as environmental compliance report of
projects based on environmental risks.


﻿Unlike its practice on environmental safeguards, LBP develops social safeguards policy and installs
the necessary social safeguards guidelines and mechanisms only when required by partner donor
agencies, such as the World Bank and the Japan International Cooperation Agency. The task of
managing social safeguards is not yet institutionalized and merely added to the functions of the
O
)       EPMD when required.
The LBP has been engaged as a financial intermediary of various projects by the World Bank and
JICA and is expected to have a good level of understanding of the environmental and social
safeguards requirement of the two institutions. Specifically when it comes to its engagement with the
World Bank, LBP capacity in implementing social and environment safeguards was assessed to be
satisfactory in the implementation of two projects - the Water Districts Development Project
(WDDP) and the Support for Strategic Local Development Investment Project (SSLDIP). The
Project Management Office (PMO) created under the WDDP - a Category A project - was retained
to manage SSLDIP. The PMO is staffed by qualified engineers, social safeguards/community
participation specialists, and environmental specialists. The PMO is supported by a Project
Implementation Consultant (PIC) with similar skills complement. The PMO and the PIC conduct
regular field visits to subprojects, provide orientation to sub-borrowers on the social and
environmental safeguards requirements of the project. They also extend assistance to sub-borrowers
in the implementation of subprojects, including the conduct of consultations with various subproject
stakeholders. However, given the complex political and social context of this project, LBP's capacity
to implement the Bank's safeguard policies for the proposed project, particularly the capacity to
identify and address issues pertaining to OP 4.10 and OP 4.12 and complex subprojects as well as
broader political and land conflict issues that the project is likely to face during implementation,
would be assessed during preparation. In addition, the capacity of the potential sub-borrowers would
also be assessed. A capacity building program for LBP and sub-borrowers will be spelled out in the
ESMF.
Safeguards implementation by LBP under the SSLDIP has been rated, on average, Moderately
Satisfactory for the last seven years of project implementation. The Integrated Environmental and
Social Safeguards Framework developed for the project was found to be generally adequate in its
coverage and effectiveness in managing most of the impacts of the enrolled subprojects. However, it
was found to be inadequate with respect to Dam Safety guidelines and in addressing IP issues.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Leonardo Jr. Batugal Paat (GENDR)
Roberto B. Tordecilla (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The project is categorized as an FI because it
OP/BP 4.01                              involves financial intermediation by LBP. Potential
sub-projects to be financed could be category A or B,
with sub-projects from Large Private Corporations
likely falling under Category A, and sub-projects
from Cooperatives and MSMEs likely falling under
Category B.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  Yes         The Bangsamoro region is known to host various


﻿critical and non-critical natural habitats. Within the
region are ten (10) declared protected areas, marine
sanctuaries and key biodiversity areas. The total area
of declared terrestrial (and aquatic) protected area is
184,000 hectares excluding the marine protected
areas. There are also additional sites considered as
key biodiversity conservation areas however with no
legislated protection scheme. The projects that will
be supported by the fund facility may have direct
impacts on these natural habitats or induce indirect or
residual impacts on these habitats. The specific
locations and details of the impacts are not known at
this stage and therefore screening for further impacts
and the corresponding mitigation measures will be
undertaken as part of the ESMF preparation.
However, a large proportion of land and marine areas
covered under the proposed Bangsamoro Territory is
classified as protected area and therefore high
likelihood that projects may have direct and residual
impacts on these areas.
Forests OP/BP 4.36           Yes          Almost half of the total land area of the Bangsamoro
is classified as forestland consisting of closed forest,
open access forest, mangroves, and brushlands. In
the total forestland of the region, the overall forest
cover is approximately 21% as of 2010. The forest
cover may have been reduced even more with the
continuing forestland conversion, clearing and
exploitation. The forestland under specific
management scheme like Integrated Forest
Management Agreement (IFMA) and Community
Based Forest Management Agreement (CBFMA)
account for approximately 64,915 hectares while
areas set aside for conservation and protection
(including protected areas and watershed reserves)
total to 192,491 hectares. The remaining 61% of the
forestland are "open access" that can be potentially
exploited or misused.
The intensification of agricultural production may
build additional pressure on further clearing and
conversion of forestlands in the future. There may be
residual and indirect impacts on the forest areas. The
ESMF shall specify project impacts on the forests
and the forest-dependent communities including
more importantly the measures to address these
impacts.
Pest Management OP 4.09      Yes          The establishment of large scale production of


﻿limited species of agricultural crops may involve the
application pest management tools including
chemical and biological controls. Whilst the best
practice as observed in some agricultural production
processes involve the use of integrated pest
management such as the use of natural parasites and
vectors targeting the pest population, in some
traditional farming systems, chemical controls may
still be used to manage pest population pest
population. The project may result to increase in the
use of pesticides within the influence area. Related to
the use of chemical controls in pest management is
the exposure risks attendant to the mode of
application, specifically aerial spraying in
plantations. While definitive exposure and
toxicological studies of aerial spraying of pesticides
specific to the region still need to establish
environmental and health impacts, this issue clearly
presents not only environmental and health risks but
also reputational risks to the Bank as well. Some
LGUs in Mindanao including North Cotabato have
already instituted policies banning aerial spraying of
pesticides; some other provinces within the
Bangsamoro have no clear and specific regulations
on the mode of pesticide application.
To address the anticipated increase in the utilization
of pesticides, a Pest Management Plan (PMP) shall
be prepared as a stand-alone plan and highlights the
Integrated Pest Management (IPM) as a central
concept of managing pest population. The PMP shall
take into account the pest management practices used
in plantations and other agribusiness ventures. The
plan will also include an assessment of the
applicability and practicability of proposed pest
management measures including the current policy
environment. Good and replicable practices (and
alternative to aerial spraying) will be identified for
some plantations that have complied with local
ordinances banning aerial spraying as the mode for
applying pesticides.
Physical Cultural Resources   TBD          The project is unlikely to affect any physical cultural
OP/BP 4.11                                 resources. However, it would appear that impacts on
physical cultural resources (including cultural and
spiritual sites of local communities) cannot be ruled
out until specific subprojects are identified.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP      Yes          One particular group affected by land disputes


﻿4.10                                      (contrasting statutory and customary systems) are the
Indigenous People (IPs). The primary conflict trigger
involving IPs is land. With the complex land conflict
context, there is strong apprehension among
stakeholders that the entry of large agribusiness
corporations will threaten the security of tenure of
the IPs who live in and have claims over 380,612
hectares of land in Maguindanao alone. There is thus
a need for the proposed project to incorporate the
necessary mechanisms to promote and protect the
rights and welfare of IPs in areas where they are
found present or have collective attachment to while
encouraging agribusiness investments in the area.
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes         Land acquisition is an indispensable part of all
BP 4.12                                   agribusiness projects or ventures. Doing this in the
context of a problematic state of land administration
system in the Bangsamoro, with the dominance of
few powerful individuals or groups/clans, and the
presence of many poor small landowners and
landless families, could result in displacement or
involuntary resettlement.
Disputes over land use are the most significant risk
for agri-business investments in the future
Bangsamoro. The proposed 'core territories' of the
Bangsamoro include a number of areas within the
current ARMM and neighboring municipalities and
provinces where conflicts over land have occurred
regularly. The ESA will focus more on this and the
corresponding ESMF will include clear measures,
procedures and institutional arrangements to ensure
that the spirit and objectives of OP 4.12 and 4.10 are
achieved under this proposed project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37    Yes          The sub-projects may involve run-of-river irrigation
systems, dirt dams, and small water impounding
systems as part of the water resources and
conservation infrastructure for large scale plantation.
Sources of water for irrigation of large scale crop
production involve available surface water,
complemented by ground water. In some instances,
run-of-river hydropower is used to provide power to
production operations. The safety issues of these
types of infrastructure may have to be assessed as
part of the project screening. The ESMF shall specify
guidelines on the planning and construction of the
infrastructure.


﻿Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 15-Aug-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
To deepen the analysis of potential environmental and social impacts of the envisaged project
especially along the objectives of OP 4.01, OP 4.12 and OP 4.10, LBP has already completed the
environmental and social assessments and prepared an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) to ensure compliance with the requirements of the policies that are triggered.
The ESMF has already been commented upon by both the World Bank and JICA project teams. It
also includes provisions relating to an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework and a
Resettlement Policy Framework to address WB requirements under OP 4.10 and OP 4.12
respectively.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Harideep Singh,Nataliya Mylenko
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:     Name: Svend Jensby (SA)                         Date: 29-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/       Name: Nathan M. Belete (PMGR)                   Date: 30-Jul-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


