INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
ADDITIONAL FINANCING
Report No.: ISDSA14604
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 04-Aug-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 05-Aug-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Tonga                      Project ID:  P151806
Parent       P096931
Project ID:
Project Name: Tonga Transport Sector Consolidation Project - Additional Financing (P151806)
Parent Project Tonga Transport Sector Consolidation Project (P096931)
Name:
Task Team       Julie Babinard,Christopher R. Bennett
Leader(s):
Estimated       28-Jul-2015                Estimated    29-Sep-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTIO2                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Ports, waterways and shipping (49%), Public administration- Transportation
(24%), Rural and Inter-Urban Roads and Highways (27%)
Theme(s):       Other public sector governance (40%), Rural services and infrastructure (30%),
Trade facilitation and market access (30%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:       5.00            Total Bank Financing:    4.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          1.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                 2.00
IDA Grant                                                                   2.00
Total                                                                       5.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Page 1 of 7


﻿Is this a         No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
A. Original Project Development Objectives - Parent
To establish and consolidate the operations of the newly-created Ministry of Transport as a
unified transport sector-policy,planning and regulatory ministry and to improve the level of
compliance of the civil aviation and maritime subsector entities withinternational safety and
security standards.
B. Current Project Development Objectives - Parent
The transport sector has (i) stronger policy, planning, and regulatory institutions and framework,
(ii) improved safety andsecurityfacilities and compliance with international safety and security
standards, and (iii) greater domestic capacity for roadrehabilitation and maintenance.
C. Proposed Project Development Objectives - Additional Financing (AF)
3. Project Description
The AF for TSCP will expand on the maritime elements of the parent project, as well as on
additional safety and capacity building activities in the maritime and road sectors. Component A of
the parent project has been completed and does not require AF. Accordingly, the AF will support the
activities described below.
Component A: Establishment of a sustainable transport sector policy, and institutional and
operational framework (part of original project, all activities completed).
Component B: Provision of high priority strategic investments required to meet with mandatory
safety and security standards required under international agreements, treaties and obligations.
Investments in physical infrastructure, which are estimated at USD 1.94 million, will include: (i)
additional aids to navigation for Nuku'alofa, Eua, Ha'apai, Vava'u, and the other islands; (ii) marine
safety, maintenance and environmental protection equipment; and, (iii) passenger shelters and
storage facilities for the safe and efficient management of both import and export cargoes.
Component C: Further investments consistent with the policy/planning frameworks and investment
plans developed under Component A will include:
i.     Investments in transport safety (USD 0.48 million), including: (i) road improvement works
to address safety issues; (ii) investments to improve maritime safety; (iii) road safety campaigns; (iv)
child restraint program; and, (v) advisory services and support for updating existing safety legislation
in the transport sector.
ii.    Technical advisory services, capacity building and training (USD 1.67 million) to strengthen
Mol, including: (i) advisors for asset management, maritime, roads, and traffic safety; (ii) support for
scaling-up change management; (iii) training and capacity building; and (iv) ICT systems, including
an asset management system.
Page 2 of 7


﻿Component D: Funding to continue support for project implementation for 2.5 years (USD 0.44
million).
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
AF activities will be located on most of the major islands of the Royal Kingdom of Tonga. The
Kingdom of Tonga consists of 169 Islands with a total population of around 120,000. The country
lies in the South Pacific and stretches over a distance of about 800 kilometers from north to south,
covering a total land area of 748 square kilometers with an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) of about
700,000 square kilometers.
The population is primarily Polynesian, with a literacy rate close to 99 per cent and a relatively low
incidence of poverty. However, its small size, geographic dispersion and isolation, and limited
natural resources provide a narrow economic base. Agriculture, fishing and tourism account for most
export earnings and it has a high dependency on external aid (approximately 15% of Gross National
Income, GNI).
Coastal resources are important to Tonga's economy and livelihoods. All sea resources and coastal
areas 50 feet above the high tide watermark are Crown property and the rights to all resources (sand,
dead coral, marine life) are vested in the Crown. Coastal areas include various ecosystems such as
mangroves, coral reefs, sea grasses, beaches and diverse species that inhabit the coastal habitats.
A wide range of shellfish and other marine life are also harvested from tidal flats at low tide for
consumption. Commercial fishing is also an important part of the economy and is divided into three
categories; offshore, bottom fish and inshore resources. Each category varies in magnitude and is
subject to different levels of exploitation. Management of this resource is administered through the
Ministry of Fisheries.
With its remote locations, small size, dispersed islands setting and other geographical factors, Tonga
faces many challenges in developing and maintaining sustainable internal (intra- and inter-island),
regional and international transport and communication linkages, all of which are crucial to the
economic development and social well-being of its population.
Tonga has an estimated total of 20,000 vehicles and a road network comprising around 1,800km
across six islands, of which approximately half is on Tongatapu. The length of minor (feeder or
access) roads is estimated at 750km on Tongatapu and 1,350km in total. The condition of the road
network is generally declining due to under-funding of maintenance in the past. In addition,
increasing levels of vehicle ownership and introduction of heavy multi-axle vehicles is accelerating
damage to the road system. Road program planning, asset management systems and financing
arrangements are generally inadequate for current and future needs.
Maritime services are the backbone of Tonga's inter-island transport for passengers and cargo. One
of Tonga's government priority in the ports sector is to rehabilitate outer islands ports as part of more
comprehensive inter-island shipping exchanges that included the introduction of a new ferry and
development of improved terminals and harvest facilities at ports. The last major upgrading of outer-
island ports was completed in 2000 and there has been little in the way of further investment since.
The AF activities will not include traditional road construction or maintenance works. Instead, only
road safety infrastructure (such as footpaths, pedestrian crossings) and road safety activities (such as
Page 3 of 7


﻿road safety campaigns, a child car seat rental programme and legislation addressing road safety
issues) are to be included under the AF. The locations for the road safety infrastructure have yet to be
determined but it is anticipated that the activities will take place in locations of existing infrastructure
or within the existing right of way.
The maritime sector investments will be located or undertaken at the existing sites of the domestic
ferry terminals and ports.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Ross James Butler (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes          Although minor in scope and impacts, some
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                environmental and social impacts will be created. These
can readily be managed through use of the project EMP.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           No impacts on Natural Habitats anticipated.
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           No impacts on Forests anticipated.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           No use of pesticides, etc., required
Physical Cultural       No           No impacts on PCR anticipated.
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The Parent project did not trigger OP 4.10. Furthermore,
BP 4.10                              analytical work undertaken during the preparation of the
"Environmental and Social Safeguards for the Pacific"
confirms that OP4. 10 is not triggered for projects in
Tonga.
Involuntary Resettlement No          The Parent project did not trigger OP 4.12. No
OP/BP 4.12                           involuntary resettlement (physical or economic) expected
as all works associated with the project will continue to be
located within existing rights of way and/or on existing
infrastructure such as wharves etc.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           No Dam issues in AF
4.37
Projects on International  No        No impacts on International Waterways anticipated.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No           No disputed areas in Tonga.
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The AF will support activities and works that are very similar in type and scale to those of the
parent project. The project will continue to trigger OP/BP 4.01 Environmental Assessment.
Page 4 of 7


﻿Based on the experience of the parent project, the anticipated environmental and social impacts are
expected to be minor, predictable, manageable and confined to small areas and will not require
complex or project-specific environmental or social analysis. The existing TSCP Environmental
Management Plan (EMP) that has been successfully applied to the parent project will apply to the
AF activities.
It is not anticipated that the road activities of the project will have any significant negative social
impacts. The activities do not include land acquisition or realignment of any road. The activities
should provide important social and health benefits to the communities of the project areas in
terms of positive reductions in road safety accidents and injuries and improved access to key
services by the communities.
The specific maritime works for improving passenger and cargo facilities will be confirmed after
scoping studies to be completed during the first year of implementation. If the proposed activities
are not covered by the existing EMP, it will be updated to reflect the necessary changes and
disclosed again. Should any changes have the potential for more substantial impacts, a limited
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) will be prepared.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential and long-term impacts of the activities financed under the AF are expected to be
generally positive through improvements to accessibility and improvement of safety and security
compliance in both the maritime and road transport sectors. No land acquisition is required for
carrying out the planned AF activities and no resettlement will be necessary.
Anticipated environmental and social impacts would related primarily to low impact construction
activities (minor noise, dust and low volume waste disposal etc.). No asbestos is expected to be
encountered.
The proposed AF activities will improve the accessibility of social and economic services, and
improve safety and security compliance with national and international obligations. It is
anticipated that there will be a reduction in road traffic injuries and fatalities and in particular for
pedestrians who walk on the roadside including school children who walk along the roads to get to
and from their schools.
The AF activities are not anticipated to have long term negative or indirect impacts.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
There were no relevant alternatives to the proposed road investments at the locations identified.
The project activities are not anticipated to include any expansion or changes in road alignments
that could require acquisition of new land.
Traffic regulation and safety elements in Tonga are generally in poor condition. In lot of places,
traffic signs, guardrails and road markings are missing. It is anticipated therefore that, by focusing
on pedestrian crossings and road safety measures such as speed bumps and pedestrian crossings,
the project's road safety improvement activities will provide significant positive benefits to the
population, both men and women.
Page 5 of 7


﻿4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The project has been operating effectively from a safeguards point of view since the last
restructuring in 2010. The existing EMP will be integrated into the technical design and civil
works contracts for the appropriate investments with an explicit requirement for the preparation of
a detailed contractor's EMP (CEMP). In addition to the CEMP requirement/guidance, a
requirement for an effective grievance redress mechanism has also been included in the EMP.
Consultations with stakeholders will also be undertaken at sub-project areas and a grievance
redress mechanism put in place and documented in the CEMPs.
All CEMPs will contain suitable measures for mitigation of the impacts, for monitoring of the
implementation of these measures and outlines an adequate budget to ensure these measures are
implemented. During any construction, the implementation of these measures will be supervised
by an engineering supervisor from the respective implementing agency, Mol or responsible
implementing agency.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders are the transport users who use the ports in Ha'apai and 'Eua, and the local
communities who live along the roads where the road safety infrastructure will be undertaken. A
site selection and prioritization process will commence in early implementation in consultation
with key stakeholders and local communities.
Key stakeholders (Mol, and project area communities) have been continually engaged and
consulted during the TSCP implementation. Consultations with the beneficiary communities and
local NGOs will continue and the EMP will also be shared and disclosed in both English and the
local language.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                               27-Jul-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                            29-Jul-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Tonga                                                     30-Jul-2015
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Page 6 of 7


﻿Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [X] No [   ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [X] No [    ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Julie Babinard,Christopher R. Bennett
Approved By
Practice Manager/      Name: Michel Kerf (PMGR)                   Date: 05-Aug-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


