INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC13628
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 28-Jun-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 06-Jul-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:        India                      Project ID:   P155303
Project Name:   Madhya Pradesh Urban Development Project (P155303)
Task Team       Uri Raich,Abhijit Sankar Ray
Leader(s):
Estimated       01-Dec-2015                Estimated     20-Apr-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU12                       Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      General water, sanitation and flood protection sector (25%), Solid waste
management (25%), Sub-national government administration (5 0%)
Theme(s):       Municipal finance (15%), Municipal governance and institution building (50%),
City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (35%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     166.00            Total Bank Financing:  116.00
U       Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                              Amount
Borrower                                                        50.00
o         International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          116.00
Total                                                          166.00
Environmental A - Full Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The development objective of the proposed MPUDP project is to enhance the capacity of the relevant
State-level institutions to support ULBs in developing and financing urban infrastructure.
C. Project Description
The proposed MPUDP would be the first urban operation supported by the Bank in MP, but it builds


﻿on a long term experience of the Bank supporting municipal development funds in the States of
Tamil Nadu and Karnataka. The proposed operation builds on such institutional design that has
proven successful in other States but builds in a series of lessons learned and specific requirements
by MP. The proposed project is expected to comprise the following three components.
o
Component 1: Institutional Development Component (Bank financing US$ 15 million). This
component will comprise the following three subcomponents:
1.1 Policy reform (Bank financing US$ 10 million): This subcomponent will provide support to the
implementation and sustainability of urban policy reforms in areas such as: (i) expansion of
municipal e-governance system to all ULBs; (ii) municipal accounting; (iii) municipal budgeting;
and (iv) enhancement of own-source revenues of ULBs.
1.2. Support to MPUDC and ULB (Bank financing US$1.5 million): This subcomponent will provide
(i) capacity building support to MPUDC for strengthening their overall systems and operational
procedures, and improving their implementation capacities for development and implementation of
urban infrastructure projects; and (ii) capacity building support to ULBs for preparing, implementing
and operating technically and financially sound projects in ULBs, including environmental and social
mitigation actions, contract supervision, and Public Private Partnerships.
1.3 Project management (Bank financing US$ 3.5 million): This subcomponent will support project
management activities (i.e. provision of necessary office equipment, funding of incremental
operating costs, etc.) of the three implementing agencies namely, MPUDC, Directorate of Municipal
Administration (DMA) in charge of implementing the institutional development and policy reform
activities, and the unit in charge of the preparation of the Bhopal-Indore Super corridor (BISCO).
Component 2: Urban Investment Component (Bank financing US$ 97.5 million). This component
will comprise the following two subcomponents:
2.1 Access to finance for urban investments (Bank financing US$ 93 million): The main objective of
this sub-component is to help participating ULBs improve urban services/infrastructure. It will do so
by providing sub-loans and sub-grants to participating ULBs to support the development of
sustainable urban investments in areas under the mandate of ULBs such as water supply, solid waste
a      management, water waste management and urban roads and public transport, based on demand
driven City Development/Vision Plans developed by ULBs. The selection of participating ULBs will
be based on an assessment of the technical, environmental, social and financial sustainability of the
investments as per criteria that will be established by MPUDC.
2.2 Credit Enhancement (Bank financing $ 4.5 million): Experience shows that successful financial
intermediaries should be developed as interim instruments to prepare subnational governments to
access credit markets directly. As such state and central government have expressed strong demand
to include this subcomponent. This sub-component will channel increased financial resources for
investment in urban sector projects by leveraging Bank funds. Thus, MPUIF's role will be expanded
to include credit enhancement support through instruments-such as debt service reserve funds, partial
risk support, bond insurance and subordinated debt instruments which would assist the overall
objective of providing sustainable access to the capital markets and commercial financing to ULBs.
Component 3: Bhopal-Indore Super Corridor (BISCO) Component (Bank financing US$3.5 million):
The objective of this component is to support the preparation of BISCO. It will do so by providing


﻿technical assistance and consulting services to develop the regional/urban plan for the Bhopal-Indore
corridor and any other relevant studies to be undertaken as part of the BISCO development.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Madhya Pradesh (MP) is the second largest, fifth populous, and eighth most urbanized state in India.
Although MP recorded a higher rate of urbanization compared to rural growth in the last decade, its
urbanization rate is still below the national average but it is projected to catch-up in the next 15
years. At present, MP total urban population is of 20.1 million (28% of total population) concentrated
in 476 urban centers as follows: Of the 14 municipal corporations, four (Indore, Bhopal, Jabalpur,
and Gwalior) are million-plus cities. Access to water and sanitation is the biggest challenge for the
urban population particularly the poor. Slum population is about 6. 4 million as per Census of India
2011.
The sub projects to be supported under the project are expected to be located in the small and
medium towns for Madhya Pradesh. The project is expected to support the development of
sustainable urban investments in areas under the mandate of ULBs such as water supply, solid waste
management, wastewater management and urban transport, based on demand driven City
Development Plans developed by ULBs.
The proposed project will have positive environmental and social impacts owing to benefits such as
improved water supply, sanitation, wastewater management, safe disposal of rain water, improved
waste collection and disposal practices, and improved road/public transport facilities and other
infrastructure improvements in the cities. The benefits are likely to be in the form of saving time for
collection of water, improved health and personal hygiene, better mobility and improved quality of
life. On the other hand, the project may also have some adverse social impacts related to
displacement of people, especially the non- title holders and also involve some private land for the
proposed infrastructure improvement interventions.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
0
The Bank has never had an investment project in the urban sector in MP but has engaged with the
state on other sectors including governance (Citizen Access to Responsive Services Project) and
O
education (Higher Education Quality Improvement Project). The institutional capacity for safeguard
policies both for MUPUDC and the Urban Local bodies is low. However, the state has prior
experience of engaging with Asian Development Bank urban infrastructure projects and has
experience of managing safeguards management issues with multilateral agencies. As part of the
project preparation, MPUDC is already preparing an ESMF and Operational Manual for projects
statewide and recognizes the safeguard requirements of The World Bank. However, the agency
would require support in developing these safeguard management instruments and in building its
capacity in operationalization of Manual and ESMF The key aspect being training and capacity
building programs and establishing strong institutional arrangement for the safeguard management in
the project.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GENDR)
Sangeeta Kumari (GSURR)
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY


﻿Safeguard Policies           Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment     Yes         The project such as water supply, sewerage, solid
OP/BP 4.01                               waste management, road improvements are likely to
have negative impacts on the project communities if
the sub-projects are not designed and implemented
with consideration to the nature and significance of
the environmental profile of the project area. The
environment impacts are also likely significant for
water and wastewater treatment plants and solid
waste landfill sub-projects, as they may affect
sensitive environmental features in some
participating ULBs. Impacts of sewerage and water
supply sub-project are also expected to be
significant, during the construction phase in the
urban areas, The project hence has been categorized
as 'Category A' and OP 4.01 has hence been
triggered.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No           Based on the currently available information on sub-
project locations, no impacts are expected on the
natural habitats. The policy hence has not been
triggered. The ESMF to be prepared for the project,
will include screening criteria that identifies and
avoids impacts on natural habitats.
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No           Based on the current list of activities being
considered, the project does not involve substantial
conversion of forest areas and impacts on the forest
resources.
 Pest Management OP 4.09   No           Project activities, are not expected to trigger the
requirements of OP 4.09.
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes         Based on the current information, the project
OP/BP 4.11                               activities are not expected to directly impact the
cultural resources. However, since some of the sub-
projects could impact cultural properties. OP 4.11
has been triggered.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP     TBD
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        The project will have some adverse impacts related
BP 4.12                                  to displacement of people, especially the non- title
holders and also involve some private land
acquisition for the proposed infrastructure
improvement interventions.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No           Project activities do not involve construction of dams
and / or dependent on dams.
Projects on International   No           Project activities do not involve / located in
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                     International waterways.


﻿Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No         Project activities are not located in disputed areas.
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 21-Dec-2015
O
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
An ESMF and Operational Manual is already under preparation by MPUDC that will be
applicable to all the sub- projects. A review and gap Assessment of these instruments will be
carried out during the project preparation and necessary additional provisions, in compliance to the
Bank Safeguards policies. All sub projects will be subjected to a screening criteria and ESIA and
ESMPs will prepared for each sub-project (as applicable). For sub projects to be prepared by
Appraisal to meet India's readiness criteria, ESIAs and ESMPs as applicable will also be prepared
simultaneously, for these sub-projects.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Uri Raich,Abhijit Sankar Ray
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:    Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                  Date: 05-Jul-2015
Practice Manager/      Name: Ming Zhang (PMGR)                         Date: 06-Jul-2015
Manager:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


