INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC14844
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Sep-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 16-Sep-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Belarus                    Project ID:   P152276
Project Name:    Belarus Competitiveness Enhancement Project (P152276)
Task Team        Karen Grigorian,Johanna Jaeger
Leader(s):
Estimated        09-Nov-2015                Estimated      15-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTC10                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       SME Finance (30%), General finance sector (10%), Other domestic and
international trade (20%), General industry and trade sector (40 %)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (30%), Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprise support (30%), e-Services (10%), Ot her Financial Sector
Development (10%), Other Private Sector Development (20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:     150.00             Total Bank Financing:   150.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development           150.00
Total                                                           150.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to enhance Belarus' private and financial sector
competitiveness by supporting broad structural reforms, fostering delivery of public services to
businesses, and improving access to finance.
C. Project Description


﻿The proposed components and subcomponents are as follows:
Component 1. Supporting broad structural reforms to improve business environment for private
sector and financial sector development
The objective of this component is to reduce major policy and administrative barriers for private
sector development in Belarus. It will support implementation of broad structural reforms outlined in
the Structural Reforms Roadmap of the Government. This component will utilize a results-based
*       lending instrument that would help to sharpen the results focus of the government's reforms and
prioritize its budget allocations. The specific set of disbursement-linked indicators (DLIs) will be
agreed with the Government during the preparation stage. Very preliminary the team identified the
set of DLIs presented in Annex 7. The main reform activities, which would serve as a policy basis for
DLIs finalization, include:
A)     Business Environment: (i) Adoption and implementation of the Government's Action Plan to
improve investment climate and advance deregulation; (ii) Making operational the e-portal of
administrative procedures
B)     SOE Reforms: (i) Adoption and implementation of the Government's Action Plan to
accelerate restructuring and privatization of SOEs on a case-by-case basis; (ii) Adoption of SOE
Reform Strategy to advance SOEs' financial autonomy, streamline corporate governance and
accountability arrangements; (iii) Introduction of amendments to the Insolvency Law to facilitate
SOE restructuring
C)     FDI Promotion and Advocacy: Strengthening the governance structure and ensuring
financial sustainability of the NAIP
D)     Strengthening Government Support for SMEs: (i) Adopting a new SME Support Strategy;
(ii) Establishing a new SME Agency and ensuring its financial sustainability; (iii) Launching a new
matching grant program to facilitate SME upgrading.
E)     Financial Sector Reform: The activity will support the efforts of NBRB and other relevant
state bodies aimed at maintaining banking sector stability and deepening of financial intermediation.
o
Component 2. Supporting Implementation of Structural Reforms, Improving public Services,
Promoting SOE Reforms and Enterprise Upgrading, and Strengthening the Financial Sector
The objective of this component is to strengthen government capacity to implement core structural
reforms and improve provision of relevant public services to attract FDI, promote exports, facilitate
new local business entry and upgrade of the existing SMEs, and support SOE restructuring. The
component will also support the efforts of NBRB and other relevant state bodies aimed at
maintaining banking sector stability and deepening of financial intermediation. It includes six
subcomponents.
2.1 Improvements in the investment climate. The project will help implement the government's SME
Strategy and support system-wide reduction of the private sector' regulatory compliance burden
including a range of approvals, permits, clearances, and inspections. Overall, this component will
build on the legislative and institutional reforms and the development of an integrated ICT system
initiated with support from the IFC Advisory Project. The specific investment climate reforms to be
selected under the project will be informed by government priorities, capacity of counterpart team
and political economy considerations. For this sub-component, the team intends to keep certain level
of flexibility in line with recent WB experience elsewhere. Improving the regulatory practices and


﻿systems across all levels of the government and enhancing public-private dialogue will facilitate
competitiveness of SMEs and accelerate the sector's growth. This sub-component will also support
capacity building within the MOE to promote further deregulation initiatives and may support
introduction of Regulatory Impact Assessment (RIA) mechanism.
0
One of the immediate priorities in streamlining regulatory services is the introduction of the
Government's e-portal of "Online delivery of regulatory services". This activity will help finance
implementation of regulatory reforms that have been already initiated. In particular, it would help the
Government implement the next phase of the online portal which provides enhanced information
services with respect to various business regulations. The Government made significant progress in
introducing the portal and plans to implement a more fully-featured and searchable information
resource. This would be followed by the development and piloting of an online transactions system
to support business entities' efforts in complying with regulatory requirements (getting the necessary
permits and approvals online). The development of the software for the portal, purchase of necessary
hardware and their integration with existing sectoral systems are the immediate anticipated expenses.
Costs related to the redesign of current business processes within the regulatory system, training of
officials and outreach (publicizing the online mechanism), etc. would also be covered. Moving
respective administrative procedures online would trigger a major redesign of respective business
processes and simplification of the current procedures.
2.2 Supporting the Establishment of a SME Support Agency. Authorities are reviewing a proposal
for a strategic decision to transfer Fund for Entrepreneurial Support to the Development Bank of
Belarus as part of the broad effort to consolidate financial instruments under a specialized agency. At
the same time, recognizing the importance of non-financial services to SMEs and limited grant
support for start-ups, the MOE decided to establish a new modern SME Support Agency. This sub-
component will provide adequate support for the initial stage of Agency's operations, including
financing to retain experienced consultants who will guide the process, as well as procure necessary
equipment and support services for the Agency.
As part of this sub-component, legal advisory will be provided to the SME Support Agency in order
to expand its ability to deliver some critical legal services to the private sector and strengthen the
Agency's image and reputation among private stakeholders. Legal support would be provided: (i) to
develop amendments to critical pieces of business regulation to reduce the administrative burden and
remove major inconsistencies within the existing body of commercial legislation; (ii) to provide
strategic legal advisory services to business groups and associations on interpretation and compliance
with the existing regulations; and (iii) design programs of legal education for entrepreneurs.
2.3 Strengthening market for Business Development Services (Matching grants to support start-ups
spin-offs, and SMEs' upgrades). The twin objective of the sub-component is, first, to accelerate
development of so-called 'first mover' firms - firms which do new things and establish a new
national best practice and, second, to diffuse the experience of those 'first movers' widely enough so
that they could become demonstration cases and role models for other SMEs to follow. The project
will finance a matching grant program to encourage both demand for and supply of BDS aimed at
deepening the BDS market, which remains underdeveloped in Belarus and presents a major
constraint for strengthening the SME sector. The focus is at improving SMEs' access to know-how
and new technologies at promoting productivity improvements.
Matching grants provided under the project are expected to facilitate upgrading of small and medium
private enterprises. The new government's SME Strategy, which is being finalized by the MOE with


﻿WBG support, provides for rollout of competitive matching grants to MSMEs to increase their
management skills and export capabilities. Grants of maximum of US$25,000 per beneficiary would
be allocated to improve access to relatively basic consulting services and technology for enterprise
upgrading. Potential beneficiaries of this grant window are all SMEs (subject to broad eligibility
O
criteria). This activity is expected to generate market demand for business development services of
general nature (accounting; diagnostic of problems such as SWOT analysis; management consulting;
legal support; training of SME personnel; purchaseof business software, etc.).
This Project's activity would aim to scale up and mainstream a similar small grant program that has
been funded by the EBRD in Belarus since 2012 and which identified considerable unsatisfied
demand for business service development across local SMEs. This sub-component would also
include competitive grants to encourage development of start-ups and spin-offs within the process of
SOE restructuring (to encourage respective teams and business units to split from a SOE and start its
own private business). Competitive grants might be also provided to facilitate capacity building in
local centers for entrepreneurial support and business incubators and training for business
associations.
2.4 Strengthening Investment and Export Promotion services (Institutional Strengthening of NAIP).
The primary goal of this activity is to generate additional interest of private investors in Belarus,
especially in sectors of strategic interest to the country. The National Agency of Investment and
Privatization (NAIP) was established as a private sector-focused development agency to streamline
transaction processes, work as an intermediary between the private sector and government, and
promote Belarus's competitive strengths within a clear investment promotion strategy. This activity
will finance capacity building at the NAIP to expand its capabilities to serve prospective investors
who require local networking, market information and other pre-investment and aftercare services.
This sub-component will support the NAIP in providing facilitation services and information to
foreign investors and local exporters, thus completing the investment and export development
processes. NAIP's capacity to service clients can be enhanced through innovative mechanisms like
country image building, demand-driven marketing tools and online promotion techniques. It will also
provide international best practice to identify target-sector relevant studies and marketing materials
to prepare and execute outward promotion missions and participation in trade shows/events.
Moreover, the project would support NAIP to become a private sector champion within the
o       administration. The Agency will play an advocacy role for further structural reforms aimed at
improving the investment climate and improve public-private dialogue (see Annex 8 for additional
detail).
2.5 Support for case-by-case SOE restructuring and privatization. The primary instrument in this area
would be support for pilot restructuring of identified SOEs aimed at facilitation of their
competitiveness by supporting divestiture of their non-core assets, various spin-offs and encouraging
private SMEs' access to the existing SOEs' premises and equipment. This strategy could be
complemented by partial privatization of SOEs' assets and an option of converting some
underutilized assets into an industrial park to host a cluster of inter-related SMEs. It is expected that
the NAIP would receive additional support under the project (sub-component 2.4) to develop
capabilities for implementing this restructuring pilot. SMEs, which would emerge in the restructuring
process, would also benefit from improved access to finance to be supported through matching grants
(under sub-component 2.3) and line of credit (under component 3). The design of this sub-component
would reflect lessons learned from the earlier Bank projects to advance SOE restructuring in the
FSU, e.g. in Moldova.


﻿2.6. Support for reforms in the financial sector. The project will also support the efforts of NBRB and
other relevant state bodies aimed at maintaining banking sector stability and deepening of financial
intermediation. More specifically, this activity aims to support NBRB in its plans to implement
O
Q)      financial sector reforms aimed at moving towards more efficiency and improved allocation of capital
as part of the broader structural reform agenda of the government. As part of this sub-component
technical assistance will be provided to NBRB and other relevant authorities in achieving the agreed
upon financial sector activities under Component 1 which tentatively include the i) adoption and
implementation of a Financial Sector Development Strategy, (ii) establishment of an integrated
financial sector supervisor (megaregulator) under the auspices of NBRB, (iii) measures to maintain
stability of the banking sector that could include an independent Asset Quality Reviews of systemic
banks as well as steps to strengthen the deposit insurance scheme, (iv) strengthening governance and
supervision of DBB, (v) establishment of a national collateral registry for movable assets to expand
opportunities for SMEs to obtain commercial credit and (vi) rationalization and gradual reduction of
government lending programs (GLPs).
Component 3. Improvements in MSMEs' access to finance through the MSME line of credit
3.1. Line of Credit for MSME Financing
This sub-component will facilitate increased access and availability of finance for MSMEs by
financing wholesale lending by DBB for its MSME business line. Funding will be made available to
eligible participating financial institutions (PFIs) for eligible sub-borrowers and sub-projects on
market-conforming terms. In this regard, the initial appraisal of interested financial intermediaries
will be undertaken by the World Bank, while DBB will be subsequently tasked with this role with the
support of the NBRB, in line with the World Bank requirements for financial intermediary financing.
During the identification mission in May 2015 initial appraisals of three interested banks were
completed. Further appraisals of interested financial intermediaries will continue throughout project
preparation. The line of credit will be open for participation by all banks meeting eligibility criteria
on a first come-first serve basis.
The interest rates to final borrowers will be market-based to ensure sustainability and avoid creating
further interest rate distortions in the market. DBB will on-lend funds to PFIs at interest rates that
a       take into account at a minimum DBB's cost of funding, operating costs and appropriate credit risk
margin. The PFIs will on-lend the funds to final borrowers at market rates based on their own credit
assessment and risk of the borrower. Sub-loans will be available for investments and for working
capital finance. In order to allow for competitively-priced, BYR-denominated lending to enterprises,
in parallel to the availability of USD and EUR denominated loans, DBB is currently exploring
potential swap arrangements with NBRB.
Sub-borrowers will be creditworthy private sector MSMEs. The proposed criteria for final borrowers
will follow DBB's MSME pilot program criteria as well as additional criteria to meet project
objectives. The following criteria for MSMEs are tentative and will be finalized during project
preparation: (i) privately owned (more than 50%) and independent; (ii) duly licensed and registered
with the tax authorities; (iii) creditworthy and in sound financial condition; (iv) prior operating
experience in the activity to be financed; and (v) co-financing of at least 20 percent.
Consistent with good practice in other WB credit lines, it is proposed that DBB be the borrower and
implementing agency for this component through a separate loan agreement with the WB supported


﻿by a guarantee of the Republic of Belarus (see Annex 11). There are multiple reasons for separate
implementation arrangements for this component centered on a line of credit. Most importantly, it
would safeguard the independence of DBB and participating commercial banks from potential
interference by any state body in credit line decisions, which is a legitimate risk in the Belarus
U       context. Also, by its nature, the line of credit will have a large number of individual payments to
banks which would need to be processed very fast given the commercial nature of credit decisions.
Experience in other transition economies has demonstrated that a qualified financial institution is far
more agile in this respect than government bureaucracy. Moreover, a direct loan agreement will
allow the WB financing support to MSMEs to go hand in hand with further institutional
strengthening of DBB, with specific covenants to be included in the Loan Agreement with this
institution. Finally, it would be important for DBB to have a direct loan agreement with the World
Bank in order to build its credentials as a reliable borrower and partner in the international arena.
These implementation arrangements would be fully consistent with the lessons drawn from the
World Bank's extensive engagement in line of credit operations in other ECA countries (Turkey,
Ukraine, Croatia, etc). A preliminary appraisal of DBB has been conducted which concluded that
DBB generally qualifies to take on the role as World Bank borrower. DBB's financial condition is
sound, it has adequate capital position and its policies and procedures follow good banking standards.
While rated as generally satisfactory further action is recommended as regards to strengthening of
external regulation and supervision of DBB's activities which is currently being discussed in an
active dialogue with the World Bank Group and other IFIs.
3.2. Technical Assistance and Capacity Building
The objective of this sub-component will be the provision of operational support and capacity-
building to the DBB. The technical assistance provided under this component will build upon an
assessment undertaken by the World Bank under the 2014 Development Module FSAP related to
institutional, regulatory and supervisory strengthening of DBB. It includes but is not limited to
defining and establishing robust operating principles, policies, procedures, and governance, design
and roll out of new finance instruments, setting up and implementing monitoring and evaluation
practices, impact assessment methodologies, and so forth.
0
Component 4. Project Implementation
This component will fund the day-to-day PMU functions for Components 1 and 2 (project
administration, procurement, financial management, disbursement, M&E, safeguards, and public
o      awareness) and assessments of compliance with the legal and regulatory framework. It will fund
PMU(s) staff, consultant services for strengthening the legal and regulatory framework and project
awareness, as well as operational costs. As mentioned above, implementation arrangements for
Component 3 will be managed by DBB and funded under Component 3.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will support Micro, Small and Medium Enterprises throughout Belarus.
E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
The borrower will ensure that the safeguards issues are properly addressed through either appointing
a staff member within the PIU, or, in case of insufficient capacity, hiring a consultant to conduct
screening project activities, assist in preparation of due diligence documentation and supervision,
where necessary. ToR for such a position will be reviewed and cleared by the Bank team.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team


﻿Esma Kreso (GENDR)
Jennifer Shkabatur (GSU03)
Klavdiya Maksymenko (GSURR)
o
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         Support to SMEs under Component 2 through
OP/BP 4.01                              provision of matching grants, the line of credit under
Component 3 and other support may include
activities that have an environmental impact
associated with their undertaking. Since the precise
nature of such activities is not known prior to project
Appraisal, an Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be developed for screening.
The screening would categorize project activities by
their potential impact and further guide the
development of adequate due diligence
documentation. It would screen out potential higher
risk activities, corresponding to a World Bank
category A, and activities that might trigger
additional safeguards policies. The ESMF will also
include a project-specific exclusion list.
Interventions dealing with State Owned Enterprises
(SOEs) shall also be dealt with in a manner to be
outlined in the ESMF, including assessment of
accumulated environmental damages related to the
SOEs' operations and potential impacts associated
with privatization of such enterprises.
O
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36         No
Pest Management OP 4.09    No
Physical Cultural Resources  No
OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP   No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/ No         The project is highly unlikely to trigger OP 4.12 on
BP 4.12                                 Involuntary Resettlement. No land acquisition,
displacement of any third party (formally or
informally occupying or using the land on which
various subcomponents will be implemented), or
restriction of access to resources or income streams
is expected under the proposed Project. The team


﻿will work closely with the social safeguards
specialists during project preparation stage to ensure
4.12 is not triggered. The team will also integrate
monitoring of the project into the PMU from the
perspective of thoroughly examining activities that
could potentially trigger 4.12
The Project will not support any sub-projects/grants
that would necessitate involuntary land acquisition or
any form of resettlement. The Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) to be prepared by
the Borrower will specify that private businesses will
be eligible to become project beneficiaries under the
condition that they have not acquired and/or would
not acquire land for the needs of activities to be
supported with the project proceeds through a
process which involved and/or would involve land
expropriation.
Additionally, project funds will not support any sub-
loans used to invest in a business, which would
require the involuntary displacement of existing
occupants or economic users of any plot of land,
regardless of its current ownership, or loss of or
damage to assets including standing crops, kiosks,
fences and other. The LoC operations manual will
define a screening procedure to be followed, and the
implementing agency will closely monitor the
screening procedure with the support of the Bank.
With these restrictions, the project is highly unlikely
to trigger OP/BP 4.12 "Involuntary Resettlement".
In cases where new construction is involved, sites
presenting situations that would trigger OP 4.12, will
be excluded from project consideration. However, re-
habilitation or reconstruction (which could involve
demolition of no longer suitable structure and
construction of a new one) of the existing buildings
within the same footprint would be permissible.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37     No
Projects on International     No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 01-Oct-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
In order for the due diligence documentation (ESMF) to be completed, reviewed with public
consultations and disclosed in time for appraisal, a rough draft should be prepared by early
September 2015, with public consultations being done in late August or early September, and the
document finalized and disclosed in country and through Infoshop by mid-September 2015.
IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Karen Grigorian,Johanna Jaeger
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                     Date: 15-Sep-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Lisa A. Kaestner (PMGR)                Date: 16-Sep-2015
Manager:


