                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                              Report No.: ISDSA17353
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 03-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Jan-2015
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           India                               Project ID:    P130544
                            Project Name:      IN Karnataka Urban Water Supply Modernization Project (P130544)
                            Task Team          William D. Kingdom
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          12-Feb-2015                         Estimated   31-Mar-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                        Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:     GWA06                               Lending     Specific Investment Loan
                                                                                   Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Water supply (95%), Sanitation (5%)
                            Theme(s):         City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (100%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:       153.00                 Total Bank Financing: 100.00
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                            Amount
                              Borrower                                                                                      53.00
                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                        100.00
                              Total                                                                                        153.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objective is to provide city-wide access to a continuous piped water
                           supply in the eligible cities in the state of Karnataka, and to strengthen service delivery arrangements
                           at the city level.
                            3. Project Description
                           An eligible city is one that the Bank and Government of Karnataka agree satisfies eligibility criteria

                                                                         Page 1 of 8
                         outlined in the Operations Manual including fiduciary and safeguard requirements and the award of a
                         performance-based contract to a project operator.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component Name
                         Component 1 – Capital Investment Program
                         Comments (optional)
                         a)       Capital Works: Includes bulk capacity augmentation; enhancing capacity or resilience of
                         transmission/feeder mains; treatment plant renovations/capacity enhancement; service reservoir
                         improvements; distribution network sectorization, pipeline rehabilitation/replacement; water meters
                         for bulk supplies and consumer consumption; replacement of house connections; and new
                         connections to low income households.
                         b)       Service Improvement Plan: The Operator will prepare and implement a Service
                         Improvement Plan (SIP) which will set out the needed investments for capital works, utility systems
                         and equipment.
                         c)       Construction Management: The Operator will act as the Client’s Construction Manager for
                         implementing the SIP and will contract with third party contractors for delivery of the SIP.
                         Component Name
                         Component 2 – Institution Building
                         Comments (optional)
                         a)       Partial financing of Operator Fees during the Transition Period: The project will finance 50
                         percent of the Operator fee during the Transition Period as a result of the additional costs incurred at
                         this time due to intensive staff training, capacity building, and heavier operating costs (especially for
                         leakage control).
                         b)       SPV (ULB-Owned Water Utility) set up and operations: This includes operationalizing the
                         SPVs including i) preparation of institutional staffing, training and delegation plan; ii) office
                         equipment; iii) staff training costs; and iv) incremental operating costs.
                         c)       Systems and Equipment for Service Delivery: This includes all the systems (MIS, GIS,
                         Billing and Collection, Call Center), equipment and preparation of Standard Operating Procedures
                         for the water utility.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component Name
                         Component 3 – Technical Assistance for Sector Development
                         Comments (optional)
                         a)       Project Impact Evaluation: This would assess the impact of providing continuous water
                         supplies at both the household level and the city level.
                         b)       Improving Social Accountability: This would support implementation and routine capture of
                         consumer feedback on the quality of WSS services in the eligible city and make it available on line
                         for easy access by all stakeholders.
                         c)       Improved dam management: Preparation of Operation and Maintenance Plans and
                         Emergency Preparedness Plans for dams under the Project to meet requirements under the Bank’s
                         policy “Safety of Dams” (OP4.37).
                         Component Name
                         Component 4 - Project Management
                         Comments (optional)
                         This component finances activities to ensure efficient and effective project implementation. This
                         includes, for example, equipment to establish PMU/PIU offices, consultants to support technical
                         evaluations, third party monitoring, expert reviewer, safeguards and fiduciary auditing, construction
                         quality assurance, communications and others.
                         The Asian Development Bank is financing a North Karnataka Urban Sector Improvement Program

                                                                       Page 2 of 8
                         (US$ 440 million) to address sanitation gaps in the project cities; hence sanitation investments are
                         not proposed under the Bank project.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
Public Disclosure Copy




                         analysis (if known)
                         Three cities, Hubballi-Dharwad, Kalaburagi and Belagavi located in the same region of the state have
                         also been subject to extensive evaluations including Environment and Social Assessments. . As of
                         March 31, 2016, the Bank and Govenrment of Karnataka have determined that Hubballi-Dharwad
                         qualifies as an eligible city and this ISDS relates to Hubbali-Dharwad.

                         Hubbali-Dharwad is the second largest city in the state by population and is located located in the
                         arid / semi-arid northern region of the state. Geologically, the city is located in the Deccan Plateau is
                         known for the limited water resources (both surface and sub-surface). The Environmental and Social
                         Assessment (ESAs) carried out for Hubballi-Dharwad does not indicate presence of any sensitive
                         environmental features in the city.

                         The assessments however indicate low water supply and sanitation services and declining ground
                         water levels in Hubballi-Dharwad. The project by virtue of the proposed water supply improvements
                         would lead to positive improvements in the quality of water delivered to the consumers (due to
                         reduced cross contamination and leakages) and associated health improvements (due to reduced
                         incidences of water borne diseases). The issue of wastewater management was analyzed in the
                         project and concluded that the ongoing activities in the city is expected to ensure that the wastewater
                         generated in the city is adequately managed.
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Harinath Sesha Appalarajugari (GEN06)
                         Ramachandran R. Mohan (GSU06)
                         Suryanarayana Satish (GSU06)
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Venkata Rao Bayana (GSU06)

                          6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                          Environmental               Yes            The Project is expected to cause moderate environmental
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                      impacts during the construction phase of the project.
                                                                     Hence, the project has been categorized as ‘Category B’
                                                                     and OP 4.01 has been triggered.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP      No             The project activities in Hubbali-Dharwad don’t pass
                          4.04                                       through / impact any natural habitats and the
                                                                     environmental assessments for the respective cities
                                                                     confirm this. Hence OP 4.04 is not triggered.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36          No             The project activities in Hubbali-Dharwad don’t pass
                                                                     through / impact any forest areas and the environmental
                                                                     assessments for the respective cities confirm this. Hence
                                                                     OP 4.36 is not triggered
                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No                 The project activities in Hubbali-Dharwad don’t involve
                                                                     increase use of pesticides and associated issues. OP 4.09
                                                                     hence is not triggered.
                          Physical Cultural           Yes            This policy is triggered on a “chance find” basis. EMPs


                                                                       Page 3 of 8
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                       and ECoPs include a provision to prepare a suitable plan,
                                                                       during chance find scenario.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      No             The Environmental and Social Assessment conducted in
Public Disclosure Copy




                            BP 4.10                                    Hubbali-Dharwad reveals that there are no indigenous/
                                                                       tribal habitations present in the project cities with unique
                                                                       socio-cultural identity as detailed in the OP 4.10. The
                                                                       Study reveals that the people living in the project cities
                                                                       are typical mainstream urban dwellers. OP 4.10 has,
                                                                       therefore, not been triggered.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes               OP/BP 4.12 has been triggered to effectively manage
                            OP/BP 4.12                                 involuntary resettlement in case of acquisition of any
                                                                       private lands. Direct purchase or land exchange methods
                                                                       will also be followed for obtaining lands.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes            The project relies on the performance of two existing
                            4.37                                       dams, each higher than 15m, to deliver water services in
                                                                       the three cities. The water supply systems draw directly
                                                                       from the reservoirs controlled by these dams or depend on
                                                                       their operation for ensuring supplies. As such OP4.37
                                                                       “Safety of Dams” is triggered.
                            Projects on International   No
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50
                            Projects in Disputed        No
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
Public Disclosure Copy




                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The project interventions relating to improvement /upgradation of (a) transmission/feeder mains
                              (b) treatment plants (c) pumping stations (c) service reservoirs (d) rehabilitation/replacement of
                              distribution network and (e) house service connections are expected to have environmental and
                              social impacts. Environmental and Social Assessments carried for Hubbali-Dharwad, identifies no
                              large scale significant impacts, but temporary impacts during construction.

                             The temporary impacts include safety hazards to the local communities and the construction
                             workers, temporary disruption of traffic and other utilities, elevated noise and dust levels etc. The
                             ESA has recommended an environmental management plan (EMP) to be implemented during the
                             implementation of the project. In addition an Environmental Code of Practice (ECoP) has also
                             been developed to ensure that the environmental issues during the operation phase are addressed
                             and managed by the operator.

                             It is also important to note that the water supply to Hubbali-Dharwad depends on two dams, each
                             higher than 15m - Neersagar and Malaprabha. Assessments for these dams were carried out by the
                             ‘Lead Dam Safety Specialist’ of the Bank and have recommended (i) preparation of O&M Plan
                             (ii) Emergency Preparedness Plan and (iii) civil and mechanical measures to improve the structural
                             and hydraulic integrity of these dams at a cost of US $ 1 million. These activities will be


                                                                        Page 4 of 8
                          implemented by the borrower and compliance with OP 4.37.

                          As regards to the social impacts, the assessments and household surveys present no significant
Public Disclosure Copy




                          and/or irreversible adverse social issues. The investment on the physical component of the project
                          will yield net positive impacts. Land assessments through ESA indicate that large part of land
                          requirement are met through transfer of Government owned lands and from Public Institutions, the
                          land acquisition from private people is very marginal. The overall requirement of land in Hubballi-
                          Dharwad is estimated at about 6 ha, of which 5 ha belongs to the government and is free of
                          encumbrances, squatters and encroachers. Thus, private land requirement works out to 1 ha across
                          three land parcels. As the requirement is quite small, the Project will explore securing lands
                          through purchases at a negotiated price. Operational Policy on Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP
                          4.12) has been triggered to effectively manage involuntary resettlement.

                           Similarly the ESA indicates that there are no tribal habitations with unique socio-cultural identity
                           vis-à-vis the mainstream population in the Project locations. OP 4.10 has, therefore, not been
                           triggered based on these assessments. The assessments reveal that: (a) the proposed capital works
                           will be located in urban locations which are non-tribal/non indigenous areas; and (b) the
                           population is mainly urban in character and are essentially non-tribal/non indigenous in culture.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Water Supply improvement / augmentation projects are indirectly expected to increase the
                           generation of wastewater in the respective cities. Similarly, the proposed continuous water supply
                           in Hubbali-Dharwad could increase the wastewater generation and would require enhancement of
                           associated collection and treatment infrastructure. A review of the sewerage and sanitation systems
                           in the city indicates that sanitation systems cover about 85% of the households. Further, about 70
                           % of the households are connected to sewers. The sanitation levels are expected to further
                           improve with more households expected to be connected to sewer systems in future through
                           ongoing state and National programs such as ADB funded NKUSIP. At the current estimates,
Public Disclosure Copy




                           27,999 households in Hubblli –Dharwad need to be connected to safe sanitation systems. These
                           improvements will be implemented by the local bodies in parallel to the water supply ‘Service
                           Improvement Plans’ to be implemented by the operator.

                          The assessment also indicates that the adverse environmental impacts will be triggered from the
                          construction related activities. These impacts are mostly temporary and limited within the project
                          boundary. Almost all the works such as transmission lines, pumping stations and treatment plants
                          are using government lands and involve minimal land acquisition from private land owners. By
                          constructing water supply infrastructure for continuous water supply, additional infrastructure will
                          be created that helps in reducing resource wastage and accrues social benefits.

                           According to the RPF and ECoP, both environmental and social screening will be performed of
                           any potential indirect or long-term adverse impacts and taking necessary mitigation measures to
                           ensure minimal impacts. If new treatment plants require land acquisition, they will require site
                           specific Social Impact Assessments and Resettlement Action Plans (RAPs) in accordance with the
                           RPF.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                           impacts.
                           The project has considered number of technical alternatives to ensure continuous water supply to
                           the city These options have been provided as initial design options for the ‘Operator’, which may

                                                                     Page 5 of 8
                           be considered in arriving at optimum design that ensures minimum impacts and desired level of
                           service. To help these designs, the project has developed an ‘Environmental Code of Practice’ that
                           provides a guidance to the operator in minimizing the environmental impacts on the project
Public Disclosure Copy




                           communities. These measures and relevant alternative will be binding on the operator to consider
                           while delivering the continuous water supply to the city

                           It is explicitly stated in the RPF that besides engineering considerations, social impact will also be
                           reviewed before finalizing the alignments. The alignments with no or minimum impacts on land
                           and land acquisition will be finalized.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           The borrower has carried out ‘ Environmental and Social Assessment (ESA)’ for Hubbali-
                           Dharwad broadly identify the potential safeguard issues that may arise during the design,
                           construction and operation phase of the proposed continuous water supply facility to the project
                           cities. Based on the assessments, an Environmental Management Plan, an ‘Environmental Code of
                           Practice (ECoP)’ and the Resettlement Policy and Framework have been developed for the project.
                           The management plan developed as part of the ESA and the ECoP have been integrated in the
                           contracts of the ‘operator’ to ensure that the safeguard issues are integrated in the project activities
                           and the impacts are minimized. The ECoPs and the RPF will be the guiding documents for sub
                           project-specific: (i) environmental/social screening; (ii) impacts assessment; (iii) consultation and
                           disclosure; (iv) preparation of environmental/Resettlement Action Plans (EMP/RAP) (v)
                           integration of costs into bid documents and special environmental clauses for constructions/civil
                           works etc.

                           The Project has developed a Grievance Response Mechanism (GRM) to address the concerns of
                           the stakeholders, receive suggestions and address complaints and grievances about the project and
                           any irregularities in application of the guidelines adopted in this framework for inclusive project
                           design, assessment and mitigation of social and environmental impacts. Complaints may also
Public Disclosure Copy




                           submitted to the Bank’s Grievance Redress Service (GRS).

                           There will be Environment and Social Specialists at the PMU level to review, supervise and
                           monitor activities for environmental and social safeguards compliance of all subprojects. To
                           validate and enhance the capacities, orientation programme on social and environment will be
                           conducted from time to time for implementation stake holders.

                           In addition the Borrower, has implemented five infrastructure projects with the financial assistance
                           from The World Bank and Asian Development Bank. The environmental unit of the implementing
                           agency has developed good safeguard management capacity by virtue of these projects, which will
                           help in better implementation and management of safeguards.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
                           The communities in Hubbali-Dharwad, the ULB and water supply utilities of the respective cities
                           are the key stakeholders for the project. All these stake holders have been consulted as part the
                           assessment carried out by the borrower in ESA. In addition, the borrower has carried out a
                           separate study aimed at ‘Communication and Social Intermediation Strategy (CSIS)’ for the
                           project. Stake holders were also consulted as part of this study. Both these efforts and series of
                           public consultations ensure that the project affected people are adequately consulted and their
                           views / concerns are addressed. Based on the recommendation of the CSIS, the borrower will have

                                                                       Page 6 of 8
                           agencies to implement the CSIS strategy during the implementation phase of the project.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         19-Dec-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      08-Jan-2015
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           India                                                               07-Jan-2015
                           Comments:
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                         19-Dec-2014
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                      08-Jan-2015
                         "In country" Disclosure

                           Comments:
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          property?
                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?




                                                                     Page 7 of 8
                             Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
Public Disclosure Copy




                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                             Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                             assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                             livelihoods)

                              Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                            OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
                             Have dam safety plans been prepared?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
                             Bank?
                             Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: William D. Kingdom
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)                       Date: 03-Mar-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                          Date: 04-Mar-2016
                            Manager:




                                                                      Page 8 of 8
