INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
CONCEPT STAGE
Report No.: ISDSC 12602
,2   Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-May-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 27-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
A. Basic Project Data
Country:         Georgia                    Project ID:   P152441
Project Name:    Georgia National Innovation Ecosystem (GENIE) Project (P152441)
Task Team        Thomas Edward Haven,Siddhartha Raja
Leader(s):
Estimated        31-Aug-2015                Estimated      12-Nov-2015
Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
Managing Unit: GTCDR                        Lending       Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):       General information and communications sector (30%), Other industry (50%),
General industry and trade sector (20%)
Theme(s):       Infrastructure services for private sector development (20%), Micro, Small and
Medium Enterprise support (20%), Export development a nd competitiveness
(20%), Technology diffusion (20%), Education for the knowledge economy
(20%)
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      40.00             Total Bank Financing:    40.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                          0.00
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development            40.00
Total                                                            40.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a        No
Repeater
project?
B. Project Objectives
The project development objective is to enhance the national innovation ecosystem in Georgia to
stimulate the growth of innovative activities and expand rural Internet connectivity.
C. Project Description


﻿The Georgia National Innovation Ecosystem (GENIE) Project responds to the Government's vision
to transform Georgia into an innovation-driven economy. It comprises four components:
Component 1: Infrastructure for Inclusive Innovation
Leveraging a hub-and-spoke network of innovation centers, this component will help realize the
Government's vision for developing infrastructure for inclusive innovation. This infrastructure will
provide all intended beneficiaries with the state of the art spaces for learning, co-working, knowledge
*       sharing, and global connectivity. The component is expected to finance retrofitting or upgrading of
existing government buildings, such as libraries, to establish an estimated four Regional Innovation
Hubs (RIHs), e.g. in Batumi, Rustavi, Kutaisi, and Poti, and around 100 to 150 Community
Innovation Centers (CICs) in second-tier towns and villages (out of the 500 planned nationwide by
the Georgia's Innovation and Technology Agency).
Component 2: Financing Innovation
The objective of this component is to facilitate access to early-stage finance for innovators, startup
companies, and technology commercialization initiatives. In doing so, the component will help
promote development of new businesses, increase startup survival rates, and foster bottom-up
innovation. While direct innovation financing support under this component will be limited to
matching grants for micro, small, and medium enterprises (MSMEs), the targeted training and
mentoring provided during the execution of this grant program should help improve the capacity of
participants (and their collaborators) to commercialize innovative ideas and secure more mainstream
forms of financing (i.e. bank loans and venture financing). This component will also support the
identification and implementation of reforms to strengthen the policy and regulatory environment for
financing innovation as well as promoting the involvement of relevant members of the diaspora.
Component 3: National Broadband Connectivity
O
U       This component will support the expansion of broadband connectivity in Georgia with the specific
aim of increasing access to internet services in rural and underserved areas. Of critical importance
will be the maximization of broadband coverage to ensure inclusive participation in the innovation
economy, and to connect areas that host the proposed innovation centers (supported by Component
1), enabling them to link local communities to global knowledge and information databases and to
serve as an integrated national network for entrepreneurial collaboration and the exchange of creative
ideas. The proposed activities under this component will address both supply-side (potentially from
fiber optic cable infrastructure) and demand-side (financing incentives to link internet providers with
customers) needs for increased broadband connectivity.
Component 4: Project implementation support
This component will aim to ensure efficient and effective implementation of all project components.
Support will be provided to Georgia's Innovation and Technology Agency (GITA) to strengthen its
capacity and increase human resources available to implement the project.
D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The Project will finance activities throughout the country with no geographic limitations.


﻿E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
GITA will be the Project implementing entity. This is a young institution established in February
2014 in the capacity of a legal body of public law operating under the State control from the Ministry
of Economy and Sustainable Development. GITA has no experience in applying safeguard policies
of the World Bank and will require capacity-building through coaching and implementation support
to be provided by the Bank. By the time of appraisal, the Bank team will explore the institutional set-
up of GITA and agree with the management of this Agency on whether they will use in house
capacity or an externally hired consultant for performing environmental and social work under the
GENIE Project. Building in this type of expertise into GITA may be considered as part of technical
assistance for the Agency's institutional strengthening to be delivered under Component 4.
F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
Safeguard Policies          Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental Assessment    Yes         The general focus of this project is the delivery of
OP/BP 4.01                              technical assistance for boosting technology adoption
and innovation.
However project proceeds are likely to be used for
small to medium size physical works and for grant-
financing of MSMEs. Therefore OP/BP 4.01 is
triggered. Laying cables for the National fiber optic
Backbone Network (NBN)-under component 3-is
likely along the existing highways, roads or other
public infrastructure and rights of way. The project
will not support new construction and none of the
expected activities will have significant, complex or
irreversible impacts on the natural and social
environment.
Hence the GENIE Project is classified as
environmental Category B. Individual activities to be
supported by the Project will be screened and
classified. Category B and C activities will be
eligible for the Project funding, while Category A
activities will not be eligible.
Individual investments of the Project are not
identified upfront: they will be selected and prepared
on a rolling basis. Nonetheless, the typology of
activities, their potential negative environmental and
social impacts and the generic measures required for
their mitigation are well known. Regarding the
MSMEs that may receive funding from the Project,
experience from other countries suggests that they


﻿may operate in hi-tech industries such as ICT,
Energy Efficiency and Nanotechnologies, but also
more traditional industries such as Food and
Agriculture, Machine and Mechanical Engineering,
and Electromechanical device production.
An Environmental and Social Management
Framework (ESMF) will be prepared to provide
guidelines for environmental and social screening of
sub-project activities; identifying the scope and
nature of safeguard documents to be prepared for
them; providing relevant measures for mitigating
potential environmental and social risks associated
with various types of possible activities; and
planning environmental and social monitoring of
works.
The ESMF will be included into the Operations
Manual of the GENIE Project. Instructions for
applying environmental and social safeguards to the
preparation of applications and to the implementation
of grant-funded activities will be incorporated into
the MSME guidelines for accessing grants from
GENIE Project.
Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04  No
Forests OP/BP 4.36          No
O
Pest Management OP 4.09     No
O
Physical Cultural Resources  Yes        The Project funds will be available for refurbishing
OP/BP 4.11                              the existing public buildings to house an estimated
a                                               number of four RIHs and over a hundred CICs.
These may be buildings of libraries, schools, and
other similar institutions. The nature of the
refurbishing and if it will involve any substantial
renovations, is to be determined during preparation.
However, it is not excluded that some of these
buildings may carry cultural/historic value, in which
case designs for any type of works to be undertaken
on these buildings should be agreed with the
National Agency for Cultural Heritage Preservation
(NACHP) under the Ministry of Culture and
Monument Protection. Special permission for
entering the site and/or supervision on behalf of the
NACHP may also be required.


﻿Laying cables for the National fiber optic Backbone
Network (NBN) is likely along the existing
highways, roads or other public infrastructure and
rights of way. However encountering chance finds
cannot be excluded as long as earth works are to be
undertaken.
OP/BP 4.11 is triggered. The ESMF will include a
blueprint of action in case a historic building is to be
refurbished or chance finds are encountered in the
course of the Project implementation.
Indigenous Peoples OP/BP    No
4.10
Involuntary Resettlement OP/  Yes        Component 1 will finance retrofitting or upgrading
BP 4.12                                  of existing government buildings, such as libraries,
to establish an estimated four Regional Innovation
Hubs (RIHs), e.g. in Batumi, Rustavi, Kutaisi, and
Poti, and around 100 to 150 Community Innovation
Centers (CICs) in second-tier towns and villages (out
of the 500 planned nationwide by the Georgia's
Innovation and Technology Agency). Component 3
will support the expansion of broadband connectivity
in Georgia with the specific aim of increasing access
to internet services in rural and underserved areas.
Component 1 is not expected to finance new
infrastructure, and Component 3 is only expected to
finance the expansion of broadband connectivity
through fiber optic cable in areas not requiring
resettlement. However, OP/BP 4.12 will be triggered
and an RPF will be developed to ensure that, if need
were to arise, cases where livelihoods are
permanently or temporarily disrupted can be
addressed by the project.
Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37   No
Projects on International   No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No
BP 7.60
III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN
A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 03-Aug-2015
B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
The specific studies and their timingi should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.


﻿The ESMF will be drafted, shared with the Bank, disclosed and discussed with stakeholders before
appraisal. If designs for any proposed civil works are ready by appraisal and are classified as
environmental Category B, then site-specific environmental safeguard documents will be
prepared, agreed with the Bank and disclosed for feedback from the project affected people.
8 IV. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Thomas Edward Haven, Siddhartha Raja
Approved By:
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Agnes I. Kiss (SA)                      Date: 22-May-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Paloma Anos Casero (PMGR)               Date: 27-May-2015
Manager:


