INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
RESTRUCTURING STAGE
Note: This ISDS will be considered effective only upon approval of the project restructuring
Report No.: ISDSR13414
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 27-Nov-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 30-Nov-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Brazil                     Project ID:  P126372
Project Name: Recife Swap Education and Public Management (P126372)
Task Team       Michael Drabble
Leader(s):
Estimated       26-Sep-2011                Estimated    29-May-2012
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GED04                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector:         Pre-primary education (39%), Primary education (38%), Sub-national
government administration (18%), Urban Transport (5%)
Theme:          Education for all (77%), Public expenditure, financial management and
procurement (7%), Administrative and civil service reform (6%) , Tax policy
and administration (5%), Urban planning and housing policy (5%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency
Recovery) or OP 8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and                  No
O
U         Emergencies)?
Financing (in USD Million)
O
Total Project Cost:     921.60            Total Bank Financing:  130.00
o        Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                               Amount
Borrower                                                       791.60
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development          130.00
Total                                                          921.60
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Current Project Development Objectives
The Project Development Objective is to expand coverage of improved early child education, create
Page 1 of 9


﻿conditions more conducive to learning in primary education, an                    d
improve municipal public management.
Proposed New PDO (from Restructuring Paper)
The Project Development Objective is to expand coverage of improved early child education, create
conditions more conducive to learning in primary education, an                    d
improve municipal public management.
3. Project Description
The Project has two components, the first of which will co-finance existing eligible government
programs in early child and primary education via a result-based approach and, the second of which
will provide technical assistance to strengthen public sector management.
Component 1: Strengthen coverage of Early Child Education (ECE) and create conditions conducive
to learning in Primary Education.
This component would provide support for the implementation of the EEPs in the following areas:
(a) rehabilitate ECE centers; (b) promote multi-sectoral early child development; (c) create
conditions more conducive to learning in fundamental education; (d) professional development of the
municipal teaching force; and (e) education management.
Component 2: Strengthen institutions for more efficient and effective public management.
This component would provide technical assistance to strengthen the MOR's public management in
the following areas: (a) educational evaluation and administration; (b) tax administration; (c) public
debt management; (d) public expenditures, including payroll management and human resources
management; procurement; public financial management; and modernization of EMPREL; (e)
municipal planning, results-based management, and Project management; and (f) urban mobility
management.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
O
The Project activities will take place in the urban municipality of Recife. The municipality of Recife
is located along the Atlantic Ocean coast, occupying a fluvio-marine plain formed by the rivers
Beberibe, Capibaribe, Tejipi6, Jaboatio and Pirapama. The region has numerous islands, swamps,
widespread mangroves, and a few hills, located mainly in the north and west parts.
The Recife territory is densely occupied, and there are few remnants of the primary vegetation, the
Atlantic Forest, which occurred mainly in the high areas. The mangroves are found along the coast
and rivers' margins. Its degradation was intense, but there are, still, large areas of preserved
mangroves due to the difficulties in occupying such sites. In the last years, the MOR took numerous
actions to protect the local ecosystems, and created over twenty protected areas (Zonas Especiais de
Proteqdo Ambiental -ZEPA) totaling approximately 6,000 hectares. The county also has extensive
areas classified as Permanent Preservation Areas, APPs, encompassing the riparian vegetation. The
city expansion, in the last decades, was characterized by the occupation of sensitive areas, such as
rivers' margins, swamps, mangroves and inclined terrains. Low-income neighborhoods are located,
commonly, on sensitive areas, such as former mangroves, favoring recurrent flooding and landslides.
Noteworthy to mention that the Federal Government lists Recife as a priority for concluding the
natural disasters risk assessment, and implementing a risk mitigation plan.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Page 2 of 9


﻿Alberto Coelho Gomes Costa (GSURR)
Gunars H. Platais (GENDR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental          Yes         The Project Restructuring did not add any activity with
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               potential to generate significant environmental impacts,
and the expected environmental impacts continues to be
limited in scope, localized, and temporary. Consequently,
the Project remains as Category B. However, the Project
Restructuring triggered, on a precautions basis, two
additional safeguard policies: the Physical Cultural
Resources Policy (OP/BP 4.11) and the Natural Habitats
Policy (OP/BP 4.04). The Project environmental
assessment, an Environmental and Social Management
Framework ESMF, was reviewed to include provisions
related to construction of new Municipal Early Child
Education Centers, and the new triggered safeguards.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes         The Municipal Early Child Education Centers seek to
4.04                                attend highly vulnerable populations, and are being
located throughout the entire county. The Municipal Early
Child Education Centers construction may have small
interferences with remaining natural habitats, considering
that the Municipality of Recife is abundant in riparian
vegetation and protected areas. Consequently, the Project
Restructuring triggered, on a precautions basis, the
Natural Habitats Policy (OP/BP 4.04).
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
0
Physical Cultural       Yes         The construction of Municipal Early Child Education
Resources OP/BP 4.11                Centers could pose potential interferences with culturally
relevant buildings, especially in the old downtown area,
known by numerous historical sites. Due to that, the
Project Restructuring triggered, on a precautions basis, the
Physical Cultural Resources Policy (OP/BP 4.11)
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        The Involuntary Resettlement Policy (OP/BP 4.12) has
OP/BP 4.12                          been triggered because the Project involves (i) support to
new Early Childhood Education Centers (ECEC) built and
equipped by the Municipality of Recife (MOR) and (ii)
Type 2 Technical Assistance activities related with the
formulation of studies and plans that may have significant
down-stream impacts (according to the definitions and
guidance provided by the "Interim Guidelines on the
Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical Assistance
(TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust
Page 3 of 9


﻿Funds Administered by the Bank - January 2014).
Although it is very unlikely that project supported
activities will cause any physical relocation or adverse
impacts on livelihoods resulting from restricted access to
land and other resources as defined in OP/BP 4.12, two
measures have been taken to address potential adverse
impacts related with involuntary retaking of land and
involuntary economic and physical resettlement.
First, the borrower carried out an assessment of the land
tenure situation of the ECECs built between 2011 and
2015. This assessment has identified that no involuntary
taking of land has been required for the construction of
these ECECs, whose execution will be supported by the
project.
Secondly, the borrower updated the Involuntary
Resettlement Framework (IRF) that was prepared for the
Original Project in 2011. The updated IRF provides the
principles and guidelines to be followed in both: (i) the
preparation of Resettlement Action Plans that may be
eventually needed in the case that land acquisition is
required for building new ECECs and may lead to adverse
impacts related with involuntary resettlement; and (ii) the
implementation of the envisaged Type 2 Technical
Assistance activities.
The updated IRF has been publically consulted, and
disseminated in country and at the InfoShop.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the Restructured project.
Identify and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The Project was classified as Category B, given the investments focus on education and
institutional strengthening. Most activities supported by the Project had no potential adverse
environmental and social effects, and the rehabilitation of Early Child Education Centers, on
existing footprints, was the only activity that could cause minor environmental impacts, triggering
OP/BP 4.01 (Environmental Assessment). The MOR prepared an Environmental and Social
Management Framework (ESMF), given that the exact locations of the ECEs were unknown. The
ESMF was disclosed prior to Appraisal, and addressed the appropriate mitigation and monitoring
measures to be taken during implementation.
Page 4 of 9


﻿The proposed Project restructuring entails a revision of the Project Development Objective to
better reflect the adjusted project scope and the expected impact of Project activities, but did not
add any activity with potential to generate significant environmental impacts. The expected
environmental impacts continues to be limited in scope, localized, and temporary. Consequently,
O
the Project remains as a Category B. It was necessary, however, reviewing and updating the
environmental assessment.
The two revised sub-components that may generate environmental impacts (directly and
indirectly), and demand Environmental Safeguards considerations, are the Sub-component 1(a)
ECE Rehabilitation, and the Sub-component 2(f), Urban Mobility Management.
Originally, the Project assumed that only rehabilitation services on existing building footprints
would be eligible, but the revised Sub-component 1(a) includes the construction of Municipal
Early Child Education Centers in the peripheries, and 'unoccupied' areas and buildings in the
downtown zone. Some construction sites have not been defined yet, recommending the use of a
social and environmental management framework, as the appropriate EA instrument.
The construction of Municipal Early Child Education Centers may have small interferences with
remaining natural habitats, considering that the Municipality of Recife is abundant in riparian
vegetation and protected areas, commonly at an advanced stage of degradation. The construction
of new ECEs could interfere with culturally relevant buildings, especially in the old downtown
area, known for numerous historical sites. Consequently, the Project restructuring triggered, on a
precautionary basis, two additional safeguard policies: the Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP
4.11) and the Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04). The restructured Project would trigger, therefore,
the following safeguards:
*      Environmental Assessment (OP/BP 4.01)
*      Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04)
*      Physical Cultural Resources (OP/BP 4.11)
*      Involuntary Resettlement (OP/BP 4.12)
The revised ESMF was prepared, following Bank team recommendations. It addressed the
environmental guidelines for location and construction of Municipal Early Child Education
Centers, and included provisions related to all triggered safeguards. The revised ESMF, also, adds
health and safety considerations, mainly related to risk assessment, selected sites environmental
quality conditions and fire prevention measures.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
As noted above, most activities supported by the Project have no potential adverse environmental
and social effects. The construction of Municipal Early Child Education Centers is the only
activity that may generate direct adverse impacts. However, the Municipal Early Child Education
Centers require small buildings, with area varying from 460 to 1,200 square meters, and the early
child education activity do not generate significant emissions and/or effluents. In sum, potential
environmental impacts due to this activity are localized and limited in scope.
Most Municipal Early Child Education Centers are being located in urban consolidated areas, with
adequate sanitation infrastructure. The Municipal Early Child Education Centers located in the
peripheries, lacking sanitation, are being equipped with septic tanks. Most Municipal Early Child
Education Centers do not pose, either, interference with protected areas or remnants of natural
vegetation. However, the Municipality of Recife is facing problems to find new areas for the
Page 5 of 9


﻿construction of Municipal Early Child Education Centers, and is being forced to evaluate plots
located nearby protected areas. The reviewed ESMF has strict procedures for those circumstances.
Some Municipal Early Child Education Centers are being developed in the old downtown area,
known by numerous historical sites. The Physical Cultural Resources safeguards was triggered on
O
a precautionary basis, considering that the Municipality has a strict legislation protecting culturally
relevant sites.
The revised Sub-component 2(f) will support the preparation of two studies related to urban
planning: (i) the Urban Restructuring and Economic Revitalization of The Territory of Recife, and
(ii) the Recife County Urban Zoning review. Both studies look to improve mobility in key areas of
the MOR's territory, among other objectives. The referred studies preparation do not have direct
adverse environmental impacts. Nevertheless, the outcomes of both studies may have
environmental and social implications going forward, entailing risks and potentially inducing
adverse impacts. The two TORs were reviewed by Bank consultants, incorporating environmental
and social provisions to be considered in the mentioned urban planning studies, in a manner that
reflects the principles of the Bank Safeguards. The two TORs comply with the instructions
expressed in the Interim Guidelines on the Application of Safeguard Policies to Technical
Assistance (TA) Activities in Bank-Financed Projects and Trust Funds Administered by the Bank
(OPSOR and LEGEN, 2014).
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The revised ESMF determines that the location of new Municipal Early Child Education Centers
must comprise the analysis of alternatives, specially, in the case of potential risks to the children,
or interference with protected areas.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The Client prepared an updated Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF),
including an updated Involuntary Resettlement Framework (IRF), in compliance with the World
Bank's Operational Policies triggered for the Project restructuring.
The Municipality organized a public consultation of the ESMF and IRF. Both documents were
disseminated and published on its website at: http://www.recife.pe.gov.br
The updated ESMF comprises an overall impact assessment, and a detailed guidelines for the
characterization of all sites proposed for the ECEs' location. The characterization addresses urban
infrastructure, access conditions, ambient quality, natural disasters risk, man-made hazards,
sanitation infrastructure and potential interferences with protected areas and historical sites. Sites
that may pose any risk for the children are not eligible. The ESMF has guidelines for evaluating
the new sites eligibility, what may demand additional studies on alternatives of location, sanitation
infrastructure, and potential interference with physical cultural resources. The ESMF also has
general environmental guidelines for the construction works.
The Municipality of Recife revised and updated the Involuntary Resettlement Framework (IRF)
that has been prepared for the Original Project in 2011 to provide guidelines to be followed in
both: (i) the preparation of Resettlement Action Plans that may be eventually needed in the cases
of new centers whose location has not yet been defined, are directly and significantly related to the
Bank-assisted project and necessary to achieve its objectives as set forth in the Project documents;
and (ii) the implementation of the envisaged Type 2 Technical Assistance activities.
Page 6 of 9


﻿5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The key stakeholders in the project include parent associations, teachers and teachers' unions,
Civil Society Organizations (CSOs) involved in education delivery or urban mobility, civil
servants, taxpayers, and the municipal administration.
O
The Municipality ofRecife organized several consultative forums to involve key stakeholders in
issues of education policy design and implementation. This included the Municipal Education
Conference (Confer6ncia Municipal de Educaqdo, or COMUDE), which holds periodic
consultations with teachers, parent associations, educational agencies and CSOs. The Municipality
held consultations with NGOs involved in early childhood education, community groups, parents,
and teachers unions among others regarding the Project activities.
Preliminary versions of the ESMF and the IRF were publicly disclosed for virtual consultation on
the Municipality's website. The website allows users to file contributions, comments and
suggestions. A consultation round on the ESMF and IRF was held September 29 with the
participation of around 50 people, representing diverse stakeholders. All contributions received
during the consultation round and through the virtual channel were considered, incorporated in the
documents or replied. A compilation of these contributions and answers have been added as an
annex of the ESMF.
The final versions of the ESMF and the IRF have been publicly disclosed in country on the
Municipality of Recife and Bank's external websites.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              15-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           ///
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              27-Oct-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
Page 7 of 9


﻿C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]  NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [  ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?          Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [  ] No [X]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
a          livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Page 8 of 9


﻿Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Michael Drabble
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Francis V. Fragano (SA)              Date: 30-Nov-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Reema Nayar (PMGR)                   Date: 30-Nov-2015
Manager:
Page 9 of 9


