INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA1 I10
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-May-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 15-May-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Central Asia               Project ID:  P151363
Project Name: Climate Adaptation and Mitigation Program for Aral Sea Basin CAMP4ASB
(P151363)
Task Team       Angela G. Armstrong,Philippe Ambrosi
Leader(s):
Estimated       18-May-2015                Estimated    22-Jun-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GENDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Central government administration (40%), Public administration- Information
and communications (30%), General agriculture, fishing a nd forestry sector
(15%), Forestry (15%)
Theme(s):       Natural disaster management (25%), Environmental policies and institutions
(25%), Other social protection and risk management (25%), Climate change
(25%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      55.94            Total Bank Financing:   47.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                27.50
IDA Grant                                                                  19.50
Local Communities                                                           8.94
Total                                                                      55.94
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
Page 1 of 8


﻿2. Project Development Objective(s)
To enhance regionally coordinated access to improved climate change knowledge services for key
stakeholders (e.g., policy makers, communities, and civil society) in Central Asian countries as well
as to increased selected investments and capacity building that, combined, can address climate
challenges common to these countries.
3. Project Description
The project will finance a set of national and regional activities, structured around the following three
pillars: (i) Information - for datasets, information systems, tools, and knowledge for climate-smart
decision making; (ii) Institutions - for capacity and coordination at national and regional levels
around climate action; and (iii) Innovation - for pilot investments in key vulnerable sectors, that can
be easily replicated to scale-up resilience.
Component 1: REGIONAL CLIMATE KNOWLEDGE SERVICES. This component will provide
technical assistance, as well as minor civil works, goods (including software and equipment), and
training at both the regional and national levels, to develop a unified, integrated regional analytical
platform for climate resilient and low emission development, with improved data, information,
knowledge, and decision-support tools. Although this information platform will be managed at the
regional level, national agencies and other stakeholders (e.g., academia, civil society organizations)
in each participating country will also have access to this system. In addition, this component will
also develop a mechanism to assess the results and lessons of the climate investments implemented
under the Program's Regional Climate Investment Facility.
The component's climate knowledge services will include:
*      Strengthening the Information Platform for Central Asia, including data and information to
facilitate public-domain collection, sharing, and maintenance of datasets relevant for climate-smart
assessment.
*      Targeted upgrading of climate-related monitoring systems. This activity will support
improved monitoring systems to support project activities (e.g., snow, permafrost, and glacier/
cryosphere surveys and monitoring, agricultural and forest systems monitoring).
*      Developing methodologies, approaches, and tools using the knowledge base for decision
support. This activity will include regional development of climate screening tools for specific
sectors, climate impact assessment and management tools, and support for climate-related decision
making (e.g., robust-decision making) and development of climate investments (e.g., review of
climate strategies and development of investment programs) at the national level.
*      Developing knowledge products, under a broad range of support such as web portals, mobile
apps, publications, specialized analytical work (e.g., climate risk and vulnerability analyses, strategy
papers to inform future orientations for Climate Knowledge Services and Climate Investment
Facility), periodic Central Asia Climate Change Atlas, on trends and indicators in the region for
climate as well as environmental and socio-economic impacts.
*      Building capacity, including activities related to training and study tours (e.g., on best
practice climate solutions, on greenhouse gas inventories), engaging young professionals via
internship programs.
* Setting up a Climate Investment Assessment Mechanism. This activity will support the
systematic evaluation of climate investments under Component 2.
* Outreach and coalition building, including holding an annual Climate Knowledge Forum (for
engagement of Central Asia stakeholders around the Program's results and its future orientations)
Page 2 of 8


﻿and fostering climate knowledge networks.
Component 2: REGIONAL CLIMATE INVESTMENT FACILITY. This component will provide
financing (grants or loans, depending on participating countries' preferences) to communities for
O
U         climate investments on a demand driven basis, considered by participating Central Asian countries as
priority for scaled-up climate action. In addition, it will provide technical assistance and facilitation
support for vulnerable communities to plan, implement, and manage climate investments.
Sub-component 2.1. Investment Financing. This sub-component aims to increase productivity and
address climate change by promoting the adoption of rural production, land management, and other
climate-resilient and mitigation investments, by providing financing (grants or loans, depending on
participating countries' preferences) at the village community and resource-user levels. Eligible
investments are expected to primarily contribute to: (a) crop diversification, climate-resilient seed
varieties, and seed system support measures, (b) on-farm water resource management and efficiency
improvement measures, (c) rehabilitation of degraded lands and land degradation control through
agro-forestry and rangeland management measures, (d) promotion of stability and sustainability of
mountain ecosystems and livelihoods, (e) conservation agriculture, (f) energy efficiency
improvements (e.g., insulation, lighting, etc.), and (g) expansion of renewable energy sources,
particularly for those communities in remote rural areas. Eligible investments will include those that
meet criteria agreed upon by all participating countries that reflect regional priority areas where
climate action must be scaled-up.
Sub-component 2.2. Capacity Building and Community Support. This sub-component includes
financing for awareness raising, participatory planning, and implementation support of climate
investment plans at the community level. This "facilitation package" is expected to raise interest of
potential beneficiary communities for climate investment opportunities under the Program, improve
the quality of the funding proposals prepared by these communities, and enhance the likelihood of
success for these investments.
Component 3: REGIONAL AND NATIONAL COORDINATION
Sub-component 3.1 Regional Coordination. This sub-component will finance the operating costs of
the Regional Coordination Unit (RCU) to be established under the regional host institution (EC-
o        IFAS), responsible for regional coordination and implementation. Support will be provided to the
RCU for procurement, financial management, regional coordination, reporting, and monitoring and
evaluation.
Sub-component 3.2 National Coordination This sub-component will support the operating costs of
the National Coordination Units (NCUs), responsible for national investment oversight, in each of
the participating countries. Support will also be provided to the NCUs for national-level
coordination, procurement, financial management, reporting, safeguards oversight, and monitoring
and evaluation.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented in three Central Asia countries: Kyrgyz Republic, Tajikistan and
Uzbekistan.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Page 3 of 8


﻿Angela Nyawira Khaminwa (GSURR)
Arcadii Capcelea (GENDR)
Nicolas Perrin (GSURR)
0
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes
Assessment OP/BP 4.01
Natural Habitats OP/BP  Yes
4.04
Forests OP/BP 4.36      Yes
Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes
Physical Cultural       No
Resources OP/BP 4.11
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement No
OP/BP 4.12
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  Yes
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Although the investments to be supported under the project will be limited in scope, they may
generate various environmental and social impacts related to: soil degradation; water and air
pollution; biodiversity conservation; labor safety issues and health impacts, etc. As the project
might support afforestation and pasture improvement activities, it might have also effects on
nature habitats and forests. Furthermore, while the project is not going to support purchasing
pesticides, it might generate a need for their increased usage, in particular in the case of forestry
nurseries development which can generate some health impacts and environmental pollution. It is
also expected these potential impacts will be mostly temporary by nature and site specific.
The project will also have positive impacts on the environment and natural resource base of the
project area: prevention of soil degradation; increase of soil moisture and in biomass and organic
matter of soils; a decrease of run-off and soil losses; increased climate resilience. This would
result in a series of economic benefits: (a) increased soil productivity; (b) increased agricultural
crops yields and farmer income; (c) improved farmer skills in climate resilience and land
conservation; etc. Taking into account specified potential impacts the project triggers a series of
Page 4 of 8


﻿WB environmental OPs and in particular: OP 4.01 on Environmental Assessment; OP 4.04 on
Natural Habitats; OP 4.36 on Forests; and OP 4.09 on Pest Management.
The project also triggers OP 7.50 (Projects on International Waterways), because project activities
O
will use water from 'international waterways', and in particular, the two main river basins in
Central Asia - the Amu Darya and the Syr Darya or their tributaries. However, the activities to be
financed would be limited to rehabilitation, modifications and minor additions or alterations to
existing schemes in ways which would not increase the amount of water abstracted or lead to
appreciable impact on the water sources or local hydrological regime. The applicability of OP 7.50
was reviewed with the Legal Department of the World Bank, and a waiver on notifying riparian
states was granted.
The project will not finance activities that result in involuntary resettlement impacts as per OP
4.12 and therefore the policy on involuntary resettlement is not triggered.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The potential long term impacts are positive and relate to increase climate resilience and
adaptation in participating countries. The project will also bring long term positive impacts in
terms of soil conservation by improving land management practices.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
To address potential environmental and social impacts, the participating countries have prepared
Environmental Management Framework documents which specify the following: description of
project activities; EA rules and procedures in participating countries and according WB
Safeguards Policies as well as their comparison; expected potential environmental and social
impacts of the proposed type of investments along with the Environmental Guidelines which
describe the rules and procedures for environmental screening; guidance for preparing sub-projects
EIA and/or simple EMPs as well as of EMP Checklist for identified small scale construction and
reconstruction activities; possible mitigation measures for different types of sub-projects;
requirements for monitoring and supervision of implementing of EIA/EMPs; and institutional
arrangements for EMF implementation. They also contain a series of measures to raise awareness
and educate potential beneficiaries regarding safe pesticide handling and use of Integrated Pest
Management (IPM) and management and monitoring of the EA review and approval process.
The EMF will be integrated into the Project's Operational Manual and will be used as part of all
contracts involving proposed activities and selected sub-projects. The Bank is expected to provide
a special training to the Safeguards Specialists to be appointed for each participating country, so
they can promote compliance with the EMF and EMPs of selected sub-projects. The subproject
EMPs will be also integrated into the contracts for approved activities, both into specifications and
bills of quantities and the Contractors will be required to include the cost in their financial bids and
grant proposals. The EMF will specify also implementing responsibilities and arrangements.
Any activities that result in impacts as those anticipated under OP 4.12, including impacts on
livelihoods will be screened out and not financed by the project. A screening checklist will be
detailed in the operations manual.
Page 5 of 8


﻿5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
The EMFs have been disclosed and consulted in all participating countries as well as the WB
Infoshop.
B. Disclosure Requirements
O
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              14-May-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           14-May-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Kyrgyz Republic                                          02-Apr-2015
Comments:
Tajikistan                                               04-May-2015
Comments:
Uzbekistan                                               04-May-2015
Comments:
Pest Management Plan
Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?          No
Date of receipt by the Bank                              //
Date of submission to InfoShop                           //
"In country" Disclosure
Comments:
O
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes[X] No[  ]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
Page 6 of 8


﻿If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [ X] No [  ]   NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Is a separate PMP required?                             Yes[   ] No[X]       NA[    ]
If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a     Yes [  ] No [    ]   NA [ X]
safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.36 - Forests
Has the sector-wide analysis of policy and institutional issues Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
and constraints been carried out?
Does the project design include satisfactory measures to  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [ X ]
overcome these constraints?
Does the project finance commercial harvesting, and if so, Yes [ ] No [ ] NA [ X ]
does it include provisions for certification system?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
Have the other riparians been notified of the project?  Yes [ X] No [    ]   NA [   ]
If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the  Yes [ X] No [   ]   NA [   ]
notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
Has the RVP approved such an exception?                 Yes [X] No [     ]   NA [   ]
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Page 7 of 8


﻿Task Team Leader(s): Name: Angela G. Armstrong,Philippe Ambrosi
Approved By
Practice Manager/    Name: Kulsum Ahmed (PMGR)                Date: 15-May-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


