INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA14151
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 16-Oct-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 19-Oct-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Niger                      Project ID:  P153743
Project Name: Electricity Access Expansion Project (P153743)
Task Team       Manuel Luengo
Leader(s):
Estimated       06-Nov-2015                Estimated    29-Jan-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEEO7                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Transmission and Distribution of Electricity (70%), General energy sector (30%)
Theme(s):       City-wide Infrastructure and Service Delivery (60%), Infrastructure services for
private sector development (20%), State-owned enter prise restructuring and
privatization (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      65.00            Total Bank Financing:   65.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          0.00
International Development Association (IDA)                                54.50
IDA Grant                                                                  10.50
Total                                                                      65.00
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective (PDO) is to increase access to electricity.
3. Project Description
Page 1 of 7


﻿The proposed Niger Electricity Access Expansion Project (NELACEP) will finance a strategic
portion of Nigelec's Investment Distribution Program, focusing on addressing existing distribution
network bottlenecks and pending connection requests in seven major urban areas, including the
capital Niamey.
The project will also finance capacity building activities to the MEP in the context of the current
sector reform. In addition, it will provide financing to Nigelec to improve its performance and to
cover project implementation costs. The project is described briefly below and further details are
provided in Annex 2.
Project Components
Component 1. Extension and reinforcement of distribution systems (estimated cost US$52.6 million).
This component will support the expansion, reinforcement, densification and rehabilitation of
medium/low voltage (MV/LV) distribution systems to allow the connection of 60,000 new clients in
seven major urban areas (Niamey, Dosso, Maradi, Zinder, Agadez, Tahaoua and Tillab6ry). In
addition, this component will support the reinforcement of the substations that feed the urban centers
and its related MV backbone network, thus improving the service quality for existing customers and
allowing new customers to connect to the grid. This will improve power system performance, leading
to a reduction of system losses, blackouts, fluctuation of voltage conditions and poor system power
factors. The investments will include adding, replacing or upgrading distribution lines, substations,
medium/low voltage equipment, meters, spare parts and tools. The new customers will be connected
by electronic meters with both prepayment and post payment functions. The payment of the
connection charges will be spread over several months. This component incorporates an owner's
engineer for supervising the implementation of the investment component, including the supervision
of the implementation of the safeguard instruments.
Component 2. Strengthening institutional capacity in the electricity sector (estimated cost US$8.7
million).
This component will finance capacity building activities for MEP as well as Nigelec. In addition, it
will support Nigelec in project implementation. The component will be divided into three sub-
components:
* Sub-component 2-A: Technical assistance to MEP. Activities under this sub-component will
include: (i) strengthening MEP capacity to develop sector policies and regulations and to articulate a
strategic vision for the sector; (ii) supporting the implementation of the Energy Regulator once it has
been created, and the preparation of a tariff review; (iii) supporting GoN's efforts to increase access
in the country by financing a National Electrification Strategy and measures to expand access in the
rural areas. These activities support the policy reforms included under the Public Investment Reform
Support Program agreed with the World Bank as part of the DPO series.
*      Sub-component 2-B: Technical assistance to Nigelec. This sub-component will include: (i)
capacity strengthening in distribution system planning (implementation of a GIS system and
acquisition of new distribution planning software); (ii) the acquisition of fault detection equipment
for underground MV system to improve system operation and fault clearing; and (iii) consultancy
services for the study of Supervisory Control and Data Acquisition (SCADA) systems for the high
voltage (HV) and MV grid.
* Sub-component 2-C: Project Management. The component covers all activities related to
Page 2 of 7


﻿project implementation, including the purchase of vehicles for site supervision, the acquisition of
computers and office equipment, training, audits and other operational costs.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
Project's activities, in particular component 1, will be implemented in urban and peri-urban areas in
the 7 major cities: Niamey, Dosso, Maradi, Zinder, Agadez, Tahaoua and Tillab6ry.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Medou Lo (GENDR)
Paivi Koskinen-Lewis (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         Activities under component 1 have the potential for some
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               localized environmental adverse impacts. An
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment (ESIA) and
an Environmental and Social Management Framework
(ESMF) (for the unknown locations) have been prepared,
consulted upon and disclosed in-country and at the
InfoShop on October 16, 2015. The ESIA includes the
global ESMP of the known activities (measures to be
implemented by NIGELEC and measures to be
implemented by the contractor).
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No          Project sites are urban and peri-urban areas with high
4.04                                population density. Therefore, the Natural Habitats policy
is unlikely to be triggered.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No          Project sites are urban and peri-urban areas with high
population density. Therefore, the forest policy is unlikely
to be triggered.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No          The Project does not involve the use of pesticides or have
any impact on pest management practices.
Physical Cultural       Yes         Due to potential impacts on Physical Cultural Resources
Resources OP/BP 4.11                associated with civil works, the ESMF formulated
standard measures to be included in the companies'
contracts, in case any chance finds occurs.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No          There are no indigenous peoples in the project area.
BP 4.10
Involuntary Resettlement Yes        Component 1 may have some limited land acquisition or
OP/BP 4.12                          subsequent losses of assets related to the potential
construction of distribution sub-stations and therefore OP
4.12 is triggered to address any adverse impacts. A
Resettlement Action Plan (RAP) and a Resettlement
Policy Framework (RPF) (for the unknown locations),
have been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in-
country and at the InfoShop on October 16, 2015.
Page 3 of 7


﻿Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project will not support construction or rehabilitation
4.37                                 of dams.
Projects on International  No        This project will not take place on any international
Waterways OP/BP 7.50                 waterways, and will not support activities that will impact
international waterways.
Projects in Disputed    No           This project will not take place in any disputed areas as
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     defined under OP 7.60, and will not support any activities
that will impact disputed areas.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project is rated as environmental category B, partial assessment, as no adverse long-term
impacts are anticipated. It triggers 3 safeguard policies; Environmental Assessment (OP 4.01),
Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11) and Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12).
OP/BP 4.12 on Involuntary Resettlement is triggered in the context of component 1 to cover
clearance of land/RoW for new transmission and distribution networks, which might require some
land acquisition leading to compensation, and potential, but very limited relocation and
displacement of some households and assets. In case any land acquisition or compensation
becomes necessary, the cost will be covered by the borrower. Some small-scale land acquisition
and/or losses or assets may occur as a result of constructing new substations (Niamey and Maradi)
and expanding the grid. The number of PAPs who lose assets is 1193, and they mainly lose small
business structures and/or trees. A Resettlement Action Plan, which addresses such negative social
impacts and which contains a compensation framework to ensure different categories of losses are
compensated adequately, has been prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in-country on 10/16/15
and at InfoShop on 10/16/15. For the unknown locations, a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF)
O
U           has been prepared to guide the future preparation of eventual RAPs, consulted upon and disclosed
in-country and at InfoShop on 10/16/15.
o           The implementation of component 1 may also induce other environmental and social impacts
which include tree cutting, soil erosion and degradation, nuisance due to dust and noises from
a           construction activities, and risks of increased prevalence of HIV/AIDS and other STDs due to
foreign workers on construction sites.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
The project is not expected to cause long term impacts, as the environmental and social impacts
associated with component 1 are localized and can be mitigated.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
N/A
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
For the known locations, NIGELEC prepared an ESIA and a RAP to address impacts specifics to
these sites. For the unknown locations, an ESMF and a RPF have been prepared to guarantee
sustainability through mitigation measures. All activities for which the location will be known
Page 4 of 7


﻿during project implementation will be subject to environmental and social screening to minimize
the potential negative impacts of these activities. The ESIA includes the global ESMP of the
known activities (measures to be implemented by NIGELEC and measure to be implemented by
the contractor). Where applicable, an ESIA, including an ESMP and/or a RAP will be carried out,
O
consulted upon and approved before the activities on the ground commence. All contractor
bidding documents will include specific environmental and social clauses to be strictly
implemented. Consulting Engineers' contracts will include provisions for overseeing the
implementation by the contractors of the environmental and social clauses. Nigelec will produce
on a quarterly basis reports on the compliance with the safeguard documents. World Bank
supervision teams will also include environmental and social safeguard experts.
The current safeguards capacity at Nigelec needs reinforcement, and this will be done by
enhancing the staffing of the PIU through the recruitment of environmental and social specialists
to be responsible for overseeing Project compliance with the environmental and social safeguards
instruments in accordance with national and Bank policies and procedures. They will be trained,
together with their regional counterparts, in the implementation and monitoring of WBG's
safeguard policies. Nigelec will ensure adherence to the safeguard documents of all agencies
involved in the implementation of the project, including contractors. All contractor bidding
documents will include specific environmental and social clauses to be strictly implemented.
Consulting Engineers' contracts will include provisions for overseeing the implementation by the
contractors of the environmental and social clauses. Nigelec will produce on a quarterly basis
reports on the compliance with the safeguard documents. World Bank supervision teams will also
include environmental and social safeguard experts.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
All safeguards instruments have been consulted upon with PAPs and relevant local, regional and
national level authorities. The safeguards documents have been disclosed in-country and at
InfoShop on 10/16/15.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
O
Date of receipt by the Bank                              23-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Oct-2015
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  00000000
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Niger                                                    16-Oct-2015
Comments: Website www.nigelec.ne
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              09-Sep-2015
Date of submission to InfoShop                           16-Oct-2015
"In country" Disclosure
Niger                                                    16-Oct-2015
Comments: Website www.nigelec.ne
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
Page 5 of 7


﻿respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
O
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP) Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [X]     TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ X ] No [  ]  TBD [  ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
0          livelihoods)
1193 Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X ] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [ X ] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Page 6 of 7


﻿Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes[X]  No[     NA[
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes[X]  No[    NA[
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Manuel Luengo
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)           Date: 16-Oct-2015
Practice Manager/     Name: Meike van Ginneken (PMGR)          Date: 19-Oct-2015
Manager:
Page 7 of 7


