INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA13021
o
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 08-Apr-2015
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 29-Jul-2014, 21-Aug-2014, 02-Sep-2014, 13-Apr-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Lao People's Democratic    Project ID:  P149130
Republic
Project Name: Second Global Partnership for Education (P149130)
Task Team       Pedro Cerdan-Infantes
Leader(s):
Estimated       06-Aug-2014                Estimated    17-Apr-2015
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GEDDR                       Lending      Investment Project Financing
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Primary education (90%), Pre-primary education (10%)
Theme(s):       Education for all (100%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      16.80            Total Bank Financing:    0.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
Borrower                                                                    0.00
Education for All - Fast Track Initiative                                  16.80
Total                                                                      16.80
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The objective of the project is to support the Government of Lao PDR in improving pre-primary and
primary education quality.
This will be done by: (i) providing additional funding at school, district and provincial levels, as well
as strengthening overall capacity to manage these resources to achieve minimum education quality
Page 1 of 8


﻿standards and (ii) enhancing the teaching and learning environment in schools through improved
teaching practices, instructional resources and analytical products to support early grade literacy.
3. Project Description
Component 1: Strengthening School-Based Management (SBM) (US$12.7 million)
This component will support the development of an SBM framework and the strengthening of SBM
by financing: (i) the development of the SBM framework, harmonization of SBM materials, training
a        of the national SBM team, monitoring quality of training of SBM team at the district level,
improvements in the existing financial monitoring and reporting system at the school level, and
support on gender issues related to education as well as disability and inclusion; (ii) a system of
quality control (iii) operational cost support for District Education and Sports Bureau (DESB) and
Provincial Education and Sports Service (PESS) to cover travel and subsistence expenses for
appropriate coaching, mentoring and monitoring of schools during this process; and (iv) three annual
payments of complementary school block grants (SBGs) to schools in phase 1 and one annual
payment for schools in phase 2.
Component 2: Improving Reading Outcomes and Assessment Capacity (US$2.5 million)
This component will focus on promoting evidence-based approaches to the teaching and learning of
early grade reading in Lao language. This will be done through the piloting of a reading development
intervention in Lao language in Grades 1 and 2 and the production of research aimed at informing
policy and programming decisions to support reading development approaches for ethnic students
and those with weak Lao language skills. This component will also finance Ministry of Education
and Sports (MoES)'s Research Institute for Educational Science (RIES)'s capacity building in key
areas around student assessment and curriculum development,
Sub-component 2.1: Reading Development Intervention for Grades 1 and 2 in Lao Language
This sub-component will support RIES and relevant units in the MoES to develop and pilot a new
pedagogical approach for teaching and learning of reading in Grades 1 and 2 that will be delivered as
an in-service program to teachers. The intervention will include (i) the development of the
pedagogical approach and accompanying instructional materials for teachers and students and simple
classroom-based assessments for early grade reading, (ii) teacher training on the pedagogical
approach and monitoring strategies to track changes in teaching practice; and (iii) capacity building
to school principals and pedagogical advisors to promote and sustain strategies towards better
teaching and learning environments in primary schools. An impact evaluation will be included to
measure the overall impact of the pilot. The Lao Early Grade Reading Assessment (EGRA) tool and
the Lao Snapshot of School Management Effectiveness (SSME) tools will be used to measure
changes in classroom and school factors supporting a more effective learning environment. The
evaluation will integrate a mixed-methods approach to ensure changes on how participant's attitudes
and behaviors changed as a result of the program and to grasp state of the enabling mechanisms at
the school, community and MoES to support scalability.
To support the MoES efforts in improving teaching and learning and to strengthen RIES leadership
in developing and improving instructional and curriculum materials, the project will also finance
RIES's capacity building in four possible major areas: (i) survey design; (ii) data analysis; (iii)
student assessment, and (iv) the design of evidence-based instructional and curriculum materials.
Capacity building activities will be short term in nature.
Page 2 of 8


﻿Sub-component 2.2: Studies to Support Lao Language Teaching to Ethnic Students
This sub-component will finance technical assistance to broaden the evidence around effective
U        approaches to reading development in the context of ethno-linguistic diversity. The objective of these
studies is to inform the MoES of policy options and programmatic decisions to address the gaps in
learning outcomes among ethno-linguistic groups.
This sub-component will support four analytical products: (i) a review of country experiences
(including Lao PDR) with significant ethno-linguistic diversity in advancing effective approaches to
reading development of students with weak skills in the official language of instruction; (ii) a study
on the orthographic and linguistic features of the main ethnic languages in Lao PDR; (iii) an analysis
of policy options and costing to address the reading deficits among non-proficient Lao speakers; and
(iv) an evaluation framework of policies / programs for instruction in Lao language. The evaluation
framework aims to equip MoES technical teams responsible for early grade reading and teacher
training with the tools to assess technical elements of reading programs for possible inclusion in a
program for slow readers.
Component 3: Project Management and Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) (US$1.6 million)
This component will support the delivery of project activities on planning and execution, financial
management, procurement, internal audit, environmental and social safeguards management and
M&E. A particular focus will be on strengthening financial management capacity to management
and control SBG. The project will use procurement and financial management procedures used under
the Education for All - Fast Track Initiative program and will also promote the development of
government-wide systems for financial management, including the use of school bank accounts for
managing all funds from the government and the GPE. The component includes activities designed
to ensure efficient project management and early identification of corrective measures to solve any
implementation problems. As the ESDP Coordination Unit (ECU) takes the coordination
responsibilities for the project, it would need to have an appropriate provision for logistics and
operational costs. A series of workshops such as a launch workshop and annual review workshop are
included in this component, together with financing for the required financial audits to support the
Department of Finance.
This component will also support the M&E of project activities and sector wide indicators, by
strengthening the existing mechanisms for monitoring and data collection, and supporting project
specific data collection when needed. This component will finance technical assistance, training and
the development and use of monitoring tools under Department of Pre-Primary and Primary
Education's, Department of Finance's M&E units, Education Statistics and Information Technology
Center and Department of Inspection, as well as members of the M&E network in provincial and
district offices. It will also support data collection on EQS indicators for a panel of representative
schools and support additional qualitative data collection when needed.
4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
This is a nation-wide project.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Maya Gabriela Q. Villaluz (GENDR)
Page 3 of 8


﻿Satoshi Ishihara (GSURR)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
SEnvironmental          Yes          Minor school maintenance will be financed by the project,
Assessment OP/BP 4.01                and the potential environmental impact is minimal. The
OP/BP 4.01 policy is triggered to address this and to
assess and take into account in an integrated manner, the
social aspects of the project particularly any impacts on
Indigenous People (ethnic groups) communities. An
Environmental Code of Practice (ECOP) was prepared as
a guide for the communities to put in place mitigating
measures in line with their regular building maintenance
practices.
Natural Habitats OP/BP  No           The project will not cause any degradation of natural
4.04                                 habitats as defined under the safeguard policy.
Forests OP/BP 4.36      No           The project will not degrade critical forest areas as
defined under the safeguard policy.
Pest Management OP 4.09 No           The project will not involve any procurement of
pesticides nor cause any increased use of pesticides.
Physical Cultural       No           The project will not adversely affect sites with
Resources OP/BP 4.11                 archeological, paleontological, historical, religious, or
unique natural values.
Indigenous Peoples OP/  Yes          OP 4.10 is triggered because this is a nation-wide project
BP 4.10                              covering the districts inhabited by poor ethnic groups (as
Indigenous Peoples are called in Lao PDR).
During project preparation, the MoES has undertaken a
social assessment in areas where ethnic groups are
present, in order to assess the project's potential effects on
ethnic groups. Free, prior and informed consultations
were conducted during project preparation with a
representative sample of ethnic groups who are likely to
participate in or be affected by the project. This process
has allowed their perspectives to be collected and
reflected in the project design and will ascertain their
support for the project. The existing Ethnic Group
Development Plan (EGDP) for the EFA-FTI program has
been updated based on the social assessment and
consultations, and disclosed both through the InfoShop
and in-country at convenient locations prior to project
appraisal.
Involuntary Resettlement No          Minor school maintenance will be supported under the
OP/BP 4.12                           project, however, all works will be carried out within the
existing school premises. No acquisition of private land,
or loss of private assets including trees and structures, is
anticipated. It is not anticipated that physical relocation
Page 4 of 8


﻿will be necessary.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No           The project does not involve any dams.
4.37
O
Projects on International  No        The project does not involve international waterways.
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
O
Projects in Disputed    No           The project will not be located in any known disputed
Areas OP/BP 7.60                     areas as defined in the policy.
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
The project will provide SBGs, which will support minor school maintenance. The size of the
maintenance will be very small, including repainting the wall, replacing damaged roof, and
furnishing school furniture. World Bank environmental safeguards policy (OP/BP 4.01) is
triggered since the project is supporting minor school maintenance, which will unlikely result in
significant or irreversible environmental impacts. All maintenance works will be carried out by
communities. An ECOP is developed to educate communities on possible impact and put in place
mitigation measures, if necessary.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
Not applicable
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
Not applicable
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The MoES has developed under the Second Education Development project (EDP II) and GPE
project the EGDP to ensure compliance with the Bank's Operational Policy 4.10 on Indigenous
Peoples, who are referred to as ethnic groups in the Lao context. The EGDP was updated and used
under this project given the similarity in nature, types, scale and scope of impacts that may occur
as was found under a social assessment carried out during the preparation of this project. Free,
prior and informed consultations were conducted as part of the social assessment with a
representative sample of ethnic groups who are likely to participate in or be affected by the
project. It found broad community support to the project among ethnic group beneficiaries. No
significant negative impact would occur. The EGDP provides principles and procedures to ensure
that ethnic groups are identified through ethnic screening, benefit from development projects, and
that adverse impacts are either avoided, or if unavoidable, are mitigated. Where ethnic groups are
present, it requires special actions to safeguard their social and economic status and avoid
restriction of their capacity to assert their interests and rights in land and other productive
resources. The EGDP is to ensure that ethnic group issues and concerns are addressed in the
project planning and implementation process and that they benefit from the project in a culturally
appropriate manner.
To insure compliance with the Bank's Operational Policy 4.01 on Environmental Assessment, the
Page 5 of 8


﻿ECOP has been prepared for this project. The objective of the ECOP is to provide the guidelines
in implementing and incorporating environmental management practices to minimize adverse
environmental impacts associated with minor school maintenance. It aims to establish
environmental management standards and self-sufficiency among implementing/executing
O
agencies and communities in undertaking their various tasks and responsibilities for minor school
maintenance. This document is intended for use by the above parties in their day-to-day work in
environmental management of minor school maintenance to educate communities on possible
impact and put in place mitigation measures, if necessary.
Assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described: Based on the past
experience with the EDP II and GPE projects, the Government of Lao PDR has a good track
record of ensuring compliance with Bank Safeguards policies from the planning to
implementation.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
MoES, DESBs, and Village Education Development Committees carried out consultations with
potential project beneficiaries/communities through a participatory social assessment, using the
mechanism of "free, prior and informed consultation" in accordance with the Bank's Indigenous
Peoples Policy (OP 4.10) to assess whether the potential target villages and their communities
support the implementation of the project. The EGDP was prepared based on key findings of the
social assessment and this is part of the process by which the MoES informs the ethnic group
communities and local authorities at village, district and provincial levels about the project. The
consultation and assessment ensures social engagement and inclusiveness and ethnic groups issues
are incorporated in the project's planning, design, implementation and monitoring. Village-level
consultation was carried out in three provinces, one in each region of north, central and south,
covering 30 schools in 30 different villages, to identify possible issues and concerns that may be
raised by potential target beneficiaries, of whom the majority are ethnic groups.
B. Disclosure Requirements
O
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           20-Aug-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                         22-Aug-2014
Comments:
Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
Date of receipt by the Bank                              20-Aug-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           20-Aug-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Lao People's Democratic Republic                         22-Aug-2014
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Page 6 of 8


﻿Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
O
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [    ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
(as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
Indigenous Peoples?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
Development Unit or Practice Manager?
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
a          measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included  Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [   ]  NA [   ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Pedro Cerdan-Infantes
Approved By
Page 7 of 8


﻿Practice Manager/    Name: Harry Anthony Patrinos (PMGR)      Date: 13-Apr-2015
Manager:
Page 8 of 8


