INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
APPRAISAL STAGE
Report No.: ISDSA7886
0
Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 12-Jan-2016
o
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 25-Jan-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
1. Basic Project Data
Country:        Bangladesh                 Project ID:  P130710
Project Name: Pro-Poor Slums Integration Project (P1307 10)
Task Team       Anna C. O'Donnell
Leader(s):
Estimated       04-Jan-2016                Estimated    17-Mar-2016
Appraisal Date:                            Board Date:
Managing Unit: GSU06                       Lending      Specific Investment Loan
Instrument:
Sector(s):      Public administration- Other social services (27%), Microfinance (18%), Other
social services (25%), General water, sanitation and flood protection sector
(15%), Housing construction (15%)
Theme(s):       Participation and civic engagement (40%), Other social development (20%),
Social Inclusion (20%), Urban services and housing for the poor (20%)
Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
O
Financing (In USD Million)
Total Project Cost:      57.50            Total Bank Financing:   50.00
Financing Gap:            0.00
Financing Source                                                        Amount
BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                          7.50
International Development Association (IDA)                                50.00
Total                                                                      57.50
Environmental B - Partial Assessment
Category:
Is this a       No
Repeater
project?
2. Project Development Objective(s)
The Project Development Objective is to improve shelter and living conditions in selected low
income and informal settlements in designated municipalities in Bangladesh
Page 1 of 10


﻿3. Project Description
The project's components are as follows:
Component A: Community Mobilization and Planning. The objective of this component is to
facilitate community-driven planning for housing projects. It will finance technical assistance in the
form of community architects, social mobilizers, engineers, as well as social, environmental, and
financial specialists for community organizations to prepare detailed designs and layouts for
o        improved living conditions and shelter improvements. In addition, this component will finance land
use surveys and planning for the pilot towns to identify vacant lands, if not available. The
Government of Bangladesh will donate the value of its land.
Component B: Urban Community Improvements and Upgrading. This component will finance a
multi-sectoral package of tertiary infrastructure and service improvements. This includes a
combination of water supply, drainage, paved access, electricity, gas, sanitation services and solid
waste management in a single package of upgrading works, depending on the expressed demands of
the specific communities. Each participating community will determine improvement and upgrading
packages that would be customized based on community preferences and needs. Where connections
to municipal level infrastructure are required, this component would also finance select interventions
in primary and secondary infrastructure. These investments are likely to be concentrated in terms of
roads and drainage links to city level infrastructure. Finally, this component will also cover costs
associated with the implementation of Environment and Social Management Plans for any works
undertaken under the project.
Component C: Shelter Component and Lending. TThis component will finance a credit line within
PKSF to provide access to Partner Organizations (POs) for investment in shelter in urban areas, and
to address the current gap in shelter lending programs among qualified microfinance institutions
(MFIs), lenders and/or NGOs. The component will support the development of loans for shelter
improvements, new construction and cluster development, and will test different collateral and
guarantee mechanisms, including community groups. The component will finance both the credit
line, as well as technical assistance to PKSF and POs to develop shelter lending.
O
Component D: Monitoring and Evaluation and Learning. This component will support independent
M&E and learning activities. This will include continuous and ongoing M&E of project results, as
well as an impact evaluation. In addition, this component will finance peer-to-peer learning programs
between community groups, and strengthening community networks at the town level. This
component would also finance the independent supervision of any Environment and Social
Management Plans, if and when applicable, to ensure compliance with World Bank guidelines. For
the implementation of this component, an independent consultant or consultant team would be
recruited, so as to mitigate any conflict of interest.
Component E: Project Management, TA and Training. This component will finance the project
management costs for NHA, including incremental staff, audits, and expenditures incurred by each of
the implementing agencies for the project, as well as for any additional costs to implement the
Governance and Accountability Action Plan (GAAP). In addition, the component will finance
capacity building, technical assistance and training associated with the project. NHA will contribute
staff costs, inclusive of all salaries and associated benefits, to the project
Page 2 of 10


﻿4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The proposed PPSIP will be piloted in three municipalities to start (Comilla, Sirajganj, and
Narayanganj), which were selected based on a multi criteria analysis: the class and population of
towns, the presence of urban poverty programs and organized urban poor communities, levels of
community savings in the town, willingness of the municipality and local government to participate
in the project, geographical variation, etc. The project will to improve living conditions of the urban
poor in selected communities across these three municipalities, through a community-driven
approach. The sites have not yet been identified. The project is expected to significantly improve
social and environmental outcomes for urban poor populations since each participating community
will determine improvement and upgrading packages that would be customized based on community
preferences and needs. PKSF will also pilot housing loan products in additional municipalities
outside the initial project areas.
5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Farhat Jahan Chowdhury (GENO6)
Md. Akhtaruzzaman (GSU06)
6. Safeguard Policies   Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Environmental           Yes         While the impacts of community led settlement upgrading
Assessment OP/BP 4.01               interventions are expected to be largely beneficial, some
minor to moderate impacts may occur during the
construction phase which are mostly on-site and can be
avoided or minimized through concerted efforts. Since the
project will involve planning and implementation of
multi-sectoral package of basic tertiary infrastructure and
services including affordable houses for urban poor
community in five secondary towns, no long term or
irreversible adverse environmental impacts are envisaged.
Considering the nature and magnitude of potential
environmental impacts from slum upgrading
infrastructures, the PPSIP has been classified as category
'B' project.
As slums or communities to be upgraded are not fully
identified or details of sub-project interventions that may
have environmental impacts are not yet available, a
framework approach has been adopted. The NHA
developed an Environmental Management Framework
(EMF) that provides tiered approach of environmental
screening, tools to identify potential environmental risks
in sub-projects, and measures to mitigate any potentially
adverse environmental impacts, a mechanism for
environmental monitoring as well as a guideline for
capacity enhancement. The EMF included mitigation
measures, environmental enhancement measures and a list
of relevant environmental codes of practices for
Page 3 of 10


﻿constructions/civil works to avert negative impacts and
strengthen positive outcomes of the selected interventions.
The Environmental Management Plan (EMP) to be
generated for the sub-projects adopted a mechanism to
incorporate the cost of mitigation measures into the
project budget. In addition, the EMF has provided a
negative list of attributes so that no natural habitats or
physical cultural resources will be affected during the
implementation of slum upgrading interventions. In
general, the EMF will ensure environmental management
of all interventions as well as compliance with the Bank's
Safeguard policies.
Natural Habitats OP/BP   Yes          It is highly unlikely that any natural habitats formed
4.04                                  largely by native plant and animal species would undergo
transformation of use or would be affected or modified by
project activities. It is obvious that the project will not
implement any activities inside the Protected Areas
(Wildlife Sanctuaries, National Parks, etc.). As
settlements or communities to be upgraded in the sub-
urban areas of Comilla, Narayanganj, and Sirajganj are
not fully identified or details of sub-project activities and
interventions that may have environmental impacts are
not yet available, the Natural Habitat OP has been
triggered as a precautionary measure. However, the EMF
has included a negative list of attributes to avoid
implementing interventions in the natural habitats. In
addition, the presence of natural habitats will be assessed
during the environmental screening of sub-projects
Forests OP/BP 4.36       No
Pest Management OP 4.09 No
Physical Cultural        Yes          Although the project sites/communities to be upgraded are
Resources OP/BP 4.11                  not fully identified, it is highly unlikely that the design
and implementation of slum upgrading interventions will
affect, modify, or reverse any designated physical cultural
resources located in the five secondary towns of
Bangladesh. Since the PPSIP plans to implement basic
infrastructure and services including affordable housing
for urban poor, OP 4.11 (Physical Cultural Resources) has
been triggered and the impacts will be examined as part of
the environmental screening/ assessment of each sub-
project when a particular site will be selected for
construction. The 'Chance find' procedures conforming to
local applicable legislation on heritage would be
evaluated when such sites are identified during the design
Page 4 of 10


﻿phase or during the actual construction period and the
related activity will not be eligible for financing under the
project. However, the EMF has included a negative list of
attributes to avoid impacting designated physical cultural
resources or heritage sites
Indigenous Peoples OP/  No           The project will cover the urban centers only. The slum
BP 4.10                              areas are developed largely on vacant public lands and
there is no likelihood of impacts on areas inhabited by
ethnic minorities or tribal peoples.
Involuntary Resettlement Yes         The project will develop community-based upgrading
OP/BP 4.12                           plans where tenure is secured, either on site, or through
voluntary relocation to sites identified and secured for
settlement upgrading under the project. All on site
development will be done in a voluntary manner, and
without a view to displace anyone. Temporary relocation
to allow land development and civil works construction
may occur in rare cases.
Displacement of people for infrastructure development
will be avoided to the extent feasible. In unavoidable
circumstances, few households may need to shift their
houses to allow civil works in road, walkway, drainage,
etc. Resumption of public land may also be required at
critical circumstances. The Project's involuntary
resettlement issues will be identified only when a
particular site will be selected for construction and
screened for social safeguard compliance. NHA has,
therefore developed a Social Management Framework
(SMF) in compliance with the Bank's OP 4.12 to address
social safeguard issues arising at project implementation
stage and to ensure social inclusion in the process. The
SMF will guide NHA to assess social impacts, and
prepare Social Management Plans (SMP) including
Resettlement Action Plans (RAP) in compliance with the
Bank policy on social safeguards.
Safety of Dams OP/BP    No
4.37
Projects on International  No
Waterways OP/BP 7.50
Projects in Disputed    No
Areas OP/BP 7.60
II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
Page 5 of 10


﻿The investment activities under the project for improvement of basic infrastructure services and
upgrading community settlement for low-income urban population will be done through in-situ
upgrading, re-blocking, land sharing and voluntary relocation approaches.
O
In-situ upgrading and re-blocking: In situ upgrading allows the communities to stay on site and
improve their housing without any population displacement or acquisition of land. However, for
re-blocking, some houses will have to be moved partially or entirely to allow space for the
infrastructure. Displacement of people for infrastructure development will be avoided to the extent
feasible. In unavoidable circumstances, few households may need to shift their houses to allow
civil works in road, walkway, drainage, etc.
Land sharing: Land sharing will be adopted when an agreement is reached between slum dwellers
and land owners (preferably public lands) that the slum dwellers will vacate all but a portion of the
land (usually the least economically viable) in exchange for some form of right to stay on location.
This will allow slum dwellers to remain in their local communities, and usually close to economic
opportunities. The community and concerned households will voluntarily vacate all but a portion
of the land for the land owner(s) in exchange for some form of right to stay on the location. The
physical structures will be relocated and pushed back into the land portion allowed for them to
stay. Some of the households and other physical establishments will be relocated temporarily for
the construction period.
Voluntary relocation: Communities on environmentally vulnerable areas and on lands with no
options to secure tenure on site, voluntary relocation and rehabilitation of community is an option
for community upgrading. The communities will arrange the land through direct purchase, lease or
manage through voluntary donation. The NHA may also arrange the land through involuntary
acquisition, direct purchase or inter-ministerial transfer and lease out to the communities on long-
term basis. This option will not involve involuntary resettlement. Should land acquisition trigger
involuntary displacement of people. Involuntary acquisition of land is not expected under the
project, but if it occurs, it will be done under the "The Acquisition and Requisition of Immovable
O
C.          Property Ordinance, 1982 (Ordinance II of 1982)".
In all cases, where population displacement and land acquisition will be involved, the World Bank
Operational Policies on Involuntary Resettlement (OP 4.12) will trigger and compensation and
resettlement of affected persons will be resorted to. The NHA has development a Social
Management Framework (SMF) that provides social screening and assessment tools.
Irrespective to slum upgrading model mentioned above, the PPSIP does not expect potential large
scale, significant or irreversible adverse environmental impacts considering the scale and
magnitude of infrastructure investments. While the project is designed to improve living condition
of urban poor, some minor environmental impacts have been envisaged from small-scale
infrastructure works. Most infrastructures will take place in their original space or alignments
where primary focus will be on-site and community managed small scale infrastructure. Therefore,
the project is classified as a "Category B" under OP/BP 4.01 with a partial assessment as the
ramifications are likely to be insignificant, site specific with no irreversible impacts and mitigation
measures can be designed more readily. The environmental safeguard policies triggered in the
PPSIP are Environmental Assessment (OP4.01), Physical and Cultural Resources (OP 4.11).
However, as a precaution, Natural Habitats (OP/BP 4.04) has also been triggered.
Page 6 of 10


﻿The NHA has developed an Environmental Management Framework (EMF) that provided
environmental screening tools and guidelines to identify potential environmental impacts and
procedures to mitigate any potentially adverse environmental impacts. The EMF included a
negative list of attributes in order to avoid damage or irreversible negative impacts on the
O
environment. The main principle to be followed for selection of slums in PPSIP is "no slums or
communities located in the environmentally sensitive areas or no sub-project interventions with
significant and long-term environmental impacts will be recommended for implementation. Given
the nature of the project, the level of development in most of the participating communities is such
that the project will not engage in construction or expansion works related to sanitary landfills,
large scale water and wastewater treatment plants, river rehabilitation through river training or
large scale embankment construction that may affect the natural flow. The NHA will maintain a
database for sub-project specific environmental screening/assessment, EMPs and implementation
monitoring of EMPs. The project M&E system will capture that information as well. An
independent (third party) environmental audit will be carried out to assess and evaluate the quality
of environmental compliance of the construction related subprojects.
Most shelter lending will be done with a view to improve, expand or construct through self-build
processes, and large scale, significant or irreversible adverse environmental impacts are also not
expected. In the three pilot towns, NHA will be responsible for all construction supervision and
environmental screening for housing construction, to ensure compliance with environmental
safeguard policies. Outside of these areas, no construction and settlement upgrading is expected,
although some housing upgrades and construction would be financed through individual housing
loans. In these areas, PKSF will ensure environmental screening in line with the EMF.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
in the project area:
No potential indirect and/or long term impacts are anticipated as a result of the project. As
communities to be upgraded are not fully identified or details of new activities or sub-projects are
not yet available, a framework approach has been adopted and an EMF and SMF have been
developed in consultation with concerned community and local stakeholders that provides
procedures to mitigate any potential adverse impacts, a mechanism for environmental monitoring
as well as a guideline for capacity enhancement, as well as social assessments and monitoring. The
EMF included a negative list of activities and interventions which are not eligible for project
financing, to avoid potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to project interventions.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
impacts.
The EMF has provided provisions for alternative analysis in terms of design and location. The
steps to be followed in subproject specific alternative analysis are: (a) identify and define
alternatives; (b) analyze or evaluate from environmental perspective; and (c) primarily select the
locally preferred and environmentally viable alternative. The environmental management process
including Environmental Mitigation Measures and Code of Practices (ECoPs) will help to consider
the alternative options to avoid or minimize adverse impacts at the planning stage.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
The NHA has adopted a Social Management Framework (SMF) and an Environmental
Management Framework (EMF) to address social and environmental safeguards issues that may
arise during the planning, implementation, and operation of PPSIP interventions. The National
Housing Authority (NHA) under the Ministry of Housing and Public Works (MoHPW) is the
Page 7 of 10


﻿implementing agency of this project for all components related to civil works. This represents their
first project with the World Bank. For this reason, significant capacity building will be needed to
orient staff to Bank procedures, and to better familiarize the Ministry with Bank-supported
operations including compliance with social and environmental safeguards. As guided by the SMF
and EMF, the NHA will ensure inclusion, community participation, transparency, and social
accountability in the project cycle. A Project Management Unit (PMU) has been set up at NHA for
identification, design and construction of infrastructure with participation from the selected
communities. A Municipal Committee at the city level will be established comprising of
representatives from the NHA, City Corporation or Pourashava, LGED and/or DPHE, and the
communities. During implementation, Urban Resource Centers (URC) will be established in each
town under the project for technical assistance to selected communities in subproject cycle. While
the PMU will engage a Social Development Specialist for management of social issues, an
Environmental Specialist will also be recruited, as per the requirement of the SMF and EMF, to
ensure that PPSIP interventions with significant negative impacts are not selected and due
diligence to relevant national laws of Bangladesh and IDA's safeguard policies are given
throughout the implementation period. NHA will be responsible for all safeguards compliance in
its project areas. Outside of these areas, minor home repairs or small scale construction will be
guided by the EMF and screened by the Partners Organizations (POs) of PKSF. Since the POs do
not have experience in dealing with environmental safeguards, PKSF will recruit an environmental
specialist to ensure due diligence to the Government and IDA's safeguard policies by the POs to
be involved in the housing program.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
Identification, design and civil works construction for community upgrading will be all inclusive
and participatory. The project will involve all social groups including women, vulnerable
communities and tribal peoples. NHA will hold consultations on social and environmental
safeguards at all stages of implementation of the project. Public consultations with all
stakeholders, at all stages of project implementation, will be carried out and the nature and number
of consultation, location, and type of participants and the summary of findings will be
documented. In addition to national government agencies, key stakeholders will be consulted
include affected communities, community organizations, NGOs, local elected representatives, host
communities, city corporations and municipalities, Local Government and Engineering
Department (LGED), Department of Public Health Engineering (DPHE) and relevant private
sector agencies.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
Date of receipt by the Bank                              22-May-2014
Date of submission to InfoShop                           26-Aug-2014
For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive  ///
Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
Bangladesh                                               17-Aug-2014
Comments:
Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
Date of receipt by the Bank                              22-May-2014
Page 8 of 10


﻿Date of submission to InfoShop                            26-Aug-2014
"In country" Disclosure
Bangladesh                                                17-Aug-2014
O
Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
report?
If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
Would the project result in any significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [X]   NA [   ]
degradation of critical natural habitats?
If the project would result in significant conversion or  Yes [  ] No [  ]   NA [   ]
degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources
Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [   ]
property?
Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
O
potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/ Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
Practice Manager review the plan?
Is physical displacement/relocation expected?           Yes [  ] No [    ]  TBD [   ]
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [ ] No [ ] TBD [ ]
assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
livelihoods)
Provided estimated number of people to be affected
The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
Page 9 of 10


﻿Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the Yes [ X] No [ ] NA [ ]
World Bank's Infoshop?
Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public Yes [X]  No [  ]  NA [  ]
place in a form and language that are understandable and
accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
All Safeguard Policies
Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
measures related to safeguard policies?
Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included Yes [X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
in the project cost?
Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
related to safeguard policies?
Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed  Yes [ X] No [  ]  NA [  ]
with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
the project legal documents?
III. APPROVALS
Task Team Leader(s): Name: Anna C. O'Donnell
Approved By
Safeguards Advisor:   Name: Maged Mahmoud Hamed (SA)            Date: 19-Jan-2016
Practice Manager/     Name: David Seth Warren (PMGR)            Date: 25-Jan-2016
Manager:
Page 10 of 10


