                       INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                             ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                      Report No.: ISDSA12475

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 18-Mar-2015
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 20-Mar-2015
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:           Africa                            Project ID:    P153466
                                                        Parent         P100406
                                                        Project ID:
   Project Name:      LVEMP APL-1 Additional Financing (P153466)
   Parent Project     Lake Victoria Environmental Management Project Phase II (P100406)
   Name:
   Task Team          Stephen Ling
   Leader(s):
   Estimated          18-Mar-2015                       Estimated   26-May-2015
   Appraisal Date:                                      Board Date:
   Managing Unit:     GENDR                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                        Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Agricultural extension and research (70%), General water, sanitation and flood
                     protection sector (30%)
   Theme(s):         Water resource management (30%), Other rural development (30%), Other
                     environment and natural resources management (20%), Biodiversi ty (10%),
                     Micro, Small and Medium Enterprise support (10%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:      22.50           Total Bank Financing:                 22.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                              20.00
     IDA Grant                                                                                 2.00
     Cooperation in International Waters in Africa                                             0.50
     Total                                                                                    22.50
   Environmental A - Full Assessment
   Category:



                                             Page 1 of 11
Is this a           No
Repeater
project?

2. Project Development Objective(s)
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project development/global environmental objectives (PDO/GEO) are to: (i) improve
   collaborative management of the transboundarynatural resources of Lake Victoria basin for the
   shared benefits of the EAC Partner States; and (ii) reduce environmentaldegradationto improve
   the livelihoods of communities, which depend on the natural resources of Lake Victoria basin.
   B. Current Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The objectives of the Project are to contribute to: (i) the improvement of the collaborative
   management of the trans-boundarynatural resources of the LVB among the Partner States; and (ii)
   the improvement of environmental management of targeted pollutionhotspots and selected
   degraded sub-catchments for the benefit of communities who depend on the natural resources of
   LVB.
   C. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)


3. Project Description
The ISDS for LVEMP APL-1 (P100406) is being updated on the preparation of an Additional
Financing (P153466) of US$ 22.5 million. The structure of the project and the safeguards
instruments and arrangements remain the same, but the ISDS has been updated to reflect progress in
implementation of the safeguards frameworks.

The project has four components: (i) Strengthening governance of water and fisheries resources; (ii)
Investing in pollution control and prevention measures; (iii) Raising public awareness and
participation; and (iv) Project coordination and management.

Component 1: Strengthening institutional capacity for managing shared water and fisheries resources
Subcomponent 1.1: Harmonization of policies and regulatory standards: One of the envisioned
project outcomes was the elaboration and adoption of a Water Resources Management Plan (WRMP)
for LVB. The initial responses to the request for proposals for this work revealed that the scope and
timeframe, as well as cost, of this activity was much beyond what had been envisioned during project
preparation. The MTR thus agreed that the development of the WRMP for LVB is a longer term
objective that will take place in two stages: the first one implemented under the current project
(Phase I), with the remaining work to be undertaken under the future Phase III. As such, the current
project will contribute to the elaboration of the WRMP for LVB. Specific activities under this project
aim to consolidate the information necessary for the elaboration of the WRMP by gathering existing
information as well as identifying the gaps and addressing them to allow the Partner States to initiate
the steps towards actual elaboration of the WRMP. Activities under this first step include: (i)
assessing the current status and use of the water resources, both surface and groundwater, in the
basin; (ii) assessing threats to the water resources and ecosystems; (iii) estimating water demand
(present and future) for all consumptive and non-consumptive uses of water, based on a defined
planning horizon of 30 years; (iv) identifying and assessing other development imperatives such as
land use, navigation, fisheries, tourism, etc; and (v) carrying out an institutional assessment,


                                             Page 2 of 11
stakeholders‟ analysis and identifying needs for capacity building .

Subcomponent 1.2: Ecosystem monitoring and applied research: The restructuring is simplifying the
project by eliminating support for multi-disciplinary research programs. As originally planned,
implementation of this activity would pose a heavy demand on the time and attention of the National
Project Coordination Team since it involves a very different set of stakeholders and a large number
of smaller and diversified activities that demand intense implementation support and require close
supervision and monitoring. This activity could be supported under the potential next phase (APL
III) and project preparation activities for APL III should advance the planning for such activity so
that a call for proposals could be launched as soon as APL III becomes effective.

Component 2: Point source pollution control and prevention
Subcomponent 2.1: Rehabilitation and improvement of wastewater treatment facilities: Considering
the time remaining until the project closing date and the delays experienced, primary focus will be on
financing feasibility studies and detailed engineering designs for construction or rehabilitation of
sewage treatment plants. When such designs become available the Bank will consider whether the
project would move forward with actual works depending on capacity and remaining time available
for their implementation, and the two-year extension of the closing date should allow for completion
of at least some of the envisioned works. The selection of consultants to carry out feasibility studies
for wastewater treatment facilities is underway in Uganda (review of proposals), Kenya (request for
proposals) and Tanzania (TORs for engineering designs and ESIA), and Annex 3 includes
benchmarks that each national implementing team is expected to meet by December 2012.

Component 3: Watershed management
Subcomponent 3.1: Natural resources conservation and livelihoods improvement: This
subcomponent was envisioned to be fully implemented through a traditional CDD approach, but
identification and preparation of more complex subprojects involving infrastructure has proven to be
a challenge due to the existing low capacity at the local level. In addition, communities tend to
prioritize subprojects focused on basic infrastructure and improved income, instead of subprojects
that primarily aim at reducing environmental stresses in LVB. To facilitate project implementation
and ensure that this subproject will achieve its objectives, it was agreed during the MTR to propose
the introduction of a modality of implementation of activities through co-management between the
Focal Point Ministry and local governments, NGOs, CBOs, and communities. The necessary funding
will come from proceeds already available in this subcomponent for implementation of watershed
management through CDD sub-projects, a portion of which will now be reallocated for
implementation of watershed management activities through co-management.
Subcomponent 3.2: Community capacity building and participation: To support local governments,
communities, NGOs, CBOs, in the preparation of solid subproject proposals for review and approval/
rejection by the NTAC, and also in the successful implementation of sub-projects, it is proposed to
allow for the use of Project proceeds to hire external technical assistance.

Component 4: Project coordination and management
This component will provide resources necessary for the effective coordination, and monitoring and
evaluation of the project activities. At regional level, these tasks will be carried out by the LVBC,
while at the national level they will be the responsibility of the National Project Coordination Teams
(NPCTs). This component will have three sub-components: project coordination; internal
communication; and monitoring and evaluation.

Sub-component 4.1: Project coordination

                                             Page 3 of 11
This sub-component would finance the incremental operating costs of the various committees,
including the Regional Policy Steering Committee (RPSC), National Project Steering Committee
(NPSC), and the National Technical Advisory Committee (NTAC). In addition, this component
would meet the capital and operating costs of the Regional Project Coordination Team (RPCT) to be
located in the LVBC Secretariat; and the NPCTs, which will be mainstreamed in the Focal Point
Ministries (FPMs). The National Project Coordinators (NPCs) could be employed on competitive
basis to coordinate project implementation activities during the first two years. This sub-component
would also strengthen the financial and procurement management functions in the LVBC and NPCTs
to enhance project’s resources management and accountability. Finally, funds would be available to
recruit a few incremental staff, such as secretaries and drivers, under the operational costs category.

Sub-component 4.2: Internal communication
This sub-component will finance the development of communications system for improving sharing
of data and information among the implementing agencies. This would enhance sharing of existing
technical knowledge and implementation experiences, at the regional, national, local, and community
levels. Specifically, the sub-component’s outputs will include an: (i) internal communications system
tofacilitate information sharing; and (ii) information sharing protocol among LVBC, member
countries, and implementing agencies.

Sub-component 4.3: Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E)
This sub-component would provide resources for the establishment of the regional and national GIS-
based M&E and Management Information System (MIS); and the collection, analyses, storage, and
dissemination of the project’s implementation performance, outcomes, and impact data and
information. To accomplish the M&E functions, LVBC and each FPM will hire and/or assign a
qualified M&E specialist. The project will maintain sets of indicators for M&E, capturing the ILBM
governance indicators, and GEF’s indicators for international waters projects, and the socio-
economic status of participating communities. This sub-component will ensure that monitoring
reports, including quarterly and annual project implementation progress, procurement, financial and
audit reports are produced regularly.
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The project will be implemented through local governments and authorities in both urban and rural
areas in the Lake Victoria Basin (LVB). Lake Victoria, with a surface area of 68,800 km2 is the
second largest freshwater body in the world, and it is a transboundary resource shared by Kenya,
Tanzania, and Uganda. Rwanda and Burundi are a part of the upper watershed that drains into Lake
Victoria through the Kagera river. Its catchment area of 194,000 km2 is shared by five countries:
Burundi (7 percent), Kenya (22 percent), Rwanda (11 percent), Tanzania (44 percent), and Uganda
(16 percent).

Lake Victoria Basin is home to some 35 million people. LVB has immense ecological values and is
greatly valued for its social and economic potential. The potential based on the human resource, rich
agricultural soils, abundant water resources, minerals, fisheries, wetlands, diverse forest resources,
wildlife and tourism potential and a rich biodiversity. Besides, its water serves vital multipurpose
functions for domestic uses, hydropower generation, agricultural and industrial uses, and medium of
transport and climate modulation. Despite its potential, the Basin is threatened by ecological and
environmental degradation, widespread poverty, high population growth and unsustainable pressure
on existing resources.



                                             Page 4 of 11
   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
  Jane A. N. Kibbassa (GENDR)
  Yasmin Tayyab (GSURR)

   6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental               Yes
   Assessment OP/BP 4.01
   Natural Habitats OP/BP      Yes
   4.04
   Forests OP/BP 4.36          No

   Pest Management OP 4.09 Yes

   Physical Cultural           No
   Resources OP/BP 4.11
   Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes
   BP 4.10
   Involuntary Resettlement    Yes
   OP/BP 4.12
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        Yes
   4.37
   Projects on International   Yes
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The additional financing would support continued expansion of ongoing investments, i.e.
     additional watershed management subprojects in existing focal areas, construction of sanitation
     and sewerage facilities that were designed but not implemented under the original project due to
     funding constraints, and expansion and deepening of cleaner production programs.

    While the project is conceived and designed to have significant positive environmental and social
    impacts, construction and/ or rehabilitation of investments, and community subprojects may pose
    negative impacts. Therefore the key safeguards policies issues raised by the project include: water,
    soil and air pollution; loss of vegetation; loss of livelihoods and access to assets, conversion or
    degradation of natural habitats and protected areas like wetlands. In addition, the project activities
    may lead to both consumptive and non-consumptive use of international waters which may
    slightly vary the quantity, although the project interventions are in fact likely to improve the
    quality of water through control of pollution in selected hotspots and catchments. None of the
    potential impacts are expected to be significant and /or irreversible as the investments will not be


                                               Page 5 of 11
  on a large scale, and provisions for effective environmental and social management have been
  made under the project. The original project was rated as Category A due to the environmental
  sensitivities of the Lake Victoria Basin and the possibility of significant impacts related to
  wastewater management systems. An Inspection Panel investigation had been requested into the
  methods used for removal of water hyacinth in the first phase, LVEMP I. The Category A rating is
  maintained for the Additional Financing. However, none of the sub-projects or investments to date
  would qualify at Catogory A activities, and it is unlikely that the activities during the Additional
  Financing will either.
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  This project is not expected to incur any potential indirect and or long term impacts due to future
  investments.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.
  The project will support part of the East African Community’s (EAC) Lake Victoria Basin
  Commission Program, therefore a discussion of alternatives would not have been relevant.
  However, in keeping with the principle of subsidiarity, where existing CDD instrumentswould be
  used to address the watershed rehabilitation, LVEMP II will seek to catalyze and top-up those
  instruments. The project will not create additional and/or parallel systems where programs of local
  government or ongoing CDD instruments, such as the Western Kenya Community-Driven
  Development and Flood Mitigation (WKCDD&FM), and Natural Resources Management Projects
  (NRM), Kenya; Tanzania Social Action Fund Phase II (TASAF II), and Participatory Agricultural
  Development and Empowerment Project (PADEP), Tanzania; and Local Government
  Management Service Delivery Project (LGMSDP), Uganda; would be adapted to meet the
  project’s sustainable natural resources and environmental management objectives.
4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  The ESMFs and RPFs prepared for the second phase of the Lake Victoria Environmental
  Management Project (LVEMP II) remain relevant and adequate and provide strategic and
  operational guidance for the integration of environmental and social considerations into the
  planning and implementation of the LVEMP II activities under the additional finance for Kenya
  and Tanzania. The ESMF in all instances has been applied for the initial screening of the proposed
  project activities for any negative environmental and social impacts which would require attention
  prior to project implementation. Based on the frameworks, the borrowers have each prepared or
  are preparing: (i) Environmental and Social Assessments (ESIAs); (ii) Resettlement Action Plans
  (RAPs); (iii) and Environmental and Social Management Plans for all investments in the pipeline.
  The World Bank‟s OP 4.10 on Indigenous Peoples (IPs) was triggered for Kenya with regards to
  Component 3 (Watershed Management) due to the presence of Ogiek IP communities in part of
  the upper catchment areas of the Nyando watershed. Since actual sub-project sites had not been
  identified, an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) was developed and disclosed in
  2008 to ensure that: (i) communities would not be adversely affected; and (ii) measures would be
  developed and implemented to mitigate potential negative impacts. Nevertheless, the IPPF
  includes a number of undertakings that would require significant policy interventions and multi-
  agency actions regarding ancestral and land rights, that are beyond the remit of the project to
  implement and that could not realistically be completed within the time horizon of the project.
  These measures, while desirable on their own account, are not related to the mitigation of
  anticipated project impacts. Given the agreed focus of the restructured project on project


                                            Page 6 of 11
investments that will be concentrated in lower catchment areas closer to Lake Victoria, the project
will not, to the best of Management’s knowledge, implement activities in areas where IPs are
present. However, as outlined in the IPPF, should a component and/or subcomponent have social
impacts (whether positive or negative) on IP communities, an Indigenous Peoples Plan will be
prepared that complies with the full array of guidelines and implements comprehensive mitigation
strategies.

The Natural Habitats and Safety of Dams policies are covered under each ESMF. Adhering to the
recommendations of the ESMFs, the project will support activities designed to enhance the East
African countries environmental and social management capacity. It is expected that the
experiences and capacities in the client countries obtained from implementing other CDD
activities will be used. In addition capacity building activities will be part of the environment and
social management process in the 5 countries.

Overall safeguard compliance and management has been improving over the last four years of
implementation. Mechanisms for coordination and overall safeguards oversight are well
established in partner countries. Environmental and Social screening has been carried out for both
CDD and CMI subprojects and Environmental and Social Management Plans are in place. In
addition, ESIAs for CDDs and CMIs have been conducted where needed, based on the type/
nature, location, sensitivity and scale of the project and magnitude of its potential environmental
and social impacts. Implementation of mitigation measures is carried out as part of the project
implementation plan. The last Implementation Support Mission confirmed that final ESIAs and
RAPs for the CMI and sanitation investment sub-project, including screening reports for CDDs
have been disclosed locally on LVEMP website in Mwanza Tanzania http://www.lvemp2.go.tz/
Project%20report.html and Kisumu Kenya www.lvemp2kenya.org. In Uganda, the project is at an
earlier stage of implementation and no ESIAs or RAPs have yet been completed, although
screening has been conducted for CDDs that are already underway. The Bank task team supervises
safeguards implementation closely through dedicated safeguards review missions (the last of
which was conducted in November 2014), and continues to provide additional support and training
as required by the project teams.

Eleven ESIAs / EAs and 4 RAPs have been prepared for specific investments are disclosed via the
Bank Infoshop to date. More detailed information is provided below.

In Tanzania, the borrower has conducted environmental and social screening of 341 CDDs and
Environmental and Social Impact Assessment for 21 Co Management Interventions (CMIs). In
addition ESMPs for 165 CDDs has been prepared and are under implementation. Assessment of 2
CMIs that were approved in August 2014 is in progress, all projects have been registered with
NEMC. The safeguards assessment status for specific investments in the pipeline is as follows:

i.      ESIA and RAP for the Construction of Simplified Community Sewerage System in
Mabatini and Igogo area of Mwanza City completed and disclosed.

ii.         Contract for the consultant to update ESIA for the construction of House connection at
Kirumba, Kitangiri, Pasiansi, Iloganzala, Nyamanoro and Igogo area to Mwanza Sewerage System
has been signed, and the study as commenced.

iii.     Draft ESIA report for the Construction of artificial wetland in Mwanza City, at Mwanza
City abattoir as part of rehabilitation of Mwanza city abattoir is waiting for site verification by

                                           Page 7 of 11
 NEMC.

 iv.  Environmental and Social Screening for the construction of 14 public toilets in Mwanza,
 Musoma and Bukoba including at fish landing sites has been finalized. ESMP is being prepared.

 v.       ESIA completed and RAP is being finalized for the updated design for Bukoba Sewerage
 collection system.

 vi .    ESIA and RAP for Musoma Sewerage System is being updated due to slight change in
 design.

 vii.   Approval of Environmental Asse ssment for the construction of Rehabilitation of Water
 Laboratories in Mwanza, Musoma and Bukoba is pending incorporation of comments by NEMC

 viii.     ESIA and RAP is complete for the construction of Magu solid waste disposal site.


 Similarly in Kenya, the investments in the pipeline have applied the ESMF and RPF to prepare the
 appropriate reports. Environmental and social screening for all 225 CDDs has been conducted.
 EIA has been prepared for 106 CDDs and ESMP for 119 provides sufficient mitigation measures
 for the subprojects’ implementation. The safeguards assessment status for specific investments in
 the pipeline is as follows:

 i.        ESIA and ESMP completed and implemented for the rehabilitation of Homa Bay,
 Bomet, Kisumu sewerage facilities

 ii.       EIA and ESMP in place for the 17 Bio toilets.

 iii.         ESMP in place for the Rehabilitation of the water Quality laboratory.

 iv.     ESIAs and ESMPs in place for all the CMIs. RAPs are not yet complete.

  Under the Additional Financing, households that meet the criteria of Project Affected Households
  as per the RPF will continue to be identified as part of the planning process. This inventory of
  project affected households will be mandatory to ensure compliance with the RPF and inclusion of
  these households as the main targeted beneficiaries of the CDD livelihood sub-projects will be a
  requirement to ensure that the incomes of these households is restored. A safeguards status report
  has been produced and disclosed at the InfoShop.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders in all the three APL1 countries – Kenya, Tanzania, and Uganda, include
  government both at national and local levels, National Environment Management Authorities,
  Development Partners, target communities, NGOs and CBOs active in the Lake Victoria basin,
  and the private sector. These stakeholder groups were consulted during preparations of the relevant
  safeguards policies documents, and additional consultations with the potentially affected persons
  has been carried out during the environmental and social screening process as outlined in the
  ESMF. Further the Nile Basin countries were notified of the proposed project in December 2007.



                                            Page 8 of 11
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Feb-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Mar-2008
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive      ////
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya, Uganda & Tanzania                                         06-Mar-2008
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Feb-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Mar-2008
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya, Uganda & Tanzania                                         06-Mar-2008
  Comments:
 Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Feb-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Mar-2008
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya, Uganda & Tanzania                                         06-Mar-2008
  Comments:
 Pest Management Plan
  Was the document disclosed prior to appraisal?                   Yes
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Feb-2008
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   14-Mar-2008
"In country" Disclosure
  Kenya, Uganda & Tanzania                                         06-Mar-2008
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)    Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?



                                          Page 9 of 11
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.04 - Natural Habitats
 Would the project result in any significant conversion or          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of critical natural habitats?
 If the project would result in significant conversion or           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 degradation of other (non-critical) natural habitats, does the
 project include mitigation measures acceptable to the Bank?
OP 4.09 - Pest Management
 Does the EA adequately address the pest management issues?         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Is a separate PMP required?                                        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If yes, has the PMP been reviewed and approved by a                Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 safeguards specialist or PM? Are PMP requirements included
 in project design?If yes, does the project team include a Pest
 Management Specialist?
OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
 Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
 Indigenous Peoples?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
 Development Unit or Practice Manager?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
OP/BP 4.37 - Safety of Dams
 Have dam safety plans been prepared?                               Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Have the TORs as well as composition for the independent           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 Panel of Experts (POE) been reviewed and approved by the
 Bank?
 Has an Emergency Preparedness Plan (EPP) been prepared and         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 arrangements been made for public awareness and training?
OP 7.50 - Projects on International Waterways
 Have the other riparians been notified of the project?             Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 If the project falls under one of the exceptions to the            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
 notification requirement, has this been cleared with the Legal
 Department, and the memo to the RVP prepared and sent?
 Has the RVP approved such an exception?                            Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]


                                           Page 10 of 11
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Stephen Ling
   Approved By
   Practice Manager/    Name: Magda Lovei (PMGR)                            Date: 20-Mar-2015
   Manager:




                                            Page 11 of 11
