                      INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                            ADDITIONAL FINANCING
                                                                  Report No.: ISDSA18000

Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 20-Apr-2016
Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 14-Apr-2016
I. BASIC INFORMATION
   1. Basic Project Data

   Country:          Tanzania                          Project ID:   P151838
                                                       Parent        P124045
                                                       Project ID:
   Project Name:     TZ-PSSN Additional Financing (P151838)
   Parent Project    Tanzania Productive Social Safety Net (P124045)
   Name:
   Task Team         Manuel Salazar
   Leader(s):
   Estimated         02-Nov-2015                       Estimated   20-Jun-2016
   Appraisal Date:                                     Board Date:
   Managing Unit:    GSP01                             Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                       Instrument:
   Sector(s):        Other social services (100%)
   Theme(s):         Social Safety Nets/Social Assistance & Social Care Services (65%), Other social
                     protection and risk management (35%)
   Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
   8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
   Financing (In USD Million)
   Total Project Cost:     200.00           Total Bank Financing:               200.00
   Financing Gap:            0.00
     Financing Source                                                                       Amount
     BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                        0.00
     International Development Association (IDA)                                             200.00
     Total                                                                                   200.00
   Environmental B - Partial Assessment
   Category:
   Is this a         No
   Repeater
   project?

   2. Project Development Objective(s)


                                             Page 1 of 7
   A. Original Project Development Objectives – Parent
   The Project Development Objective of APL Phase 1 is to create a comprehensive, efficient, well-
   targeted productive social safetynetsystem for the poor and vulnerable section of the Tanzanian
   population.
   B. Proposed Project Development Objectives – Additional Financing (AF)
   “To increase income and consumption and improve the ability to cope with shocks among
   targeted vulnerable population groups, while enhancing and protecting the human capital of their
   children.”
3. Project Description
The PSSN will provide a combination of a labor-intensive public works intervention and a cash
transfer intervention. Both programs offer complementary benefits for the same group of the
population (extremely poor and food insecure) and consequently will be implemented in the same
villages and target the same households.

At the core of the PSSN is the provision of cash transfers to eligible households. Households will
receive up to three transfers depending upon their household composition and, therefore, eligibility
for different transfers following their selection using a common targeting system: (i) a basic monthly
transfer to improve household consumption on an ongoing basis, transferred to all households
registered in the program; (ii) a Variable Conditional Transfer for households with children or
pregnant women to serve as an incentive for households to invest in the human capital of their
children and the health of the pregnant women, which is subject to participants’ compliance with a
set of activities; and (iii) a seasonal transfer linked to participation in labor-intensive public works to
increase and sustain household assets, and smooth consumption during lean seasons. Preliminary
estimates show that around 90 percent of the eligible households have both children less than 18
years of age and adults able to work, so they would be eligible to participate in both programs and
receive the three benefits.

The cash transfer intervention is intended to increase the household income on a permanent basis
while the public works program seeks to provide a predictable transfer during the lean season to
encourage beneficiary households to avoid negative coping decisions, which include selling assets,
pulling children out of school and sending children to work. Both elements also seek to have long-
term impacts. The cash transfer introduces co-responsibilities to encourage beneficiaries to invest in
the education and health of their children and pregnant women. The public works may provide
beneficiaries with a source of funds to enable saving and the accumulation of assets. Therefore, the
combined interventions will offer support to extremely poor households to cope with current low
consumption and seasonal shocks, as well as opportunities for a sustained improvement of living
conditions.

The safety net will be built and supported by a set of instruments to: (i) select the poorest and register
program beneficiaries; (ii) monitor program implementation and measure results; (iii) improve
coordination with existing assistance interventions; (vi) gradually incorporate or merge new
programs into the PSSN; (v) rationalize the social protection expenditure to minimize overlaps and
fill gaps; and (vi) create and strengthen links between the safety net interventions with other
programs to support beneficiaries to take the opportunities offered by economic growth.

To achieve the development objectives, the PSSN would support the implementation of the proposed
operation based on 2 components:


                                               Page 2 of 7
Component 1 –Consolidation of Integrated Social Safety Net Interventions for Extremely Poor and
Food Insecure Households
In order to maximize the impact of a social safety net in Tanzania, different interventions will be
coordinated to target the extreme poor and food insecure groups. In this framework, the entry point
of the social safety net will be based on the implementation and scale up of two complementary
interventions: labor intensive public works and cash transfers.

The approach adopted by the PSSN, in which multiple interventions are targeted to the same
households requires a common targeting mechanism to select eligible households and a unified
registry of beneficiaries. While the PSSN is nationwide, geographical targeting intra-PAA, and
community targeting methods with additional verification tools to minimize inclusion errors will be
used to reach the poor. As explained in Annex 2 the targeting system comprised a two-step process
or geographical and community targeting to minimize exclusion errors complemented by a Proxy
Means Test tool as a verification mechanism to minimize inclusion errors and possible elite capture.

Sub-component 1A- Conditional Cash Transfers. While the roll out plan, the targeting system and the
registry of beneficiaries are common tools for all three programs, the PSSN expansion began with the
CCT to guarantee that necessary institutional and implementation arrangements are in place before
scaling up the other programs.

Sub-component 1B- Labor Intensive Public Works Plus (PW). Since the implementing agency has
focused its efforts on the rapid and massive scale up of the CCT component of the program, the PW
started the implementation in late 2014 at a reduced scale and is expected to speed it up from FY16
onwards under the defined roll out plan.

Sub-component 1C- Livelihoods Enhancement. The AF would strengthen the Community Savings
Promotion (COMSP), originally introduced to complement sub-component 1B by mobilizing
beneficiaries to save, by expanding its scope further to support households’ income generating
capacity in the medium and long term. This sub-component would contribute to bridge the gap
between PSSN beneficiaries and the supply of programs that can help them increase their productive
potential, gradually generating the necessary foundation for households’ graduation from the
program over time.

Component 2 – Institutional Strengthening

The objective of this component is to: (i) support the Government of URT in the process of
institutionalizing the PSSN as part of a national social protection framework; (ii) support TASAF to
start the implementation of the PSSN under the current structure and gradually move towards
permanent institutional arrangements; and (iii) support program management and monitoring and
evaluation of the PSSN. The component will finance activities at national, PAA, and c ommunity
levels aimed at improving accountability and transparency in the use of Project resources. It will
have two sub-components:
 4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
analysis (if known)
The AF of the project will include scaling up the activities across Sub-component 1-B, related to
labor intensive public works (micro-projects), which are community based and selected by the
Community Management Committees. All 161 LGAs are expected to be included by end of project


                                            Page 3 of 7
  life. The activities will include construction and rehabilitation of rural community roads and Charco
  dams; nurseries; dug wells and contour bunds and solid waste management
   5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
  Alexandra C. Bezeredi (GSU01)
  Mary C.K. Bitekerezo (GSU07)
  Ruma Tavorath (GEN07)

   6. Safeguard Policies       Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
   Environmental               Yes           The community level civil works financed under the
   Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     project have the potential of having minor to moderate
                                             localized impacts. An ESMF was prepared and disclosed
                                             for the parent project.
   Natural Habitats OP/BP      No            As in the parent project, the small civil works are not
   4.04                                      expected to have impact on natural habitats
   Forests OP/BP 4.36          No            As in the parent project, the small civil works are not
                                             expected to have impact on forests
   Pest Management OP 4.09 No                Project activities do not include the procurement and use
                                             of insecticides
   Physical Cultural        No               As in the parent project, the small civil works are not
   Resources OP/BP 4.11                      expected to have impact on PCR
   Indigenous Peoples OP/   No               A Board waiver for this OP will be sought.
   BP 4.10
   Involuntary Resettlement Yes              The sub-projects are community based and demand
   OP/BP 4.12                                driven. Therefore the PWP component activities may
                                             attract land acquisition and/or changes in access to natural
                                             resources in designated or protected areas. A resettlement
                                             Policy Framework was prepared and disclosed for the
                                             parent project.
   Safety of Dams OP/BP        No
   4.37
   Projects on International   No
   Waterways OP/BP 7.50
   Projects in Disputed        No
   Areas OP/BP 7.60

II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
    A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
   1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
     and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
     The potential negative environmental impacts of the AF are expected to be small and could
     include increased soil erosion and salinity; larger area under cultivation, leading to increased
     demand on natural resources or degradation of the surrounding environment; water-logging or
     reduced water inflow due to poor design; waste dumping and haphazard excavation of soil for
     construction; health and safety issues and possible conflicts due to water usage patterns;


                                               Page 4 of 7
 management of wastes at the rehabilitation /construction sites; loss of vegetation, rehabilitation of
 borrow pits, as well as dust and noise during the works. Similarly the scaling up of the Public
 works program may have minor land acquisition implications.

  The original project triggered OP 4.10 (Indigenous Peoples), and an Indigenous Peoples Planning
  Framework was prepared, consulted upon and disclosed in January 2012. The Government of
  Tanzania has subsequently requested a waiver to the application of the policy (see below). To date,
  the project has provided cash transfers and some public works activities (the latter of which have
  been carried out in PAAs where Indigenous Peoples are not present).
2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
  in the project area:
  Many of the above impacts, while small-scale and localized in nature, could become permanent
  issues unless appropriate mitigation measures are undertaken during design and construction.
3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
  impacts.

4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
  assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
  An Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF) and the Resettlement Policy
  Framework (RPF) were prepared and disclosed on November 15, 2011 and January 18, 2012
  respectively in country and in InfoShop. These do not require any further modifications and can
  continue to be implemented under the proposed AF. However, what is being added is the
  requirement for an independent assessment of the implementation of the ESMF and RPF to be
  undertaken by the TMU ten months prior to project completion.

 Since the project was approved, however, the Government of Tanzania has subsequently requested
 a waiver to the application of the policy in Tanzania, given its constitutional position regarding
 ethnicity. In response to the GoT’s position, it is proposed that the project would prepare social
 assessments to analyze needs of vulnerable groups (VGs) and include measures for their
 engagement and participation in the project. This approach ensures that VGs (e.g., those that may
 be below the food poverty line, lack access to basic social services – including those that are
 geographically isolated, and are not integrated with society at large and its institutions due to
 physical, or social factors) participate in informed consultations and benefit from the project in
 socially appropriate ways.

  Vulnerable groups are present in the project area. These include women-headed households,
  children, elderly and disadvantaged communities. The Vulnerable Groups Planning Framework
  (VGPF) prepared for the project includes measures to ensure that: such groups have been involved
  in a process of free, prior and informed consultation leading to broad community support for the
  project; any adverse impacts on such groups are mitigated; the groups obtain appropriate benefits
  from the project; there is a process for grievance redress; and, the project includes monitoring and
  evaluation to assess the project’s impacts on, and benefits for vulnerable groups. The VGPF was
  consulted upon and disclosed in April 2016. Where necessary, Vulnerable Group Plans (VGPs)
  will be prepared, consulted upon and disclosed during project implementation (please see detailed
  explanations in the Proposed Changes and Appraisal Summary section below). The VGPF is an
  annex to the ESMF.
5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure


                                             Page 5 of 7
  on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.
  The key stakeholders include the relevant LGAs/ Second VPO experts, communities, regional
  administration, district and village government authorities, including Ward Extension Staff,
  Village Council/ Shehia Advisory Council and civil society organizations;. Both the ESMF
  (including the VGPF) and RPF include the requirements that all LGAs implement the projects in
  close coordination and consultation with the various stakeholders.
B. Disclosure Requirements
Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      15-Nov-2011
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   15-Nov-2011
  For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
  Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
"In country" Disclosure
  Tanzania                                                         00000000
  Comments:
 Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
  Date of receipt by the Bank                                      17-Jan-2012
  Date of submission to InfoShop                                   17-Jan-2012
"In country" Disclosure
  Tanzania                                                         00000000
  Comments:
If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
Audit/or EMP.
If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
 Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 report?
 If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
 Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 in the credit/loan?
OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
 Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
 If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
 Practice Manager review the plan?
 Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [   ]

  Provided estimated number of people to be affected

                                            Page 6 of 7
    Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
    assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
    livelihoods)

     Provided estimated number of people to be affected
   The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
    Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    World Bank's Infoshop?
    Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    place in a form and language that are understandable and
    accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
   All Safeguard Policies
    Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
    measures related to safeguard policies?
    Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    in the project cost?
    Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
    related to safeguard policies?
    Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
    with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
    the project legal documents?

III. APPROVALS
   Task Team Leader(s): Name: Manuel Salazar
   Approved By
   Safeguards Advisor: Name: Johanna van Tilburg (SA)            Date: 21-Apr-2016
   Practice Manager/    Name: Penelope Jane Aske Williams (PMGR) Date: 21-Apr-2016
   Manager:




                                             Page 7 of 7
