                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA20128
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 15-Nov-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 23-Nov-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Guatemala                          Project ID:   P153366
                            Project Name:      Transparency and Efficiency in Tax Administration (P153366)
                            Task Team          Alberto Leyton,David Santos Ruano
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated          07-Nov-2016              Estimated     17-Jan-2017
                            Appraisal Date:                             Board Date:
                            Managing Unit:    GGO16                     Lending       Investment Project Financing
                                                                        Instrument:
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:        55.00           Total Bank Financing:     55.00
                            Financing Gap:              0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
Public Disclosure Copy




                              International Bank for Reconstruction and Development                                       55.00
                              Total                                                                                       55.00
                            Environmental C - Not Required
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The project development objective is to increase levels of compliance with tax and customs
                           obligations.
                            3. Project Description
                           The Project has been designed to help address structural weaknesses and targets areas for
                           improvement that are linked to the main causes of existing weak management of the tax
                           administration and the low tax culture in the country. Aspects related to the weak internal governance
                           framework in SAT, the outdated core business and support processes, the weak controls on tax
                           compliance and customs, and the lack of transparency in SAT, are being specifically targeted as


                                                                        Page 1 of 6
                         areas of intervention for this operation. The operation comprises three components designed to cover
                         vertical and transversal interventions to strengthen the overall SAT governance framework and to
                         increase its effectiveness. Each of the three components is designed to tackle structural weaknesses
Public Disclosure Copy




                         in the Guatemala➢❨ s tax system that contribute to low tax compliance and therefore low revenue
                         collection. While component 2 is designed to support vertical interventions to strengthen internal
                         revenues and customs functions, components 1 and 3 are seen as crosscutting interventions aiming at
                         strengthening the overall governance framework in SAT as well as the development of integrated tax
                         intelligence and tax enforcement procedures to enhance SAT➢❨ s effectiveness.

                         Component 1. Transparency, Integrity and Institutional Development in SAT

                         The objective of this component is to support implementation of the new SAT➢❨ s governance
                         model by supporting the implementation of the recently approved amendments to the Organic Law
                         of SAT and by strengthening its internal capacities in areas related to strategic planning, human
                         resource management, institutional integrity, information governance, and information and
                         communication technology (ICT) services. It will also support implementation of a change
                         management strategy and communications initiatives to ensure successful implementation of the
                         proposed reforms. Activities to be supported by this component will be organized under the
                         following sub-components:

                         Management of the SAT Reform. This sub-component will focus on the development and
                         implementation of a reform strategy in SAT by: (i) designing and institutionalizing strategic planning
                         and Monitoring & Evaluation (M&E) tools; (ii) designing and implementing an ICT Governance
                         model; and (iii) designing and implementing a change management strategy (including a
                         communications campaign program) to support the reform process. This sub-component will also
                         support Project administration activities under the Project Management Office (PMO).

                         Strengthening Human Resource Management and Institutional Integrity. This sub-component will
Public Disclosure Copy




                         support: (i) the development and implementation of an integrated human resource management
                         strategy in SAT including updating of the staffing plan for both internal revenues and customs
                         services, establishing a performance management framework, developing and implementing a more
                         rigorous screening process for staff recruitment, and designing and implementing an internal capacity
                         development and knowledge management program for staff; and (ii) the development and
                         implementation of a transparency and institutional integrity strategy including the establishment and
                         implementation of the new Internal Investigation Unit, the strengthening of the internal audit
                         functions, and design and implementation of an industrial security plan for staff at all levels
                         including physical and legal protection based on the nature of their functions and the associated risks
                         following international experiences.

                         25.      Upgrading and Integration of the Information Technology Platform. This sub-component
                         will finance the required investment for the updating and upgrading of the ICT platform aligned with
                         the SAT reform strategy. It will include the following activities: (i) designing of a new organizational
                         model for the ICT department; (ii) improving ICT planning and Project management capacities; (iii)
                         designing of a new and comprehensive software architecture ensuring integration all SAT functions;
                         (iv) upgrading the ICT infrastructure to support the reform process including improving information
                         security and establishing a data recovery center.

                         Component 2. Strengthening of Tax Collection Functions in Internal Revenues and Customs


                                                                       Page 2 of 6
                         The purpose objective of this component is to strengthen the core processes of the primary tax
                         collection and controls functions in both Internal Revenues and Customs with a view to enhancing
Public Disclosure Copy




                         taxpayer voluntary compliance, taxpayer satisfaction and SAT➢❨ s efficiency. This component will
                         support: (i) review and redefinition of core processes and management instruments for revenue
                         collection; (ii) the upgrade, replacement and development of information systems; and (iii) the
                         implementation of electronic services for taxpayers. While the component does not envision a
                         comprehensive overhaul of the internal revenues management system, it would support the
                         replacement or upgrading of selected modules. Two sub-components are envisioned under this
                         component:

                         Strengthening of Internal Revenue Collection Processes. This subcomponent will focus on the
                         redesign and implementation of an integrated tax compliance model by: (i) redesigning and
                         improving the taxpayer registration system (Registro Tributario Unico); (ii) redefining and
                         implementing a new model for the Taxpayer Current Account (TCA) with the 360Â° approach ; (iii)
                         strengthening and expanding the e-invoice initiative and the use of other third-party sources of
                         information for effective collection control; (iv) implementing tools and methodologies to improve
                         effectiveness of administrative collection and tax arrears recovery including initiatives and programs
                         to foster compliance and deter omission practices using behavioral economic approaches; and (v) the
                         development and implementation of a comprehensive strategy for improving taxpayer services
                         including improvements in the existing face-to-face services provided in regional offices, the
                         expansion of electronic services, and the implementation of a taxpayer satisfaction survey model.

                         Strengthening of Customs Services. This subcomponent will support the following activities: (i)
                         implementation of a risk-based management model for merchandise controls, including ex-post
                         document controls and the Trusted Operator Program ; (ii) development and implementation of
                         streamlined and automated customs procedures and mechanisms, including a joint administrative
                         inspection model with all the various border control agencies; (iii) implementation of non-intrusive
                         technologies and electronic tracking devises for merchandise control at the customs entrances, exits
Public Disclosure Copy




                         and transits; (iv) strengthening controls over special customs regimes (free zones and others); (v)
                         facilitating information exchange with other national and international agencies by applying
                         international conventions and developing regional and bilateral agreements with neighboring
                         countries; and (vi) increasing transparency and predictability in Customs services by improving and
                         implementing modern valuation methodologies and tool, implementing standardized application of
                         norms and procedures at customs offices, improving availability and quality of customs information
                         to staff, trade operators and other users, creating consultation and feedback mechanisms between
                         traders and customs, and improving transparency on the VAT devolution process for exports.

                         Component 3. Strengthening of integrated Tax Intelligence and Tax Enforcement capabilities

                         The objective of this component is to strengthen tax intelligence and tax enforcement capabilities of
                         SAT. The component will promote an efficient use of tax information sources to support the
                         auditing, control and enforcement functions through the adoption of an integrated compliance risk
                         management model, the promotion of a culture of information analysis within SAT, and the
                         strengthening of tax auditing and legal services for a more effective detection of evasion and tax
                         fraud practices and the effective collection of disputed taxes. The proposed model will cover both
                         internal revenues and customs in order to deter existing silo-based practices and to increase
                         effectiveness of the tax intelligence function through the effective access and use of all available
                         information. The component comprises three sub-components:

                                                                      Page 3 of 6
                         Strengthening Tax Intelligence and Tax Audit. This sub-component will focus on: (i) the creation
                         and implementation of the new Tax Intelligence Unit; (ii) the design and implementation of an
Public Disclosure Copy




                         integrated risk-based management model covering both internal revenues and customs; (iii) the
                         construction of a unified data warehouse and business intelligence tools for easier and more effective
                         analysis of existing information, (iv) the definition and implementation of a comprehensive auditing
                         strategy and tools based on taxpayer segmentation and risk analysis for both internal revenue
                         collection and foreign trade areas; and (v) building capacities of auditors including on transfer price
                         processes.

                         Strengthening Legal Services and Tax Appeals Procedures in SAT. This sub-component will focus
                         on the following activities: (i) creation of a strategy and development of analytical tools to support
                         tax litigation processes and strengthening capacity of the SAT➢❨ s Legal Department; (ii)
                         identifying areas of opportunity to improve existing regulations that hinder SAT➢❨ s ability to
                         collect tax debts; and (iii) support implementation of the new tax appeals framework and the new
                         administrative tax tribunal known as TRIBUTA, through the development of organizational manuals
                         and procedures, analysis of staffing capacity requirements and training, development of supporting
                         tools to record and monitor appeal cases, and dissemination and communication activities to inform
                         taxpayers on new tax appeals procedures and protocols.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         Project will be located in the Capital City of Guatemala at Superintendencia de Administracion
                         Tributaria. the Address is 7-a Av. 3-73, Zona 9, Edificio Torre SAT. Other locations (at Custom
                         Border Crossing Points) will be identified during implementation stage
                          5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
                         Mariela Mena (GWADR)
                          6. Safeguard Policies      Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Environmental              No             This policy is not triggered given that the proposed
                          Assessment OP/BP 4.01                     Project seeks to support the strategy of the Government
                                                                    for a comprehensive modernization of the tax and custom
                                                                    administration system, no physical works are expected
                                                                    and there are no foreseeable environmental adverse
                                                                    impacts.
                          Natural Habitats OP/BP     No             This policy is not triggered since none of the Project
                          4.04                                      activities are expected to affect natural habitats.
                          Forests OP/BP 4.36         No             This policy is not triggered because the Project does not
                                                                    consider any changes to forest management or any works
                                                                    in forest areas.
                          Pest Management OP 4.09 No                This policy is not triggered because no pesticides will be
                                                                    used or procured in any of the Project activities.
                          Physical Cultural          No             This policy is not triggered since none of the Project
                          Resources OP/BP 4.11                      activities include soil removal that may affect any
                                                                    physical cultural resources.
                          Indigenous Peoples OP/     No             This policy is not triggered given that project activities are
                          BP 4.10                                   not expected to cause any impact on indigenous peoples


                                                                      Page 4 of 6
                            Involuntary Resettlement No               This policy is not triggered given that the Project will not
                            OP/BP 4.12                                require any land acquisition or restriction of access to
                                                                      natural resources.
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            This policy is not triggered given that the Project will not
                            4.37                                      support the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor will
                                                                      support other investments, which rely on the services of
                                                                      existing dams.
                            Projects on International   No            This policy is not triggered because the Project will not
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      affect international waterways as defined under the policy.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            This policy is not triggered because the proposed Project
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          will not affect disputed areas as defined under the policy.
                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The Transparency and Efficiency in Tax Administration project is assigned an EA category of
                              ➢❨ C➢❨ as this activity poses low or no safeguards risk and specific Safeguards will not be
                              triggered.
                              Related to Policy OP/BP 4.12 Involuntary Resettlement: The Project will not require any land
                              acquisition or restriction of access to natural resources.
                              Related to OP 4.10 policy: Actions and project intervention area do not require the activation of
                              the policy. Retrenchment of staff has been made already within SAT, and is not expected to take
                              place during Project implementation.
                            2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                              in the project area:
Public Disclosure Copy




                            3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse
                              impacts.

                            4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                              assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.

                            5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                              on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.


                           B. Disclosure Requirements
                            If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                            respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                            Audit/or EMP.
                            If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:


                           C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level


                                                                       Page 5 of 6
                            The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                             Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             World Bank's Infoshop?
Public Disclosure Copy




                             Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             place in a form and language that are understandable and
                             accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                            All Safeguard Policies
                             Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                             measures related to safeguard policies?
                             Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             in the project cost?
                             Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                             related to safeguard policies?
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed       Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Alberto Leyton,David Santos Ruano
                            Approved By
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Arturo Herrera Gutierrez (PMGR)               Date: 23-Nov-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 6 of 6
