                                          INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                   CONCEPT STAGE
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                          Report No.: ISDSC13250

                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 05-Mar-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 08-Mar-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                           A. Basic Project Data

                            Country:          Pakistan                         Project ID:    P154255
                            Project Name:     PK-Balochistan Integrated Water Resources Management & Development
                                              Project (P154255)
                            Task Team         Mahwash Wasiq,Muhammad Riaz
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       22-Feb-2016                        Estimated      02-Jun-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                    Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GWA06                               Lending        Investment Project Financing
                                                                               Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Irrigation and drainage (60%), Forestry (10%), Public administration- Water,
                                              sanitation and flood protection (10%), Water supply (10 %), Flood protection
                                              (10%)
                            Theme(s):         Natural disaster management (10%), Rural services and infrastructure (40%),
                                              Other rural development (10%), Climate change (10%), Wat er resource
Public Disclosure Copy




                                              management (30%)
                            Financing (In USD Million)
                            Total Project Cost:    253.74                   Total Bank Financing:       205.56
                            Financing Gap:           0.00
                              Financing Source                                                         Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                         10.11
                              International Development Association (IDA)                               205.56
                              International Fund for Agriculture Development                             38.07
                              Total                                                                     253.74
                            Environmental A - Full Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a         No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                           B. Project Objectives
                           To improve water resources monitoring and management by the Balochistan Irrigation Department,
                         and to increase adoption of water-efficient practices and technologies by water users in targeted
                         communities, in focused areas of the Nari and Porali basins of Balochistan.
                         C. Project Description
Public Disclosure Copy




                         The Project will begin the transformation of water management in Balochistan from a narrow
                         irrigation project focus, to an integrated multi-sectoral river basin planning and development
                         approach. It will achieve this through institutional restructuring and strengthening, investments in
                         hydro-meteorological data and water information systems, and priority infrastructure investments in
                         irrigation, potable water supply, flood protection, watershed and rangeland management.

                         For the Nari Basin (69,224 km2) and the Porali Basin (11,616 km2) all Project sub-components will
                         be implemented. For the Pishin Lora Basin (16,671 km2) only sub-components A3 (Installation and
                         Operation of Hydro-meteorological System) and sub-component B4 (Watershed & Rangeland
                         Management and Environmental Protection) will be implemented. In addition, the project activities
                         following an integrated water resources management approach, promoting: (i) water savings
                         technologies in irrigated agriculture such as utilization of high efficiency irrigation system,
                         promotion of land leveling which is the largest user of water, thereby improving soil and water
                         availability; (ii) improved agriculture practices and promotion of drought tolerant cropping varieties
                         and other productivity enhancement techniques related to pest management will improve soil and
                         water conservation; (iii) better decision making by the farmers in better crop selection choices, based
                         on analysis of soil, improved water availability, and weather advisories; (iv) improved watershed and
                         rangeland management technologies to improve soil moisture retention, reducing erosion and
                         improving groundwater recharge; and promoting conservation of two important ecosystems in
                         Balochistan, namely the Juniper forest in the catchment areas of Nari river basin and the Mangroves
                         forest in the delta of Porali river basins. These activities not only have a positive impact on the
                         environmental sustainability but also builds resilience to climate change and associated impacts of
                         floods and drought.

                         III.    PROJECT DESCRIPTION
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Component A: IWRM Institutions, Capacity and Information
                         Total Base Cost US$27.54M, IDA US$27.54M
                         This component will lay the foundation for a gradual transition to IWRM in Balochistan. It supports
                         institutional restructuring, professional development, installation and operation of hydro-
                         meteorological systems, and establishment of river basin information systems and decision support
                         systems. The project will establish a hydro-meteorological observation network in the three project
                         river basins including telecommunication equipment, software for data transmission and analyses,
                         storage conversion of the data into the needed information and training in network operation and
                         maintenance (O&M). A flood early warning system will be installed and operated based on real-time
                         data collection and transmission. Appropriate institutional arrangements for IWRM will be
                         determined and progressively implemented during the Project. Significant investment will be made
                         in professional development to enable a transition to IWRM including new and more effective
                         institutions capable of robust water resources planning and management. A Water Resources Center
                         of Excellence will be established, most likely hosted by a local university or existing technical
                         institution.

                         Component B: IWRM Sub-projects
                         Total Cost US$213.20M, IDA US$203.09M, Beneficiaries US$10.11M).
                         This component will support implementation of IWRM sectoral investments in Nari and Porali
                         basins within a framework of community mobilization and participation. Investments will include:
                         construction and/or rehabilitation of irrigation and potable water supply facilities; flood protection
                         infrastructure; watershed and rangeland management and environmental protection works; and on-
Public Disclosure Copy




                         farm water management and agricultural productivity activities.

                         Sub-component B1 Community mobilization will promote “grass roots” organizations and facilitate
                         participatory skills development. Farmer organizations, water user associations, agricultural
                         development groups and forest user groups will be established. Beneficiary farmers will contribute
                         in-kind with labor for cost sharing of the development work.

                         Sub-component B2 Eight irrigation and sixteen potable water supply sub-projects will be
                         implemented: four each in the Nari and Porali basins, spanning ~128,000 ha and benefiting ~48,100
                         households. Development work will include remodeling of the headwork and secondary canals,
                         command area development in perennial irrigation, spate irrigation (Sailaba) and rainwater
                         harvesting (Khushkaba) irrigation areas, and construction of access farm tracks. The Project will
                         support construction and rehabilitation of sixteen village water supply schemes providing potable
                         water supply to ~4,200 households.

                         Sub-component B3 High-intensity rain in the steep upper catchments generates high-energy flash
                         flooding. There has been very limited investment to-date in flood protection; there is a dire need for
                         flood protection works in five districts in the Nari basin and in two districts in the Porali basin. These
                         works will protect ~14,600 ha of farmland and ~4,100 low-income family homes benefitting ~10,200
                         households, as well as protecting 31 km of village roads (with 18 bridges and culverts) and various
                         irrigation infrastructure.

                         Sub-component B4 will support a participatory approach to (i) watershed management (at the river
                         basin and irrigation scheme levels), (ii) rangeland management focusing on highland pasture and
                         biomass production and (iii) environmental protection including enlargement and conservation of
                         protected juniper and mangrove forests. Watershed management activities will be undertaken in all
Public Disclosure Copy




                         three Project river basins, including soil and water conservation measures, rainwater harvesting and
                         plantations. At the irrigation scheme level, watershed management will include drainage
                         improvement, soil and water conservation measures and rehabilitation/protection of irrigable land
                         degraded/endangered by erosion gullies. Rangeland management will introduce rotational grazing
                         and stocking rate limits. Environmental protection will be guided by land use surveys in all three
                         target basins to identify potential areas for protection. Mechanisms will be developed to enable
                         sustainable local use of juniper forests and in the lower Nari and Porali basins mangrove protection
                         will be a key priority. Total sub-component beneficiaries are ~280,000.

                         Sub-component B5 will improve on-farm and field irrigation water efficiency and farm productivity.
                         Matching grants will be given to service providers and farmers for high-efficiency irrigation systems,
                         land leveling, farm machinery and diverse training. Training will encompass improved water
                         management technologies, improved crop management including Integrated Pest Management and
                         crop diversification, exposure visits, training for women in agriculture and livestock, and on the job
                         and off-site training for project/department staff. Total beneficiaries for this component are ~20,000
                         (within irrigation beneficiaries).

                         Component C: Project Management & Technical Assistance
                         Total Costs US$25.11M, IDA US$25.11M
                         This component will support project management, monitoring and evaluation and studies. The
                           component will finance expenditures associated with overall project implementation costs including
                           incremental costs associated with PMU and the PIUs, Project Supervision and Implementation
                           Assistance (PSIA) consultants, Monitoring and Evaluation (M&E) consultants, and implementation
Public Disclosure Copy




                           of Management Plans and Strategic Studies including Environmental Management Plan, Social
                           Management Plan, Gender Action Plan, and strategic studies. Study tours will also be included with
                           piloting of new technologies and others that may be identified during project implementation, as well
                           as feasibility studies for other potential river basins.
                           D. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                           analysis (if known)
                           The proposed project is to be implemented in three river basins of Pishin-Lora, Nari and Porali in the
                           water stressed and highly arid region of Balochistan. All the selected basins are overdrawn, with high
                           levels of groundwater extraction combined with old-styled irrigation practices. The selected basins
                           are home to unique and fragile ecosystems. Ziarat district, located at the confluence of Pishin-Lora
                           and Nari river basins, is host to the second largest Juniper Forests in the world. Porali river basin
                           drains into Arabian Sea, supporting the mangrove forests located at the coast of Lasbela district. All
                           the three basins have large tracts of rangelands and pastures that support the local livestock
                           population as well as wild ungulate populations. There are four wildlife sanctuaries and two game
                           reserves in Pishin-Lora Basin, two wildlife sanctuaries and one game reserve in Nari, and one
                           wildlife sanctuary in Porali Basin. Since the project aims to increase cultivated area, possible water
                           storage and diversion, and building new irrigation schemes, there is a high possibility of forest and/or
                           pasture land conversion, decreased freshwater input to mangrove forests, and possible introduction of
                           newer crop varieties, for all of which, detailed analysis of impacts is required. Also, with drought
                           mitigation and flood protection measures in plan, there will be positive impacts to the environment as
                           a whole, which need to be amplified and ensured.
                           E. Borrowers Institutional Capacity for Safeguard Policies
                           Balochistan Irrigation Department of the Government of Balochistan will be the lead implementing
                           agency and has already implemented Balochistan Small Scale Irrigation Bank funded project in the
Public Disclosure Copy




                           recent past. Overall the department has a limited capacity to plan and implement Safeguard
                           requirements. It will therefore need considerable support for capacity development to implement the
                           project safeguards requirements.
                           F. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists on the Team
                           Abdelaziz Lagnaoui (GEN06)
                           Chaohua Zhang (GSU06)
                           Maqsood Ahmed (GSU06)

                         II. SAFEGUARD POLICIES THAT MIGHT APPLY
                           Safeguard Policies                Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                           Environmental Assessment          Yes            The project Investments will include construction
                           OP/BP 4.01                                       and/or rehabilitation of irrigation and potable water
                                                                            supply facilities; flood protection infrastructure;
                                                                            watershed and rangeland management and
                                                                            environmental protection works; and on-farm water
                                                                            management and agricultural productivity activities
                                                                            in a water-stressed area.
                                                                            Implementation of sub-projects will also have
                                                             construction-related environmental impacts such as
                                                             air quality deterioration, water and soil
                                                             contamination, land use and land form changes, and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                             impacts on biological resources. This policy is
                                                             therefore triggered to carry out detailed
                                                             environmental assessment and prepare environmental
                                                             monitoring and mitigation plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP 4.04   Yes   This policy is triggered because of the potential
                                                             environmental impacts of project activities on the
                                                             natural habitats and protected areas in the selected
                                                             river basins. The EIA will identify and delineate any
                                                             areas of critical habitat and ensure application of the
                                                             mitigation hierarchy in accordance with this policy
                                                             for all project works
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36            Yes   The proposed project will be developed in proximity
                                                             of natural forest areas and rangelands. Yet it is too
                                                             early to know at this stage whether interventions
                                                             could affect the rights and welfare of people
                                                             dependent on forests and if this would bring changes
                                                             in the management, protection, and utilization of
                                                             natural forests. OP/BP 4.36 is triggered as a
                                                             precautionary measure, and also to improve forest
                                                             conservation.

                                                             Juniper forests in Ziarat and Mangrove forests at the
                                                             coast of Lasbela may be affected due to project
                                                             interventions. Rangelands are also classified as forest
                                                             area by the Balochistan Forest Department.
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Pest Management OP 4.09       Yes   Sub-component B5 will improve on-farm and field
                                                             irrigation water efficiency and farm productivity.
                                                             This may lead to crop diversification and hence a
                                                             potential change in crop management practices. The
                                                             project is not contemplating procurement of any kind
                                                             of pesticides but will focus on delivering targeted
                                                             training that will encompass improved water
                                                             management technologies and improved crop
                                                             management practices, including Integrated Pest
                                                             Management. Pest Management Training modules
                                                             will be part of the project’s subcomponent.
                         Physical Cultural Resources   Yes   The policy on Physical Cultural Resources (OP 4.11)
                         OP/BP 4.11                          applies given the uncertainty at this stage regarding
                                                             the exact locations of activities to be carried out
                                                             under the project. Some forests or landscapes
                                                             concerned by the project might be considered to have
                                                             historical or cultural significance such as spirit
                                                             forests, sacred valleys or other features of the natural
                                                                                                                        landscape. The EIA will include specific provisions
                                                                                                                        to assess the potential impacts on forests, sacred
                                                                                                                        valleys or landscapes considered to have historical or
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                                                                        cultural significance. The EIA will also include
                                                                                                                        provisions for the treatment of physical cultural
                                                                                                                        resources that may be discovered during project
                                                                                                                        implementation (chance finds).
                                 Indigenous Peoples OP/BP                                    No                         Basin-wide social assessments and scheme-wise
                                 4.10                                                                                   social impact assessments in the first year program
                                                                                                                        have been conducted. They indicate that there are no
                                                                                                                        indigenous people as defined in OP 4.10 reside in the
                                                                                                                        project basins and therefore the policy is considered
                                                                                                                        not triggered.
                                 Involuntary Resettlement OP/                                Yes                        The overall project design and implementation has
                                 BP 4.12                                                                                adopted a programmatic approach. Accordingly, a
                                                                                                                        Resettlement Policy Framework has been developed
                                                                                                                        to guide resettlement planning for the various
                                                                                                                        schemes to be identified, designed and implemented
                                                                                                                        under the project. At the same time, a few schemes
                                                                                                                        have been designed in detail for implementation in
                                                                                                                        the first year of the project. For these schemes,
                                                                                                                        social impact assessments have been carried out and
                                                                                                                        a Social Impact Assessment and Mitigation Plan is
                                                                                                                        being developed. This plan documents the SIA
                                                                                                                        findings, socioeconomic baseline, impact
                                                                                                                        assessments, mitigation measures, stakeholder
                                                                                                                        participation, grievances and implementation
                                                                                                                        arrangements.
Public Disclosure Copy




                                 Safety of Dams OP/BP 4.37                                   No                         This policy is not triggered as the project will not
                                                                                                                        support the construction or rehabilitation of dams nor
                                                                                                                        will it support other investments which rely on the
                                                                                                                        services of existing dams.
                                 Projects on International                                   Yes                        Because the project activities are implemented in the
                                 Waterways OP/BP 7.50                                                                   Pishin Lora (TBC) and Nari basin, which are
                                                                                                                        international waterways, the International Waterways
                                                                                                                        Policy (OP 7.50) may be triggered. Works will be
                                                                                                                        limited to installation of hydro-meteorological
                                                                                                                        stations and watershed range land management,
                                                                                                                        neither of which will adversely affect the quality or
                                                                                                                        quantity of water flows to downstream riparians’ or
                                                                                                                        be adversely affected by other riparians' water use.
                                                                                                                        Exception to riparian notification as per paragraph 7
                                                                                                                        (a) of OP7.50 will be sought from SARVP
                                 Projects in Disputed Areas OP/ No                                                      The project is not located in Disputed Areas as
                                 BP 7.60                                                                                defined in the Bank policy.

                         III. SAFEGUARD PREPARATION PLAN


                         1 Reminder: The Bank's Disclosure Policy requires that safeguard-related documents be disclosed before appraisal (i) at the InfoShop and (ii) in country, at publicly accessible locations and in a
                          form and language that are accessible to potentially affected persons.
                           A. Tentative target date for preparing the PAD Stage ISDS: 18-Jan-2017
                           B. Time frame for launching and completing the safeguard-related studies that may be needed.
                              The specific studies and their timing1 should be specified in the PAD-stage ISDS:
Public Disclosure Copy




                             January 2016
                         IV. APPROVALS
                           Task Team Leader(s): Name: Mahwash Wasiq,Muhammad Riaz
                           Approved By:
                           Safeguards Advisor: Name: Zia Al Jalaly (SA)                            Date: 08-Mar-2016
                           Practice Manager/    Name: Ousmane Dione (PMGR)                         Date: 08-Mar-2016
                           Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy
