                                                INTEGRATED SAFEGUARDS DATA SHEET
                                                        APPRAISAL STAGE
                                                                                             Report No.: ISDSA17641
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Date ISDS Prepared/Updated: 09-Jun-2016
                         Date ISDS Approved/Disclosed: 09-Jun-2016
                         I. BASIC INFORMATION
                            1. Basic Project Data

                            Country:           Uganda                             Project ID:   P155186
                            Project Name:      Uganda Reproductive, Maternal and Child Health Services Improvement Project
                                               (P155186)
                            Task Team          Peter Okwero
                            Leader(s):
                            Estimated       16-May-2016                           Estimated   28-Jul-2016
                            Appraisal Date:                                       Board Date:
                            Managing Unit: GHN01                                  Lending     Investment Project Financing
                                                                                  Instrument:
                            Sector(s):        Health (100%)
                            Theme(s):         Population and reproductive health (60%), Health system performance (40%)
                            Is this project processed under OP 8.50 (Emergency Recovery) or OP No
                            8.00 (Rapid Response to Crises and Emergencies)?
                            Financing (In USD Million)
Public Disclosure Copy




                            Total Project Cost:        140.00               Total Bank Financing:       110.00
                            Financing Gap:               0.00
                              Financing Source                                                                          Amount
                              BORROWER/RECIPIENT                                                                           0.00
                              International Development Association (IDA)                                                110.00
                              Global Financing Facility                                                                   30.00
                              Total                                                                                      140.00
                            Environmental B - Partial Assessment
                            Category:
                            Is this a          No
                            Repeater
                            project?

                            2. Project Development Objective(s)
                           The Project Development Objectives (PDOs) are to: (i) improve utilization of essential health
                           services with a focus on reproductive, maternal, newborn, child and adolescent health services in
                           target districts; and (ii) scale up birth and death registration services.


                                                                        Page 1 of 9
                          3. Project Description
                         The proposed project comprises four components: (a) Results Based Financing for Primary Health
                         Care Services; (b) Strengthen Health Systems to Deliver RMNCAH Services; (c) Strengthen
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Capacity to Scale up Delivery of Births and Deaths Registration Services; and (d) Enhance
                         Institutional Capacity to Manage Project Supported Activities. The project under components one
                         and two will support the country's efforts to scale-up key RMNCAH services as outlined in the
                         RMNCAH Sharpened Plan 2016-2020, and under component three support efforts to strengthen
                         institutional capacity to scale up birth and death registration (BDR) services in the country. The
                         project is entirely focused on results and is designed to respond to key constraints in the provision
                         and utilization of RMNCAH and CRVS services in the country. The project under component one
                         will use RBF to incentivize the implementation of a set of high impact RMNCAH interventions by
                         front-line health providers.
                          4. Project location and salient physical characteristics relevant to the safeguard
                         analysis (if known)
                         The project will be implemented through existing health facilities (HC III and IV) in selected
                         districts. Component 1 will support implementation of RBF activities in a phased manner to
                         ultimately cover 60 districts in Uganda. Activities for Components 2 and 3 are mainly national-level
                         activities, and will accord priority to low capacity and remote districts. The interventions under the
                         project involve improvement in provision of health services to communities, including those that are
                         vulnerable. The project will contribute to improved health services and the treatment of more people
                         and consequently there will be increased generation of medical waste in the health facilities, and the
                         need for appropriate controls to minimize the associated risk of spread of disease. Component 2 will
                         involve small scale repairs, renovations, and construction of maternity wards and appropriate
                         environmental and social controls will be needed in respect to any land acquisition and construction
                         activity. The environmental and social impacts that could arise from the project have been predicted .
                         The civil works will pose health and safety issues, including construction waste aspects, while the
                         health care waste will pose health risks to the patients, attendants, health workers and the general
Public Disclosure Copy




                         public in the event of poor management practices.

                         Given the wide geographical coverage of the project that includes Kaabong District where the IK
                         community are present and with potential inclusion of some districts where the Batwa are present,
                         both an Indigenous Peoples Plan (IPP) and an Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF),
                         respectively have been prepared. Through free, prior and informed consultations with the IK, the
                         health concerns, challenges to health access and utilization were identified. The IPP includes actions
                         that will address these unique barriers to health access among the IK, some of which are related to
                         cultural and traditional considerations in health service delivery, inadequate midwives in the health
                         center and language barriers among others. The IPPF, also prepared after free priori and informed
                         consultations with the Batwa, will support the development of IPPs for the remaining districts where
                         the project might cover areas inhabited by the Batwa.

                         In both cases, particular focus will be on enhancing continuous free, prior and informed consultation
                         as well as meaningful engagement of IPs in project delivery. Appropriate mechanisms identified in
                         the IPP and the IPPF will inform measures needed to address the unmet RHMNCH needs of IPs.
                         Given that the above foreseen infrastructure works is expected to be carried out within existing
                         health facility land, the need for compensation, resettlement and livelihood restoration is uncertain.
                         In this case, an RPF has been prepared through a consultative process with stakeholders. Overall, the
                         potential environmental and social impacts can be adequately managed by integrating environmental


                                                                      Page 2 of 9
                         and social due diligence into the sub-project cycle.
                         5. Environmental and Social Safeguards Specialists
Public Disclosure Copy




                         Catherine Asekenye Barasa (GSU07)

                         6. Safeguard Policies        Triggered? Explanation (Optional)
                         Environmental                Yes            The interventions under Components 1 and 2 of the
                         Assessment OP/BP 4.01                       proposed project involve handling of medical products
                                                                     and thus contribute to increased generation of medical
                                                                     waste in the health facilities, may involve minor civil
                                                                     works and construction of maternity wards (repairs and
                                                                     minor renovation works) and related impacts, therefore
                                                                     renders the project to trigger OP 4.01 on Environmental
                                                                     Assessment. Because of the overall limited likely
                                                                     environmental and social impacts, the project is rated as
                                                                     EA category B. Since the participating health facilities are
                                                                     not yet determined or known, Environmental and Social
                                                                     Management Framework has been prepared to guide
                                                                     management of environmental and social aspects. Once
                                                                     the specific sites and respective activities have been
                                                                     identified, ESIA shall be prepared as needed and ESMPs
                                                                     developed before start of any works. The ESMF has been
                                                                     prepared in a consultative manner and disclosed both in-
                                                                     country by the client and at Infoshop by IDA before
                                                                     project appraisal. In addition to the National Health Care
                                                                     Waste Management Plan (2009/2010 ➢❨ 2011/2012)
                                                                     prepared and disclosed under the previous IDA projects,
                                                                     the MoH has the following documents on health care
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                     waste management and infection control: Approaches to
                                                                     Health Care Waste Management (HCWM), Health
                                                                     Workers Guide, Second Edition (2013); Uganda National
                                                                     Infection Prevention and Control Guidelines (December
                                                                     2013); and the National Policy on Injection Safety and
                                                                     Health Care Waste Management (2014). These documents
                                                                     shall guide management of HCW and shall form part of
                                                                     the project ESMF. The listed guidelines shall be
                                                                     harmonized into one basic practical guide in the Project
                                                                     Implementation Manual used at both HC-IIIs and HC-IVs
                                                                     to manage HCW. HCWM shall be part of the assessment
                                                                     criteria for participating health facilities including
                                                                     development of a site specific HCWM-Plan.
                         Natural Habitats OP/BP       No             The project will not support any activities that may affect
                         4.04                                        natural habitats.
                         Forests OP/BP 4.36           No             The project is not anticipated to affect any segment of
                                                                     forest/s and/or support activities associated with forests.
                         Pest Management OP 4.09 No                  The project will not support procurement or use of
                                                                     pesticides.



                                                                       Page 3 of 9
                            Physical Cultural           Yes           Though the project will be undertaken in existing
                            Resources OP/BP 4.11                      facilities and with no known PCRs, the civil works may
                                                                      affect unknown PCRs and a chance finds procedure has
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      been developed as part of the ESMF.
                            Indigenous Peoples OP/      Yes           This policy has been triggered because some project
                            BP 4.10                                   Districts host indigenous people: such as the Ik people in
                                                                      Kaabong District. In this case where the project area
                                                                      clearly covers Kaabong where the Ik exist, an IPP has
                                                                      been prepared. It is anticipated that project coverage may
                                                                      extend to Districts of Kisoro, Bundibugyo, Kasese and
                                                                      Kanungu, all of which host the Batwa. In this case, an
                                                                      Indigenous Peoples Planning Framework (IPPF) has been
                                                                      prepared for the Batwa.
                            Involuntary Resettlement Yes              The project interventions under Component 1 and 2 are
                            OP/BP 4.12                                expected to be undertaken in existing health facilities with
                                                                      limited likelihood of land-take/acquisition or loss of
                                                                      livelihoods. However, since the specific facilities (HC IIIs
                                                                      and HC IVs) and scope of activities are not known at this
                                                                      point, additional land may be required in cases where
                                                                      expansion of the health facility may be required. In cases
                                                                      where surrounding communities or hospital staff sources
                                                                      of alternative livelihood or income generation activities
                                                                      like kiosks or gardens may be affected, these will be taken
                                                                      into account for restoration, time allowance for harvesting
                                                                      of crops, relocation or compensation whichever is
                                                                      appropriate in accordance to the policy. Community
                                                                      members and staff will have adequate education on and
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      access to the GRM. RPF has been prepared in a
                                                                      consultative manner and disclosed both in-country by the
                                                                      client and at Infoshop by IDA before project appraisal.
                            Safety of Dams OP/BP        No            The project will not finance any dams or abstract water
                            4.37                                      from existing dams.
                            Projects on International   No            The project will not support any activities on international
                            Waterways OP/BP 7.50                      waterways.
                            Projects in Disputed        No            There are no known disputed areas in the likely project
                            Areas OP/BP 7.60                          sites of the country.

                         II. Key Safeguard Policy Issues and Their Management
                             A. Summary of Key Safeguard Issues
                            1. Describe any safeguard issues and impacts associated with the proposed project. Identify
                              and describe any potential large scale, significant and/or irreversible impacts:
                              The interventions under the project involve improvement in provision of health services, handling
                              of medical products. These activities will contribute to increased generation of medical waste in
                              the health facilities. Component 1 will support implementation of RBF activities in a phased
                              manner to ultimately cover 60 districts in Uganda. Activities for Components 2 and 3 are mainly
                              national-level activities, and will accord priority to low capacity and remote districts. The


                                                                       Page 4 of 9
                          interventions under the project involve improvement in provision of health services to
                          communities, including those that are vulnerable or marginalized. The project will contribute to
                          improved health services and the treatment of more people and consequently there will be
Public Disclosure Copy




                          increased generation of medical waste in the health facilities, and the need for appropriate controls
                          to minimize the associated risk of spread of disease. Component 2 will involve small scale repairs,
                          renovations, and construction of maternity wards and appropriate environmental and social
                          controls will be needed in respect to any land acquisition and construction activity. The
                          environmental and social impacts that could arise from the project have been predicted. The civil
                          works will pose health and safety issues, including construction waste aspects, while the health
                          care waste will pose health risks to the patients, attendants, health workers and the general public
                          in the event of poor management practices.

                          The project coverage includes districts that host indigenous peoples (IPs). In order to ensure that
                          social development outcomes of inclusion are achieved, services supported under the project in the
                          IP host communities will be delivered in a culturally sensitive manner, with provision for adequate
                          interaction and communication with beneficiary communities and use of local dialects spoken by
                          the IK and Batwa. Appropriate mechanisms identified in the IPP and the IPPF, will inform
                          measures needed to address the unmet RHMNCH needs of IK and Batwa respectively.

                          The project involves small civil works and minor renovations, and while the probability for land
                          acquisition under the project is quite small, since the exact sites and land take needs are uncertain,
                          the project may have resettlement and land acquisition impacts in terms of compensation,
                          resettlement and livelihood restoration. The potential environmental and social impacts can be
                          adequately managed by integrating environmental and social due diligence into the sub-project
                          cycle.

                          Although the project involves small civil works and minor renovations, adherence to existing labor
                          laws will remain critical. This will among others include contractor's compliance to provision of
                          contracts to all employees including clear provisions for conflict resolution, adherence to zero
Public Disclosure Copy




                          tolerance policy for sexual harassment in the workplace, decent sanitary facilities separate for men
                          and women, access to clean water for all employees, HIV/AIDS workplace program, deliberate
                          efforts to ensure non discriminative policies for employment that ensure opportunities for all; for
                          example local labor from the host areas and women to be prioritized for work opportunities in
                          order to advance equitable income distribution within the community. Other social concerns
                          including child labor and all forms of violence against children, harassment of women and girls by
                          laborers will be addressed through proactive measures and close supervision.

                           There are no anticipated large scale or irreversible impacts by the project.
                         2. Describe any potential indirect and/or long term impacts due to anticipated future activities
                           in the project area:
                           Beyond the continued generation of medical waste in the health facilities, there are no anticipated
                           long term or irreversible impacts by the project. The small civil works and minor renovations are
                           not expected to promote mobile laborers in the area, with the resultant social interactions that
                           could lead to: a) increased sex work, b) spread of STDs/HIV/AIDS, c) sexual harassment, and d)
                           sexual abuse of women and underage children as well as child labor. A Code of Conduct has been
                           prepared as part of the ESMF and shall be enforced with respect to influx of workers for any short
                           term construction works.
                         3. Describe any project alternatives (if relevant) considered to help avoid or minimize adverse


                                                                      Page 5 of 9
                           impacts.
                           The project will use a combination of approaches to handle medical waste as per the guidelines
                           issued by the Ministry of Health, including through the use of eligibility criteria for participating
Public Disclosure Copy




                           health facilities. In addition, an IPP has been prepared for the IK community and the IPPF for the
                           Batwa. A Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) has been prepared through a consultative process
                           to inform any emerging needs in this respect. Engagement of District labor officers to provide
                           regular site supervision and support for adherence to labor policy including on issues raised under
                           1 above.
                         4. Describe measures taken by the borrower to address safeguard policy issues. Provide an
                           assessment of borrower capacity to plan and implement the measures described.
                           Since the exact participating facilities and their location are not yet known, and it is not clear
                           whether or not the project could lead to acquisition of additional land and or loss of livelihoods of
                           some individuals or communities, Environmental and Social Management Framework (ESMF)
                           and a Resettlement Policy Framework (RPF) have been prepared to guide handling of project
                           environmental and social aspects during implementation. The ESMF includes environmental and
                           social management tools such as screening procedures for sub projects, assessment checklists,
                           guides for environmental and social management plans, simplified/practical health facility (HC-
                           III/IV) health care waste management guidelines, chance finds procedure, environmental and
                           social reporting formats, , grievance redress mechanism, etc. Given that the project may involve
                           construction and labor concentrations and movement, the ESMF has provided guidance that is in
                           line with the National Labor laws and management of workers, including a Code of Conduct. In
                           addition, each district has a department responsible for District Community Based Services
                           departments to support compliance to related laws and guidelines.

                           In addition to the National Health Care Waste Management Plan (2009/2010 -➂❨➂ 2011/2012)
                           prepared and disclosed under the previous IDA projects, the MoH has the following documents on
                           health care waste management and infection control: Approaches to Health Care Waste
                           Management, Health Workers Guide, Second Edition (2013); Uganda National Infection
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Prevention and Control Guidelines (Dec 2013); and the National Policy on Injection Safety and
                           Health Care Waste Management (2014). These guidelines have been reviewed and incorporated in
                           the ESMF and shall be used to guide HCWM. HCWM shall be part of the assessment criteria for
                           participating health facilities including development of a site specific HCWM-Plan as needed.

                           Environmental compliance is the responsibility of the Environmental Health Division (EHD) of
                           the MoH which is charged with coordination of health care waste management activities under the
                           overall policy guidance of the National Environment Management Authority. At the health
                           facilities, committees to handle infection control have been established. In addition, the project
                           will incentivize implementation of HCWM activities at the health facilities. Their functionality
                           and capacity to handle environmental and social Safeguards requirements was assessed during
                           preparation of the ESMF and appropriate remedial measures suggested to address the gaps that
                           were found. In order to ensure proper implementation and management of the environmental
                           aspects of the proposed project, the MoH will hire or designate an Environmental Health Specialist
                           as part of the project coordination team. The specialist shall closely work and coordinate with the
                           District Environment Officers and Community Development Officers and related partners on a
                           day to day basis. Relevant safeguards training of project staff, participating health facilities &
                           Local Governments shall be undertaken early enough at the start of the project.
                         5. Identify the key stakeholders and describe the mechanisms for consultation and disclosure
                           on safeguard policies, with an emphasis on potentially affected people.

                                                                      Page 6 of 9
                           Local consultations were done as part of the preparation of the ESMF. The consultations included
                           the full spectrum of directly affected local stakeholders, the Indigenous Peoples of Ik and Batwa,
                           including selected District Local Governments, In Charge of Health facilities, Hospitals Medical
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Superintendents, NEMA, National Medical Stores, National Drug Authority, and MoH staff.
                         B. Disclosure Requirements
                         Environmental Assessment/Audit/Management Plan/Other
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Jun-2016
                           For category A projects, date of distributing the Executive
                           Summary of the EA to the Executive Directors
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           08-Jun-2016
                           Comments: In the MoH Resource Center and Websites
                          Resettlement Action Plan/Framework/Policy Process
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Jun-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           01-Jun-2016
                           Comments: In the MoH Resource Center and Websites
                          Indigenous Peoples Development Plan/Framework
                           Date of receipt by the Bank                                      29-Apr-2016
                           Date of submission to InfoShop                                   09-Jun-2016
                         "In country" Disclosure
                           Uganda                                                           01-Jun-2016
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Comments: In the MoH Resource Center and Websites
                         If the project triggers the Pest Management and/or Physical Cultural Resources policies, the
                         respective issues are to be addressed and disclosed as part of the Environmental Assessment/
                         Audit/or EMP.
                         If in-country disclosure of any of the above documents is not expected, please explain why:
                         Some documents disclosed previously under ongoing documents. The remaining ones are to be
                         disclosed.
                         C. Compliance Monitoring Indicators at the Corporate Level
                         OP/BP/GP 4.01 - Environment Assessment
                          Does the project require a stand-alone EA (including EMP)      Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          report?
                          If yes, then did the Regional Environment Unit or Practice     Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Manager (PM) review and approve the EA report?
                          Are the cost and the accountabilities for the EMP incorporated Yes [      ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the credit/loan?
                         OP/BP 4.11 - Physical Cultural Resources



                                                                     Page 7 of 9
                          Does the EA include adequate measures related to cultural          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          property?
Public Disclosure Copy




                          Does the credit/loan incorporate mechanisms to mitigate the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          potential adverse impacts on cultural property?
                         OP/BP 4.10 - Indigenous Peoples
                          Has a separate Indigenous Peoples Plan/Planning Framework          Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          (as appropriate) been prepared in consultation with affected
                          Indigenous Peoples?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          If the whole project is designed to benefit IP, has the design     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          been reviewed and approved by the Regional Social
                          Development Unit or Practice Manager?
                         OP/BP 4.12 - Involuntary Resettlement
                          Has a resettlement plan/abbreviated plan/policy framework/         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          process framework (as appropriate) been prepared?
                          If yes, then did the Regional unit responsible for safeguards or   Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          Practice Manager review the plan?
                          Is physical displacement/relocation expected?                      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]

                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                          Is economic displacement expected? (loss of assets or access to Yes [      ]   No [   ]   TBD [       ]
                          assets that leads to loss of income sources or other means of
                          livelihoods)
Public Disclosure Copy




                           Provided estimated number of people to be affected
                         The World Bank Policy on Disclosure of Information
                          Have relevant safeguard policies documents been sent to the        Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          World Bank's Infoshop?
                          Have relevant documents been disclosed in-country in a public      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          place in a form and language that are understandable and
                          accessible to project-affected groups and local NGOs?
                         All Safeguard Policies
                          Have satisfactory calendar, budget and clear institutional         Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          responsibilities been prepared for the implementation of
                          measures related to safeguard policies?
                          Have costs related to safeguard policy measures been included      Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          in the project cost?
                          Does the Monitoring and Evaluation system of the project           Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [    ]
                          include the monitoring of safeguard impacts and measures
                          related to safeguard policies?




                                                                      Page 8 of 9
                             Have satisfactory implementation arrangements been agreed     Yes [   ]   No [   ]   NA [   ]
                             with the borrower and the same been adequately reflected in
Public Disclosure Copy




                             the project legal documents?

                         III. APPROVALS
                            Task Team Leader(s): Name: Peter Okwero
                            Approved By
                            Safeguards Advisor: Name: Nathalie S. Munzberg (SA)                    Date: 09-Jun-2016
                            Practice Manager/    Name: Magnus Lindelow (PMGR)                      Date: 09-Jun-2016
                            Manager:
Public Disclosure Copy




                                                                      Page 9 of 9
